A CLEAR, SINCERE, AND MODEST confutation of the unsound, fraudulent, and
intemperate Reply of T. F. who is known to be Mr. Thomas Fitzherbert now an
English IESVITE.

Wherein ALSO ARE CONFVTED THE chiefest objections which D. Schulckenius, who
is commonly said to be Card. Bellarmine, has made against WIDDRINTONS Apology
for the right, or Sovereignty of temporal PRINCES.

BY Roger Widdrington an English Catholic.

LVKE 6. Benedicite maledicentibus vobis, and orate pro calumniantibus vos.

Bless them that curse you, and pray for them that calumniate you.

printer's or publisher's device IHS


Permissu Superiorum 1616.

THE CONTENTS of this Treatise.
The Epistle to English Catholics.
Wherein

1. IT is showed first, that it is not safe for the consciences of Catholics
to adhere always to the Pope, and neglect the command of their temporal
Prince.

2 That if the Pope should exact from Catholics, that obedience, which is due
only to their temporal Prince, they should by obeying the Pope disobey the
command of Christ, and be truly traitors to their Prince.

3 That it is possible for Popes to challenge such an obedience, and that de
facto Pope Boniface did challenge it of the King, and inhabitants of France.

4 That it is probable, that the Pope that now is, in condemning the late Oath
of Allegiance, and in challenging a power to depose temporal Princes,
demands of English Catholics the foresaid temporal Allegiance, and
usurps that authority, which Christ has not given him.

5 That although it should be granted, that it is probable, that the Pope has
such an authority, yet so long as it is but probable, it is titulus sine re, a
title, which can never be put in execution without manifest disobedience to
God, and injustice to temporal Princes.

6 That the Pope neither is the Judge of temporal Princes in temporal causes,
nor as yet by any authentical instrument has defined, that he has power to
depose temporal Princes, and that therefore it is probable, that he has no
such power.

7 That the manner of his Holiness proceeding in condemning my books, and
commanding me to purge my self, and the fallacious dealing of my Adversaries,
does clearly show, that they in their consciences are not persuaded, that the
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, is a point of faith.

8 The causes of the beginning and increase of this doctrine are briefly
insinuated, and that if all temporal Princes would use the like means to
defend their Sovereignty, this controversy would be quickly at an end.

9 That Catholics are bound to read, and examine this question, otherwise
their ignorance will be wilful, damnable, and inexcusable.

10 That they may lawfully read my books, notwithstanding the Popes, or rather
Card. Bellarmines prohibition to the contrary, and that I deserved not at their
hands such uncharitable words and deeds, for the love and pains I have taken
for their sakes.

The Preface to the Reader.
Wherein M.r Fitzherberts Preface is confuted, the matter, which Widdrington
handles, and the manner how he proceeds therein is declared, and his
doctrine proved to be truly probable, and to be neither prejudicial to his
Majesty's service, nor to the consciences of Catholics, and the exceptions of
D. Schulckenius against that rule of the Law brought by Widdrington, In dubijs
melior est conditio possidentis, In doubts, or disputable causes, the condition
of him who has possession, is to be preferred, are confuted.

The first Part.
wherein The authorities, and testimonies of those learned Catholics, which
Widdrington in his Theological Disputation brought against the Popes power to
depose Princes, (and which M.r Fitzherbert cunningly passes over, and for
answer to them remitteth his English Reader to D. Schulckenius a Latin writer)
are briefly and perspicuously examined, and the Replies, which Doctor
Schulckenius makes against them, are confuted.

Chap. 1.
Wherein the authority of John Trithemius an Abbot, and famous writer of the
order of S. Benedict, is examined, and the exceptions, which D. Schulckenius
takes against it, are overthrown.

Chap. 2.
Wherein the authority of Albericus Roxiatus, a famous Lawyer, and Classical
Doctor, is examined, and the exceptions of D. Schulckenius, against it, are
confuted.

Chap. 3.
Wherein the authority of Ioannes Parisiensis, a famous Doctor of Paris, is
examined, and the exceptions of D. Schulckenius against him are proved to be
insufficient.

Chap. 4.
Wherein the authority of M.r Doctor Barclay, a famous and learned Catholic,
is briefly examined.

Chap. 5.
Wherein are set down the authorities of many English Catholics, who have
publicly declared their opinions, as M.r George Blackwell, M.r William
Warmington, M.r John Barclay, M.r William Barret, Bishop Watson, Abbot Fecknam,
Doctor Cole, both the Harpesfields, Mr Edward Rishton, M.r Henry Orton, M.r
James Bosgraue, M.r John Heart, M. James Bishop related by Mr. Camden, and those
thirteen learned, and virtuous Priests, and most of them, as yet living, whose
names I related in my Theological Disputation, and whose protestation, which I
set down verbatim in my Appendix to Suarez, must needs suppose, that the Pope
has no power to depose Princes, as out of Suarez I convince in this chapter.

Chap. 6.
Wherein the authority of the Kingdom and State of France is largely debated,
the exceptions which D. Schulckenius takes against Petrus Pithaeus and
Bochellus are confuted, and Sigebert is defended from Schism, of which he is
wrongfully taxed by Card. Baronius and D. Schulckenius.

The second part.
wherein All the principal arguments, which Card. Bellarmine brings to
prove the union and subordination of the temporal and spiritual power among
Christians, whereon Mr. Fitzherbert, and all the other vehement maintainers of
the Popes power to depose Princes, do chiefly ground that doctrine, together
with the Replies, which are brought by D. Schulckenius to confirm the same
union and subordination, are exactly examined.

Chap. 1.
Wherein the true state of the question concerning the union of the temporal
and spiritual power among Christians is declared.

Chap. 2.
Wherein the argument of Card. Bellarmine taken from those words of S. Paul,
We being many are one body in Christ, to prove, that the temporal and
spiritual power among Christians do make one total body, or commonwealth,
whereof the Pope is head, is answered, and Card. Bellarmine convinced of
manifest contradiction.

Chap. 3.
Wherein the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzene comparing the temporal and
spiritual power among Christians to the body and soul in man (which is so
often urged by Card. Bellarmine to prove, that the temporal and spiritual
power among Christians do make one total body, as the body and soul do make
one man) is declared, and clearly proved by Card. Bellarmines own grounds to
make nothing for his purpose.

Chap. 4.
Wherein the true state of the question concerning the subjection and
subordination of the temporal power among Christians to the spiritual is
propounded, and the different opinions of Catholics concerning this point are
rehearsed.

Chap. 5.
Wherein the first argument of Card. Bellarmine taken from the ends of the
temporal and spiritual power, to prove, that the temporal power among
Christians, as it is temporal, is subject to the Ecclesiastical, as it is
Ecclesiastical, is propounded, Widdringtons answer to the same related, and D.
Schulckenius Reply thereunto clearly confuted.

Chap. 6.
Wherein Card. Bellarmines second argument to prove the same, taken from the
union of Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes in one Church is rehearsed, the
Answer of Widdrington, of Mr. D. Barclay, and of Mr. John Barclay thereunto is
related, and Card. Bellarmines Reply to the same is most clearly overthrown.

Chap. 7.
Wherein Card. Bellarmines third argument, to prove the same, taken from the
obligation, by which Christian Princes are bound to change their temporal
government, if it hinder the spiritual good, is related, Widdringtons answer
to the same rehearsed, and D. Schulckenius Reply threunto proved to be
unsound, fraudulent and repugnant to his own grounds.

Chap. 8.
Wherein Card. Bellarmines fourth argument, taken from the authority of S.
Gregory Nazianzene comparing the temporal and spiritual power among
Christians to the body and soul in man, is clearly convinced to be no fit
similitude to prove, that the temporal power among Christians is per se
subject to the spiritual, and that tht Pope has power to dispose of
temporals, and to depose temporal Princes, but that is rather a fit similitude
to prove the flat contrary.

Chap. 9.
Wherein the fifth argument of Card. Bellarmine taken from the authority of S.
Bernard, and Pope Boniface the eight, affirming that in the Church are two
swords, and that the sword is under the sword, is rehearsed, Widdringtons
answer thereunto related, D. Schulckenius Reply confuted, and clearly proved
that S. Bernard does nothing favor, but expressly impugn the Popes power to
use the temporal sword; and that Pope Boniface did challenge a direct
temporal Monarchy over the whole world, and that Extrauagant vnam Sanctam,
was reuersed by Pope Clement the next Successor but one to Boniface; and
withal that Pope Boniface his words may be understood in a true sense.

Chap. 10.
Wherein Card. Bellarmines sixth and last argument, taken from the authority of
Pope Innocent the third, comparing the spiritual and temporal power to the
Sun and Moon, is answered.

Secondly Card. Bellarmines reasons, which moved him to recall his opinion
touching the subjection of S. Paul to Caesar, and of Clergy men to temporal
Princes, are confuted, and some of them by his own grounds; whereby it is
clearly proved, that without just cause he has departed from his ancient, and
the common doctrine of the School Divines to follow the Canonists, and also
that not without some note of temeritie he has condemned as improbable the
common opinion of the School Divines, who also follow therein the Ancient
Fathers.

Thirdly, the true state of the question concerning the power of spiritual
Pastors to exempt Cleargie-men from the authority of temporal Princes, is
declared, whereby it is made apparent, how weak or strong an argument can be
drawn from the Popes power to exempt Clergy men from all subjection to
temporal Princes, to prove his power to deprive temporal Princes of their
Regal authority.

The Adioynder.
Wherein first it is clearly showed, that Widdrington has truly charged Mr.
Fitzherbert with falsitie in two respects.

2 Widdringtons first exposition of that clause of the oath [Also I do from my
heart abhor, detest and abjure as impious and heretical, this damnable
doctrine and position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other whatsoeuer] is
proved to be sound and sufficient, and to be void of all absurdity, or
contradiction, as is convinced by those four examples of propositions, which
Mr. Fitzherbert brings to confute the same.

3 Mr. Fitsherberts fraud and ignorance are discovered, and the causes of his
error are declared.

4 The two usual significations of the word heretical among Catholics are
laid open, whereby it is made manifest, that not only the doctrine of
murdering, but also of deposing Princes may be truly abiured for heretical.

5 Widdringtons second exposition of the aforesaid clause is proved to be
sound, and agreeable to the common sense and understanding of the words, and
Mr. Fitzherberts exceptions against the same are proved to be insufficient, and
not agreeable to the approved rules assigned by Divines and Lawiers for the
interpreting of the words of every Law.

6 Lastly, Widdrington from the premises draws four conclusions clean
opposite to the four conclusions, which Mr. Fitzherbert from his premises
collecteth: and finally he concludes, that neither this clause, nor any other
is sufficient to make the oath unlawful, or to move any Catholic to refuse
the same, adding withal, what little hope of sincerity, and sufficiency the
Reader may expect from the rest of Mr Fitzherberts Replies, seeing that in this
(of which nevertheless he and his favorers do so greatly brag) he has
showed such great want of learning, and sincerity.

TO ALL ENGLISH CATHOLICS, who are of opinion, that the Pope has power to
depose temporal PRINCES, ROGER WIDDRINGTON their Brother and Servant in CHRIST
wishes true zeal, knowledge, and felicity.
1 I Have written here a Treatise in answer to Mr. Fitzherberts Reply,
touching the POPES power to depose PRINCES, and the new oath of Allegiance,
which I thought fit to Dedicate to you, Dear Countrymen, those especially, who
have taken upon you a charge to teach, and instruct others, for that the
matter, which here is handled, does as much concern your souls, and
consciences, or rather much more, then my own. Do not you imagine, that when
there is a controversy betwixt his Holiness, and your Sovereign, concerning
your spiritual, and temporal allegiance, you may safely, and without danger
of deadly sin adhere to his Holiness, and forsake your Sovereign, unless
you duly examine the right, and title which either have: for that by the law of
GOD, and Nature you are bound to give to GOD, and Caesar that which is their
due; that is, spiritual obedience to your spiritual Pastors, and temporal
allegiance to your temporal Prince. Wherefore if the Pope should challenge,
and exact from you not only spiritual obedience, which is due to him, but
under color of spiritual obedience, should demand also temporal allegiance,
which is not due to him, but only to your temporal Prince, you should in
obeying the Pope therein yield him that obedience, which is due only to your
temporal Prince, and so transgress the law of GOD and nature, and
consequently it being a matter of so great moment, you should, according to the
approved doctrine of all Divines, by yielding such obedience incur a most
heinous deadly sin.

2. For as there are but two only supreme powers on earth, to which all
Christian subjects do owe obedience and subjection, to wit, spiritual, which
does reside specially in the chief spiritual Pastor, who in things
spiritual is supreme, and temporal power, which does reside in temporal
Princes, who in things temporal are supreme, and subject to none but God; So
also there be only two subiections, and obediences answerable thereunto, to
wit, spiritual and temporal: So that if such a power, or obedience be not
spiritual, it must of necessity be temporal, and with the same certainty or
probability, that one is persuaded such an authority not to be spiritual, he
must be persuaded that it is temporal. That authority is spiritual, and due
only to the Pope, which Christ has given to his Church, and the spiritual
Pastors thereof; All other supreme authority is temporal, and due only to
temporal Princes. And therefore if it be probable, as in very deed it is, and
as you may see it in this Treatise clearly convinced so to be, that the Pope
has no authority given him by Christ to depose Princes, it is consequently
probable, that the aforesaid authority (if there be any such authority on
earth to depose Princes) is not spiritual but temporal, and that therefore,
whosoever grants it to the Pope, does give to him that obedience, which is
due to temporal Princes, and consequently he does against the express command
of Christ, not render to God and Caesar, that which is their due.

3. Well then thus you see, that if the Pope should challenge that obedience as
due to him by the institution of Christ, which Christ has not given him, and
which consequently is due only to temporal Princes, he should usurp that
authority, which he has not, and in so doing he should transgress the law of
God and Nature, and those subjects, who should adhere to him, and yield him
that pretended spiritual obedience, should also transgress the law of Christ,
and be not only pretended, but true Traitors both to God and their Prince, in
not acknowledging their Prince to be their true Sovereign, by yielding that
obedience, which is due to him to an other, and so by taking from him his
supreme power, or soueraingtie, and giving it to an other Prince, which in very
deed is to take the Diadem, which does signify his supreme authority, off
from his head, and place it upon the head of an other.

4. Now there is none of you, as I suppose, of so mean understanding, that can
imagine, that the Pope is so infallible in his opinion, judgment, or any
declaratiue command grounded thereon, as that he can not possibly err therein,
and challenge that authority as due to him by the institution of Christ, which
nevertheless Christ has not given him, but it belongs only to temporal
Princes. This you may see by experience in Pope Boniface the eight, who
pretended, that Philip the fair the most Christian KING of France, was subject
to him in spiritualls and temporalls, and declared them to be heretics, who
should believe the contrary: and that he was a temporal Monarch of the
Christians world, and therefore that the kingdom of France by reason of the
disobedience, and rebellion of Philip their King, was fallen into the hands of
the Sea Apostolic: for which cause Pope Boniface was taxed by many learned
Catholics of great impudency, pride, and arrogancy: and his extrauagant,
Vnam Sanctam, which he made to curb the said King of France, declaring that
the temporal sword is subject to the spiritual, and temporal power to
spiritual authority, was reuersed by Pope Clement the fifth, the next
Successor but one to Pope Boniface, who declared, that by the definition, and
declaration of Pope Boniface in his extrauagant, Vnam Sancta^, no prejudice
should arise to the King, and kingdom of France: and that by it neither the
King, kingdom, or inhabitants of France should be more subject to the Church of
Rome, then they were before, but that all things should be understood to be in
the same state, wherein they were before the said definition, as well concerning
the Church, as concerning the King, Kingdom, and Inhabitants of France. The
like temporal authority Pope Sixtus the fifth, if he had lived, would also
have challenged, for that as I have been credibly informed by diverse Jesuits
of good account, who then lived at Rome, he did intend to suppress Card.
Bellarmines first Tome of Controversies, because he did not with the Canonists
grant to the Pope this direct temporal Monarchy over the whole Christian
world.

5 So that the only controversy now is, whether the Pope has de facto erred
or no, in declaring the oath of allegiance to be unlawful, and to contain in
it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, upon this supposall, that
it is a point of Faith, that the Pope has authority given him by Christ, to
depose Princes, which is the substance of the oath, as Fa: Suarez Lib 6 Defens.
Fidei fere ^er totum.
acknowledges, and the maine question betwixt my Adversaries and me, as M.r.
Fitzherbert In the end of his Preface.
in express words confesses. Now you may see, if you please to read, that I
have clearly proved in this Treatise, that it is probable, that the
authority, which the Pope claims to depose Princes, is not true, but
usurped, not granted him by Christ, but given him by men contrary to those
express words of CHRIST, Math. 22.
Render the things that are Caesar's to Caesar, and the things that are Gods, to
God. And therefore consider, I pray you, in what danger you stand, of doing
great injury to your Sovereign, and committing flat treason against his Royal
person and Crown, if you rashly, and without due examination follow the Popes
opinion, judgment, or also declaratiue command grounded thereon, who, under
pretense of demanding of you a profession of his spiritual authority, and
your spiritual obedience, exacteth in very deed not spiritual allegiance,
but that obedience which is probably thought by many learned Catholics to be a
mere temporal allegiance, and due only to your temporal Prince.

6 But observe, dear Countrymen, a more manifest, and dangerous gulf, into
which for want of due consideration you may easily cast your selves. For if
once you grant, that it is probable, that it is a controversy, that it is a
disputable question, as in very deed it is, and as I think very few of you,
who have studied this question, are persuaded to the contrary, that the right,
title, power, and authority, which the Pope challenges to depose Princes, is
no true title, but pretended, a mere temporal, and not a true spiritual
authority, although I should grant you also for Disputation sake, of which as
yet I do not dispute, that it is also probable, that the said title is good,
and that the Pope has such an authority to depose Princes given him by
Christ, yet there is none of you so simple, but if you will duly consider,
will presently perceive, that this title, so long as it is in controversy, is
titulus sinere, a mere title, which so long as it is disputable, and debated
on either side, can never be put in practice by any man; what opinion so ever
he follow in speculation, without doing the Prince, who is deposed by the Pope,
manifest wrong, and if he be a subject, by committing that detestable crime of
treason in a most high degree.

7 For if any one of you should be inlawfull possession of a house, jewel, or
any other thing, whereunto an other man pretends a title, and claims a
power to dispose thereof, and perchance it is also probable, that his title is
in very deed the better, and his Lawiers do bring strong reasons, and
evidences to confirm the same, would not you think, that it were a manifest
wrong, as in deed it were, and against the known rules of justice grounded
upon the light of reason, that your Adversary, or any other in his behalf,
notwithstanding the probability of his title, should put you out of
possession, and take it away from you by violence, before the Judge had decided
the controversy?

8 And if any one should Reply and say, that the Pope is our Sovereigns Judge;
to whom also all Christian Princes are subject, and that he has decided this
controversy betwixt him and our Prince, and defined, that this his title to
depose our Prince and all other Christian Princes, is a true and not only
pretended, a spiritual, and not a temporal title, he is manifestly deceived.
For neither is the Pope the Judge of temporal Princes in temporal causes,
wherein they are supreme, and subject to none but God; neither has the Pope as
yet decided this controversy, or defined by any General Council, or any
other authentical instrument (for I will not at this time contend what
authority the Pope has to define matters of faith without a General Council)
that this title, and authority which he challenges to depose Princes, is a
true spiritual title, and an authority granted him by the institution of
Christ. For concerning this point Popes, and Emperors have ever been at great
variance, as well said Fa: Azor, Tom. 2. lib. 11 cap q. 5.8.
and it is in controversy among Catholic Doctors, as I have convinced in this
Treatise, and as yet the controversy is not decided by the Judge, as Abbot
Trithemius See beneath part. 1. cap. 1.
does well affirm.

9 And if any one should perchance imagine, that his Holiness that now is,
has by his late Breues decided the controversy, and defined, that he has
authority to depose Princes, he is also most grosely mistaken; both for that
there is not so much as one word mentioned in any of his Breues concerning his
authority to depose Princes, but only in general words he declares, that
Catholics ought not to take the oath, for that it contains many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation, but what those many things be he does not
express (and perchance he might imagine at the first sight, as Card.
Bellarmine did, that the Popes power to excommunicate, to bind and loose, to
dispense in oaths is denied in the oath, and that it was framed to make a
distinction betwixt Protestants and Catholics touching points of Religion, al
which how untrue they are I have clearly showed in my Theological
Disputation) but especially for this reason he is fowly mistaken, because
there is not in the Breues any one of those words, which, according to the
doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, and other Divines related by me in the aforesaid
Disputation Cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 32. and seq.
are required to make an infallible definition, and final decision of a point
of faith. Neither is every Breue, or Apostolical letter of the Pope, although
it be registered in the body of the Canon Law among the Popes Decretall letters,
a sufficient instrument to define matters of faith, for that in them is
commonly contained only the Popes opinion concerning some doubtful case, or
question, and not a final decision or definition, which all Catholics are
bound to follow. Otherwise it must needs be granted, that Popes have defined
in their Breues false doctrine, and also heresy, as may be seen in the
Decretall letters, and Breues of Pope Celestine the first, Pope Nicolas the
third, and Pope Boniface the eight, as also I observed in the aforesaid
Disputation Cap. 10. sec. 2 nu. 47.48.


10. Yea both the very manner of his Holiness proceeding in condemning the
oath in such general words, for that it contains many things flat contrary
to faith and salvation, not declaring any one of those many things, although he
has been in some sort urged thereunto by his Majesty, In his Apology page 7.
number. 5.
and we also his Catholic subjects, whom it most concerns, have most humbly
and most earnestly requested it at his hands, Disput. The olog. in the Epistle
to his Holiness.
and the forbidding of my books also in such general words, not declaring
whether they are forbidden, for the matter which they handle, or for the
manner, or in respect of the persons against whom they are written, or for some
other cause, but especially, and which is more strange, and contrary to the
practice of all tribunals, the commanding of me to purge my self forthwith,
and that under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures, without signifying any crime
at all, either in general or particular, whereof I should purge my self, are
manifest signs to a prudent man, that latet anguis in herba, and that they
themselves do distrust their own cause. Can any prudent man imagine, that if
his Holiness, or the most Illustrious Cardinals of the Inquisition, were fully
persuaded, that the Popes power to depose Princes is a point of faith, and
defined by the Church so to be, as Card. Bellarmine, and some few other
especially Jesuits would enforce the Christian world to believe, and that they
were able to convince the same either by holy Scriptures, Apostolical
traditions, decrees of sacred Councels, or any other conuincing reason, they
would forbear to signify the same, especially being so greatly urged
thereunto?

11. Besides the manner also of my Adversaries handling this controversy, in
corrupting my words, perverting my meaning, concealing my answers, altering the
true state of the question, confounding the Readers understanding with
ambiguous words and sentences, and being requested to insist upon any one place
of holy Scripture, authority of sacred Council, or any other Theological
reason, which they shall think to be most conuincing, that thereby the
controversy may quickly be at an end, their flying from one place of holy
Scripture to another, from one Council to another, from one Theological
reason to another, their fallacious arguing from the facts of the Apostles, yea
also and of those Prophets, who were no Priests, which were done miraculouslie,
and by an extraordinary power, or by the special command of Almighty God, to
prove the like ordinary power to be in spiritual Pastors, from the
practices of certain Popes, who were resisted therein both by Christian
Princes and people to infer the practice of the Church, which is a
congregation of all the faithful etc. from the opinion of very many Doctors,
or also of the Church only probably judging or thinking, to conclude the
faith of the Church firmly believing or defining, from the Popes power to
command temporals, to gather the Popes power to dispose of temporals, from the
Popes power to impose temporal punishments to deduce a power in the Pope to
inflict or use temporal punishments, or which is all one, to constrain with
temporal punishments, and from a power which is granted to the Church, as the
Church is taken for the Christian world consisting both of temporal and
spiritual power, to conclude the said power to be in the Church, as the Church
is taken for the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which consists only of
spiritual power, and such like pitiful shifts to confound thereby their
Readers understanding, and at the last, in regard either of their presence or
prehemine^ce in the Court of Rome, to cause by their evil information his
Holiness to consent to the forbidding of their Adversaries books, that
thereby neither their legerdemaine and fraudulent dealing may be laid open to
the view of the world, nor the Reader may see what we allege against them, or
in defense of our selves, but in that lame and corrupt manner, as they shall
please to deliver it, does evidently show, that they are not desirous to
satisfy men's understandings, and to search and find out the truth by a
sincere debating of this dangerous and difficult controversy, but rather that
they themselves do suspect their own cause, which because they have once
taken in hand to defend, they will per fas and nefas, by fraud and violence
seek still to maintain. But truth will never be overthrown, it may for a
time by fraud and violence be suppressed, but maugre all the sleights of the
impugners thereof, it will in the end prevail.

Whereas my plain, sincere, and perspicuous handling this question, and
requesting my Adversaries, that they will insist upon any one text of holy
Scripture, which shall seem to them to be the most pregnant place, whether it
be, whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. Feed my sheep. If you shall have Secular
judgments etc. or any other; or upon any one decree of Popes, or general
Counsels, whether it be, can: Nos Sanctorum, Iuratos, Absolutos, or any other,
whether it be the Council of Trent, of Lions, of Laterane, (which now of late
is so greatly urged by some, whereof in former times was made so small account
for the proof of this point,) or upon any one Theological reason, which shall
seem to them to be the most unanswerable, whether it be taken from the
subordination of the temporal power to the spiritual, or from the necessity
of defending the Church, repressing haeresies, punishing wicked Princes,
defending innocent people, or from the promise which Christian Princes make to
the Church, either in Baptism, or at their Coronation, or any other which
shall like them best, protesting withal, In Resp: Apologet. nu^ 1.
that if any man shall show by any convincing reason that the doctrine for the
Popes power to depose Princes is a point of faith, and consequently the
contrary not probable; I will presently yield, neither shall any hope of gain,
or fear of punishment withdraw me from embracing forthwith and publishing also
the truth, do sufficiently demonstrate, that my only desire is to find out,
and follow the truth in this controversy, which does so nearly touch our
souls and salvation and our obedience due by the law of Christ to God, and our
temporal Prince.

13 Wherefore my earnest request at this time, and vehement desire only is,
Dear Countrymen, that you will be pleased to examine diligently your
spiritual, and temporal obedience, your duty to GOD and CAESAR, and that you
will be led and guided by true reason, and not carried away by blind affection,
hope of preferment and credit, or fear of disgrace and want, and not to be
desirous so to please the Pope, as to neglect your duty, and obedience, which
by the command of Christ, and under pain of eternal damnation you owe to your
temporal Prince. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Coeca obedientia, blind
obedience in this case is dangerous, and damnable, and your ignorance herein,
you having now so just cause to doubt, and therefore, according to the doctrine
of all Divines, are bound to examine the truth, will be affected, gross,
wilful, and culpable, like to that, whereof the Prophet spoke, Psalm: 35.
Noluit intelligere vt been ageret, he would not understand that he might do
well. For although it be lawful, and also very commendable to obey your
Superiors command, without examining what authority he has to impose upon
you such a command, when by obeying, you incur no danger of disobeying God,
of wronging your neighbor, whom by the law of God you are bound not to wrong,
or of disobeying another Superior, whom by the law of God you are bound also
to obey, yet this is also certain, that when there is a controversy, that
your obeying an earthly Superior is a disobedience to God, or a rebellion
against another supreme Superior, whom God has commanded you to obey, unless
you duly examine the matter, and in what manner by obeying that earthly
Superior, although it be the Pope, you do not disobey God, nor commit
rebellion against your Prince, whom God commands you to obey, no pretense of
advancing Catholic Religion, of devotion to the Sea Apostolic, or of any
other good end whatsoever can excuse you from committing a mortal sin.

14 The pretense of furthering the common good, of advancing Catholic
Religion, of depressing haeresies, of punishing wicked Princes, of defending
innocent people, and such like, may be colorable clokes to excuse many
damnable and deuilish attempts, many wicked backbytings, sla^derings, and other
wrongs both by words and deeds, as by late experience may be seen in the
execrable murders of the two most Christian Kings of France, in the
abominable Conspiracy of the Powder Traitors, in the uncharitable
proceedings against the Appellants, and those who favored them, and and now
against those Catholics, who do any ways favor the Oath, (to omit many other
exorbitant dealings under this pretense of furthering the common good, which if
it were needful I could make manifest) but assure your selves that neither
good ends are sufficient to excuse bad practices, nor the zeal of the person
is a sufficient warrant to justify all his actions, nor injustice is to be
done to any man be he never so wicked.

15 Call to mind, I beseech you, the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and the
practice of the primitive Church, observe the causes of the beginning and
increase of this practice, and doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes,
and the continual contradiction thereof, and you shall find, that no man of
any learning can persuade his conscience, that this doctrine is certain, and
of faith. For the zeal of Pope Gregory the seventh, the wickedness of Henry
the fourth Emperor, the discord of the German Princes, the riches of the
Countess Mathildis, the warlike forces of the Nortmans, and the desire of all
men that the Emperor might be restrained from doing such evils, were the
first occasions, See beneath part: 1. cap: 6. nu: 24.
that this doctrine began first to be practiced by the said Pope Gregory, and
afterward, it being in regard of the strangeness thereof, so greatly
contradicted, justified by him to be lawful, for which cause it was by
Onuphrius See in the place above c^ted.
called, a thing not heard of before that age, and by Sigebert a learned, and
virtuous Catholic, and no Schismatike, as I will prove beneath Part: 1. cap.
6. number. 20. and seq.
, it was taxed of novelty, not to say of heresy, and confuted by him at large.

16 Secondly, the advancing of them, who did maintain this doctrine, the
depressing of those, who did impugn it, the suppressing of Books, and the
threatening of Ecclesiastical Censures, which nevertheless if they be unjust,
are not of force in the Suarez de Censuris Disp. 4. sec. 7. nu. 2. 4. 23. and
seq.
Court of Conscience, and the indiligence of temporal Princes to maintain
their Sovereignty (the causes whereof I dare not presume to examine) besides
the former reasons, and pretense of advancing Catholic religion etc. were the
chief causes, why the defenders of this doctrine, did so increase in number
from the time of Pope Gregory the 7. in comparison of those who did impugn
it. But if temporal Princes would yet be pleased, to use hereafter those
means to defend their right, and Sovereignty, which Popes have heretofore,
and do continually use to maintain their pretended temporal authority over
Kings and Princes, to depose them, to dispose of their temporalls etc. in order
to spiritual good, I do not doubt, but that the stream of Doctors would
quickly turn backward, and my Adversaries would have small cause to brag
(considering especially the weakness of their grounds, and that their doctrine
is ouerswaied by authority, and not by reason) that so many Authors favor the
Popes power to depose Princes, and so few the right of Princes not to be
deposed by the Pope.

17 Nevertheless it is also manifest, that it has ever been contradicted by
Christian Princes and people, and notwithstanding the foresaid motives, and
also the fear that some might have, lest wicked Princes might be in some sort
encouraged to persevere in evil by impugning that doctrine, which seemed to be
a bridle to restrain their bad purposes) it has continually been impugned,
disproued, and confuted by learned Catholics, as I have clearly proved in
this Treatise. And therefore remember, into what danger of soul, body, and
temporal fortunes, you (for want of reading and due examining,) do throw
headlong your selves, and many innocent men, who do follow your example and
counsel, for the which at the day of judgment you are to make a most strict
account, where no favor of Man can help you, and wilful ignorance will not
excuse you, but condemn you, and it will be too late to say then Non putaram,
unless you do now, abstracting from all humane affection and respects,
examine duly what duty you bear God and Caesar, what obedience you owe to
the Pope, and your temporal Prince.

18 But perhaps some of you will demand, how can you by reading examine this
controversy, seeing that the Books, which treat thereof are forbidden by the
Pope? In answer to this I will only propound at this time to your prudent
considerations, whether if there should arise a controversy betwixt the Pope,
and a temporal Prince concerning the title to any kingdom, especially which
that temporal Prince has in his possession (as there is betwixt the Pope, and
the King of Spain touching the Kingdoms of Naples, and Sicilie) the Pope has
authority to command that temporal Prince, and his Subjects not to read, and
pervse those evidences, which do make in favor of his own title, but only
those evidences, which do prove the Popes title?

19 Now if the reason, why my books are forbidden by the Pope, (or rather by
the evil information, importunity, and judicial sentence of Card.
Bellarmine, against whom, as my principal Adversary in this cause, I did
write both my Apology for the right of Princes, and also my Theological
Disputation concerning the oath of Allegiance, which two books are only
forbidden, and who therefore was pleased to be an Accuser, Witness, and Judge,
in his own cause) be, for that they do favor the oath of Allegiance, and
impugn the Popes power to depose Princes, (as all my Adversaries confess,
that for this cause they are forbidden to be read) then you may clearly
perceive, that therefore my books are forbidden, for that they do show, and
declare the evidences, which do make for the right and title of temporal
Princes, and their right not to be deprived, or thrust out of their kingdoms
by the Popes pretended authority, but especially of our Sovereign, whose case
concerning this point is more singular, and concerns him more nearly,
considering the opposition betwixt him, and the Popes Holiness, with whom he
is not linked in unity of religion and friendship, then it does concern other
Christian Princes, who have not the like reason to fear tumults, rebellions,
and Powder-treasons, under pretense of restoring Catholic religion in their
Country, and of having the Popes express or virtuall license for the same;
which prohibition of the Pope to forbid such kind of books, how far it can
bind either those Princes, to whom it belongs by the law of God and nature
to defend their Sovereignty, or else their Subjects, who also by the same Law
of God and nature are bound to examine the reasons and evidences of their
Princes title, authority, and Sovereignty, least that for want of due
examination they should deny to God, or Caesar, that which is their due, I
remit to the prudent consideration of any judicious Catholic man.

20 Lastly, consider, I pray you, the manifold wrongs, which for the love and
pains I have taken for your sakes, I have received from diverse of you, whom I
could name, if it were needful, both in reproachful words, and uncharitable
deeds, not beseeming, I will not say, Religious Priests, but moral honest men.
For long before I did put pen to paper, I had thoroughly examined this
controversy, and all which in my judgment could be objected on either side,
and for my own part I was fully settled in my opinion; but perceiving all men
to be silent in a matter of such importance, and necessity as this is, and
which also concerns us all, the zeal, affection, and duty, which I bare to
Catholic Religion, to the Sea Apostolic, and to my Prince and Country, with
a vehement desire, that the truth in this important controversy, which
concerns our obedience, which by the command of Christ, we owe to GOD and
Caesar, to the Popes Holiness, and to our temporal Sovereign, compelled me
first to write, and now also to continue, for which although I shall hereafter
suffer, as hitherto I have done, reproach, infamy, disgrace, loss of friends,
and other evils, yet I will still pray for my persecutors, and remit my cause
to GOD above, assuring my self, that in time convenient he will in this world,
or the next, or both, be a just Judge revenger, Protector, and rewarder of the
Innocent.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader. Wherein Mr. FITZHERBERTS PREFACE is confuted, the
matter which WIDDRINGTON handles, and the manner how he proceeds therein, is
declared, and his doctrine proved to be truly probable, and neither
prejudicial to his MAJESTY'S service, nor to the Consciences of Catholics.
1. IT is not unknown to thee, Courteous Reader, the great controversy has
been of late years, especially among us English Catholics, concerning the new
oath of Allegiance, which his Majesty by Act of Parliament has ordained to
make trial how his Catholic Subjects stand affected toward him in point of
there loyalty, and due obedience. For although his Holiness, by the
instigation and importunity no doubt of others, has by three several Breues
declared the said oath to be unlawful, and to contain in it many things
clearly repugnant to faith and salvation, and many learned men, especially
Jesuits, as Card. Bellarmine Fa: Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, and now lastly
Suarez, have by public writings endeavored to convince the same,
nevertheless since that Mr. George Blackwell then Archpraesbiter, and many
other learned Priests did from the very first publishing of this oath defend it
to be lawful, and not to contain in it any thing, which either expressly,
or covertly is contrary to Catholic faith or salvation, the said oath has
been maintained as lawful by many learned Catholic Priests, and has been
taken by the most part of those Lay-Catholikes, to whom it has been tendered;
assuring themselves that his Holiness command for the refusing thereof, being
only a declaratiue precept, and not grounded upon any infallible definition,
but at the most upon a probable opinion, that the Pope has power to depose
Princes (which is the maine substance of the oath, as my Adversary here In the
end of his Preface.
confesses, and Fa: Suarez, Lib. 6. defens. a cap. 2.
also before him expressly acknowledges, is not, according to Suarez
doctrine, of force to bind them, especially with so great prejudice to his
Majesty and themselves, to embrace an uncertain and doubtful opinion, or to
obey the Popes declaratiue precept grounded thereupon.

2 I therefore with other Catholics considering how greatly this oath does
concern our allegiance, and obedience due to God and Caesar, and the great
harm both spiritual and temporal, which may ensue by breach thereof, thought
it our best course, to set down sincerely all the chiefest arguments, which
have been hitherto by any Author, or which might in our judgments be objected
by any against the said oath, together with the answers, which have been, or
might be brought to the same Objections, and withal dutiful submission to
propound them to his Holiness, humbly requesting him, that he would be pleased
diligently to peruse them, and in regard of his Pastoral Office would
vouchsafe to instruct us in the Catholic faith, satisfy the difficulties,
which do perplex our consciences, and to make known unto us, what clauses of
the oath are, I do not say, according to the opinion of Card. Bellarmine, or
some other Catholic Doctors, who are no necessary rule of the Catholic
faith, but according to Catholic doctrine necessarily to be believed by all
men, repugnant to faith and salvation, as his Holiness affirms in his
Breues. And this I performed in my Theological Disputation, partly at the
request of many Catholics, whose case I greatly pitied, but chiefly for the
duty I owed to God, Religion, my Prince and Country: Neither did I intend in
that Disputation to affirm any thing of my self, but as representing the
persons of those, who were persuaded, that the oath may, or may not be lawfully
taken. And because when the said Disputation was in the press, and almost
finished, there came to my hands an English book composed by F.T. and
entitled a Supplement to the Discussion etc. wherein this Author endeavored
to prove the said oath to be repugnant to all laws both humane and divine,
and therefore justly condemned by his Holiness, in that it does exempt
temporal Princes from Excommunication and deposition by the Pope, I thought
good to touch briefly in an Admonition to the Reader, both the substance of
this Authors discourse, and of the chiefest arguments which he brought against
the oath, and also the answers, which might be made to them; to the end his
Holiness, might be fully informed of all the reasons, which are alleged as
well against as for the taking of the oath. And this was the cause, that I
writing in Latin, did to inform his Holiness briefly set down what he had
written in English against the aforesaid oath.

3 But the said Author F. T. who now has turned backward the first letters of
his name into T. F. and is known, acknowledged, yea and boasted of by his
favorers to be Mr. Thomas Fitzherbert now an English Jesuit (for which cause
I was the more bold to express his name) has of late set forth a Reply in
English in defense of his arguments, In the Praeface nu. 2.
which I briefly answered in Latin, to the end, says he, that our
Countrymen, whom it most imports to understand well the quality, and state
of this controversy, may discover my weakness, and avoid the danger of
their souls, whereto they may be drawn by the false fame, and opinion, that
many have conceived of my sufficiency. But howsoever my Adversary, or any
other be conceited of my weakness or sufficiency (for time will make known
the weakness or sufficiency of us both) I do not doubt (God willing,) but
notwithstanding all his vaunting bragges, to discover clearly the weakness
and insufficiency of his Reply, albeit he has been furthered with the
former writings of many learned men, especially Card. Bellarmine, Fa: Lessius,
and now lastly of Suarez (from whom he borrows the chiefest Replies he
brings to my answers, yet concealing their names) to omit the many other
helps I want, which he may have in the place where he lives, both by the
conference of learned men, and the commodity of all sorts of books, wherewith
that place is furnished. And although he uses very spiteful, and slanderous
speeches against me (for the which I pray God to forgive him) thinking thereby
to magnify himself, disgrace me and promote his own cause, but in the end
he will find that such exorbitant and irreligious courses will tend to his
own disgrace and not mine, and he greatly prejudicial both to his cause and
conscience, yet I will abstain from such uncharitable and unjust proceedings,
and with all modesty I will defend my own innocence, by answering all his
objections, and by clearing my self of all those imputations, which he has
falsely laid to my charge: and if in defending my self I lay open his fraud,
and ignorance, and return his slanders back upon himself, I ought not
therefore to be taxed of calumniation, seeing that, to detect the slanders of
the Adversary is not, Cap. 5. Apologiae.
to use Card. Bellarmines own words, to be accounted a defaming. Now to draw
near unto the matter.

4. Before my Adversary come to examine my Answer to his arguments, he
thinks it not amiss to say somewhat concerning me, the matter which I
handle, and the manner how I proceed therein. First then touching me he
affirms, In his Preface number. 3.
that whereas I call my self by the name of Widdrington, it is well known to
many, that M. Roger Widdrington, under whose shadow I shroude my self, is
far different from me in quality, habit, and profession. And albeit Number. 3.
he is not ignorant what my true name, and quality is, yet he forbeareth to
declare it for just respects, and will only say of me for the present, that
whereas our Adversaries have heretofore levied, and Pressed many soldiers of
their own profession to maintain their quarrels against us, they have now in
this late quarrel of the oath Pressed one of ours (I mean says he, this
Author) who so much presumes of his own skill and strength, that albeit the
proverb says, Ne Hercules contra duos, yet he fears not to encounter ten
at once, yea hops, as it seems, to wrest the club out of Hercules his hand,
and to beat him with his own weapon. For he takes upon him to overthrow
Card. Bellarmine with his own arguments, to batter the fortress of the
Catholic Church with her own Canons, and constitutions etc.

5. But first, whether Roger Widdrington be the true or supposed, the sole, or
joint Author of that Disputation, it little avails to the matter, which is
now in controversy: and when my Adversary shall name more plainly that
person, whom he forbearing, as he says, to name, yet cunningly names, I doubt
not, but that he will not be afraid to answer him more fully; neither will
all my Adversaries clamours, and threatenings discourage him from defending the
truth, his Prince, and Country, for the love whereof, and not for any hope of
temporal lucre or preferment, or for to show his wit as my Adversary falsely
affirms, he will not be ashamed to be Pressed on to write against Mr.
Fitzherbert, or any other such like Author, who living in other Countries, and
out of danger to loose any thing, but rather in hope to obtain preferment by
their writings, would press English Catholics to defend with danger of
loosing all they have, and of incurring his Majesty's high displeasuer that
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes to be of faith, which the State
of France has accounted scandalous, seditious, damnable, and pernicious. In
the mean time let this suffice, that he is a child of the Catholic Roman
Church, and as good a Catholic, if not better then Mr. Fitzherbert is, if we
will duly consider the true nature and definition of a Catholic, and that he
is no true Catholic, who with true Catholic and supernatural faith believes
doubtful, disputable, and uncertain opinions, and which consequently are
subject to error, to which true Catholic faith cannot in any wise be exposed.

6. Secondly, it is untrue, that I do presume so much of my own skill and
strength, that I dare adventure to wrest out the club of Hercules his hand, as
my Adversary affirms or to encounter upon equal terms with Card.
Bellarmine, or any one of those learned writers, whom I named in my
Disputation, accounting my self to be far inferior to every one of them in
skill and strength (only excepting this my Adversary, whose skill and strength
I do not greatly fear, it being well known of what sufficiency he is, and
that his skill in Philosophy, or School Divinity is not great, although he
has pretty skill in making use of other men's labors, and answering in
English, what other men have before replied in Latin) but if Hercules will
leave his club, and fight with a bulrush, it is no great maistrie for a weaker
man to withstand him; if Card. Bellarmine instead of the express words of holy
Scripture, and the true meaning thereof so declared to be by the ancient
Fathers, or the universal Church, or undoubted definitions of General
Councels, or necessary inferences deducted from them (which are the only
weapons wherewith Catholic doctrine can be convinced) will fly to over
wrested similitudes, false, or at the most probable suppositions, doubtful and
uncertain collections, to prove an infallible doctrine of the Catholic faith,
as he, and the rest, who follow him in this controversy for the Popes power to
depose Princes have done, it is an easy matter for one, who has less skill
and strength then they have, to withstand them, yea and to vanquish them, and a
hundred such others being so weakly armed.

7. And therefore very false, and frivolous is that, which my Adversary
affirms Number 4. and 5.
that Widdrington (for so still I will call my self) takes upon him to batter
the fortress of the Catholic Church with her own Canons, and constitutions,
and to undermine the immovable rock of S. Peter with his own instruments,
and all this he does with such art and slight, that whiles he fights against
the Church, he pretends to be a friend and child of the Church, and albeit
he impugn the Popes authority, yet he dedicateth his book to the Pope,
laughing upon him, whiles he wounds him, and betraying Christ with a kiss,
as Judas did. But how vainly he labors in all this, he may easily see, if
he call to mind, what he has learned in the Catholic Chucrch, to wit, how
inexpugnable is the rock, and seat of Peter, which the proud gates of hell
cannot overcome. For I do not batter the fortress of the Catholic Church
whom I reverence and love as my dear mother (and to whose Censure I ever have
and do also now most humbly submit my self and all my writings) but the
private opinions of some few Catholics, especially Jesuits, who will needs
enforce upon the Christian world, doubtful, disputable and uncertain
opinions, for infallible grounds of supernatural faith, which only is the
fortress of the Catholic Church. Neither do I undermine that immovable
rock of S. Peter, whereon Christ has built his Church, but those scandalous,
seditious, damnable and pernicious positions (for so the State of France does
call them) of murdering Princes, and thrusting them out, contrary to the
rules of law and reason, of the lawful possession of their kingdoms, by an
authority which is only doubfull and questionable: Neither do I impugn that
authority of the Pope, which is certainly known to be granted him by Christ,
but that new doctrine of some few writers, which does attribute to the Pope
that authority, as certainly given him by Christ, which at the most is
disputable, whether Christ has given it him or no.

8. I do honor and reverence in good truth Card. Bellarmine, as also many
other learned men of his Society, and their singular learning I do greatly
admire, but that their learning or authority ought to be so greatly esteemed
of by Catholics, that whatsoever they think to be a point of faith, it is
presently to be taken for a divine Oracle, and the contrary opinion of other
learned Catholics, who have seen and examined all their grounds, reasons, and
authorities, is not to be accounted an opinion, but an heresy, and that in a
matter of such importance, which concerns the dutiful obedience of every
Christian to God and Caesar, this is that which I cannot take in good part. And
might not, I pray you, the Canonists, who do vehemently defend the Popes direct
power to dispose of all temporalls against Card. Bellarmine and others, whom
they are not afraid to call impios politicos wicked politicians, Alexander
Carerius.
pretending thereby to strengthen the fortress of the Catholic Church, to
confirm the immovable rock of S. Peter, and to maintain the Popes
authority, retort the very same inuectiue, which my Adversary has borrowed
of Card. Bellarmine, Against Barclay cap. 1. and in the Epistle Dedicatory of
his Schulckenius against me.
upon Card. Bellarmine himself, who does vehemently impugn the aforesaid
direct authority, which the Canonists do yield unto the Pope, and with the
same facility cry out with my Adversary, that he takes upon him to batter
the fortress of the Catholic Church with her own Canons, and constitutions,
and to undermine the immovable rock of S. Peter with his own instruments,
and all this he does with such Art and sleigth, that whiles he fights against
the Church, he pretends to be a friend and child of the Church; and albeit
he impugn the Popes authority, yet he dedicateth his book to Pope Sixtus the
fifth, laughing upon him whiles he wounds him, and betraying Christ with a
kiss, as Judas did etc. And thus much concerning me.

9. Now as touching the matter which I handle, and the manner of my proceeding
therein, Number. 6.
Widdringtons special purpose (says my Adversary) in this his late work is
to defend the new oath of allegiance, and to confute all the chief arguments,
that have been made by any against the several clauses thereof; which
nevertheless he means no other ways to perform (as he himself often
protests) but only by showing probably, that the said Oath may be taken by
Catholics, and that nothing has been hitherto, or can be objected against
it, which has not been or cannot be probably answered. And from hence my
Adversary gathers certain admonitions to the Reader, which, as he says, are
worthy to be noted.

10. But before I come to set down his worthy admonitions, I think it fit, to
put thee in remembrance (Courteous Reader) what is the true state of the
question betwixt us concerning the Popes power to depose Princes, and what was
my chief intent in making that disputation of the Oath. The maine question
therefore betwixt me, and these my Adversaries, as my Adversary T. F. also
confesses, In the end of his Preface.
is touching the Popes power to depose Princes, which specially is denied in
this new oath: to wit, whether it be a point of faith, and not to be denied by
any Catholic without note of heresy, or error, that the Pope has by Christ
his institution power to deprive temporal Princes of their Kingdoms for any
crime whatsoever. For whereas some very few late writers especially Card.
Bellarmine and other Jesuits, could not be content to defend this doctrine
for the Popes power (call it temporal, or spiritual as you will) to depose
Princes in a moderate manner, but would needs take upon them to make it a
point of the Catholic faith, and clearly to demonstrate by the testimony of
holy Scriptures, of sacred Counsels, and by invincible reasons, that Christ
has given to S. Peter, and his Successors such a temporal power over
Sovereign Kings and Princes (a doctrine neither practiced, nor known by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church, and which has been a chief occasion, why
this Kingdom is departed from the obedience to the Sea Apostolic) and to
condemn all those Catholics of heresy, who do not run with them in this
their violent course, when I seriously considered with my self, what scandal
this new doctrine maintained with such violence brought to Catholic Religion,
what danger to our Prince and Country, and what great calamities and disgrace
English Catholics do daily suffer thereby, as not being accounted true, and
loyal Subjects to their Prince, even according to the doctrine of those, who
are esteemed to be the chief pillars of the Catholic Church, but so long
only as it shall please the Pope, I thought my self bound by the duty which I
do owe to the Catholic Religion, and to my Prince and Country, to take away as
much as lies in me (notwithstanding the manifold slanders, which I foresaw
some persons would therefore raise against me) the aforesaid scandals, dangers
and disgraces, and to answer probably all the arguments which Card. Bellarmine
has from the chiefest Authors, who have handled this question collected, to
demonstrate that it is a certain and infallible doctrine, and the contrary,
not so much an opinion, as an heresy, that the Pope has by Christ his
institution authority to deprive Sovereign Princes of their temporal
Kingdoms and dominions.

11 Wherefore the present controversy betwixt me and my Adversaries is not at
this time concerning the absolute proposition, to wit, whether the Pope has or
has not power to depose, (the reason why I do not dispute of this absolute
proposition I will declare beneath Number. 78.79
) but concerning the modall, whether it be certain, without controversy, and
a point of faith, that the Pope has power to depose, as this Author T. F.
following Card. Bellarmine and some few Jesuits, will needs have it to be,
and I with other Catholics, and the Kingdom of France, as Petrus Pithaeus
witnesses In Cod. libert. Eccles. Galli^.
, do utterly deny the same, And from hence it evidently follows, that
although Card. Bellarmine should allege an hundred Catholic Authors, who do
affirm, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, yet if they do not also
affirm that it is certain, and to be believed as a point of faith, that the
Pope has such a power, they neither confirm his opinion, nor gainsay mine
concerning the present controversy, which is now in hand. And thus much
concerning the matter and manner of my Apology for the right of Princes. Now
touching my Theological Disputation concerning the oath of Allegiance,
although in very deed hitherto I have not seen any sufficient reason to
condemn the said oath as unlawful, and from the doctrine which I taught in my
Apology it does necessarily follow, that with a probable and safe conscience
it may be taken by any Catholic, considering that the Popes power to depose
Princes, as my Adversary here confesses, is the maine question betwixt him
and me, and which is specially denied in this oath, nevertheless I did not
intend in that Disputation positiuely to defend the said oath, but sincerely to
propound unto his Holiness, who as I am fully persuaded, was neither truly,
nor thoroughly informed of the reasons, why English Catholics thought the said
oath to be lawful, all the arguments on both sides, which might be urged
against or for the oath, affirming nothing of my self, but as representing the
persons of those, who either impugned or approved the said oath; humbly
requesting his Holiness, that after he had diligently examined the reasons on
both sides, he would be pleased to satisfy those difficulties, which we
propounded, and to make known to us English Catholics, those many things,
which he in his Breues had affirmed to be in this oath clearly repugnant to
faith and salvation.

12 Now let us see those worthy admonitions, and those things, which my
Adversary says, are worthy to be noted. First therefore, says he, number. 10.
Widdrington does not account his own opinion and doctrine in this point to be
certain and assured, but only probable, neither yet condemns our doctrine as
manifestly false, or repugnant to faith, or to the salvation of souls: besides
that he confesses also elsewhere, In Epist. De^^icat. and in Disp. Theolog.
cap. 3. number. 1.
that his Holiness in three several Breues declared the contrary doctrine
contained in the oath to be repugnant to the Catholic faith Number. 11.
whereupon I infer, that it were no less then most dangerous temeritie, and
extreme folly to reject our doctrine, and to adhere to his; for if it be
wisdom in doubtful matters to take the surest way, it cannot with reason be
denied, but that albeit his opinion seem probable to him, yet the contrary is
much more to be embraced, seeing that by his own confession it is at least
probable, and therefore may be embraced without danger, whereas his is not
only doubted of, but also declared to be contrary to the Catholic faith,
both by his Holiness, and also by very many learned Catholics (as he himself
also confesses: Vbi supra.
) besides that he acknowledges also afterward, that there are very few
Authors extant, Cap. 3 s^^ 3. number. 15.
which do deny our doctrine in comparison of those that teach and defend it;
whereto I also add, that it is altogether conform to the practice of the
Church, confirmed by diverse general Councels, as I have showed particularly
in my Supplement; so as no man, that has care of his soul, Supplem. cap. 2.
^^o. 76. (...)
can have any reason to venture it upon his opinion, impugned and condemned by
so great authority, when our doctrine may by his own confession be securely
followed without doubt or danger.

13. But mark (Courteous Reader) how many frauds, and falsehoods my Adversary
has here committed. And first how cunningly he would deceive thee by not
distinguishing the absolute proposition concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes, which is not now in question, from the modall, which only is now in
controversy. For although I do not take upon me at this present to condemn
that opion for the Popes power to depose Princes as manifestly false, or to
defend the contrary as certain and without controversy, yet it is untrue,
that I do not assuredly account that opinion and doctrine, which affirms it
to be a point of faith, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and the
contrary to be heretical, to be absolutely false, and to use the words of the
Parliament of Paris against Suarez doctrine, to be scandalous, seditious,
damnable and pernicious.

14. Secondly, it is also untrue, that I do acknowledge that there are very
few Authors extant, which do deny their doctrine concerning the modall
proposition, in comparison of those, that do teach and defend it: for although
I affirmed, that very few Authors, whose writings are now extant, in comparison
of others, who defend this temporal power of the Pope, are to be found that
deny his authority to depose Princes, (the reasons whereof which I alleged in
that place and before in my Apology, because they clean overthrow the common
argument taken from the multitude of Authors, who do cleave to their opinion
touching the absolute proposition, both my Adversary, and D. Schulckenius also
do altogether conceal,) yet touching the modall proposition I confidently
auerred, that there were very few writers, and those for the most part
Jesuits, who do hold this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes to
be a point of faith. For behold my express words. In Pres. Resp. Ap^log. nu.
10.
And from hence any man may plainly perceive, that Widdrington does not oppose
himself either against all Divines, or against the common opinion of the
Church, or Doctors, but only against very few writers, considering that among
those seventy Authors related by Card. Bellarmine very few are to be found,
who (although they are perchance of opinion, that the Pope by Christ his
institution has authority to depose Princes for enormious crimes) do so
peremptorily adhere to that opinion, as to tax them with heresy, who do
maintain the contrary. And if Card. Bellarmine in the later Editions of his
books, yet bringing no new reason to confirm his former opinion, had not
condemned the contrary opinion of Catholics as heretical, but had suffered
every man to persevere without note of heresy, in his own opinion, which he
should think to be the truer, he should not doubtless have had Widdrington to
be his Adversary, or to have attempted to overthrow his reasons as
insufficient to demo^strate an undoubted point of faith.

15 Thirdly, it is also untrue, that confess the Popes Holiness to have
declared in his Br^ues, that the doctrine, which denies his power to depose
Princes, is contrary to the Catholic faith: I only confess, that in his
Breues he has declared the Oath to be unlawful, for that it contains in it
many things flat contrary to faith and salvation; but what these many things
be, his Holiness does not express in his Breues, neither as yet has he been
pleased to signify it unto us, although we have both by private letters, and
also public writings most humbly and instantly requested it at his hands. I
did indeed confess, that his Holiness was by all likelihood misinformed of
those many things, which he thought in this oath to be flat contrary to faith
and salvation, by Card: Bellarmine, who has publicly in his books declared,
that the Popes spiritual Primacie, his power to excommunicate, and to bind
and loose are plainly denied in this Oath, and the Kings spiritual Supremacy
is therein acknowledged, but how untrue this is, I have sufficiently showed in
my Theological Disputation, and beneath I shall have occasion to repeat
again. And albeit his Holiness had in his Breues particularly declared the
doctrine for his power to depose Princes to be of faith, and the contrary to be
haereticall, (as likewise Pope Celestine the 3. did in a Breue, or Decretall
letter of his, which was in times past for almost two hundred years together
extant in the Canon Law, declare, that Marriage was so dissolved by heresy,
that the party, whose consort was fallen into heresy, might lawfully marry
another, which doctrine is now flatly condemned in the Council of Trent) yet
this declaration of the Pope being no infallible definition, but only a
signification of his opinion, as I proved abundantly in the foresaid book, no
Catholic is bound in conscience to follow it neither to obey his declaratiue
precept grounded thereon as out of Suarez doctrine I showed in that place Disp*
Theolog. c^p: 10. s^^. ^.
.

16 Fourthly, it is also untrue, that I confess the contrary doctrine of
theirs touching the absolute proposition to be at least probable, and that it
may be securely followed without doubt or danger; for touching practice I do
utterly condemn that doctrine as absolutely false, impious, damnable,
seditious, yea and in some sort heretical, as shall appear beneath In the
Adioinder number: 106. and seq.
, and for speculation, I do neither approve it as probable, nor condemn it as
improbable, because with the probability or improbabilitie of the affirmative
part of this question, I do not at this time intermeddle. That only, which I
affirm, is touching the negative part of the question, to wit, that it is
probable, that the Pope has not power to depose Princes, but whether it be
probable, that he has power to depose Princes I neither confess nor deny, but
only for Disputation sake I do grant, that although it be probable, that the
Pope has such a power, yet it does not therefore follow, that it is certain
and of faith, and the contrary heretical, improbable, and not to be embraced
by any Catholic without note of heresy, error, or temeritie.

And by this you may also easily perceive, another fraud, and cunning of my
Adversary. For whereas he affirms, that my special purpose is to show
probably, that the said oath may lawfully be taken by Catholics, he does here
turn cunningly the question an other way, affirming, that it is also probable,
yea and the more probable opinion, that the oath may lawfully be refused by
Catholics, with which question I do not intend at this present to
intermeddle, but only to prove by true probable arguments, that the oath may
lawfully be taken by Catholics. For be it so for Disputation sake, that it is
probable, yea and the more probable opinion, that Catholics may lawfully
refuse the oath, (by reason that so many learned men, yea and the Pope
himself, do think it to be unlawful) which nevertheless I will not at this
time either affirm, or deny, for the reason I will allege beneath Number: 7
(...)
, yet can it not from thence be rightly concluded, that therefore it is not
probable, that the oath may lawfully be taken, or that it is a most dangerous
temeritie and extreme folly, as my Adversary seems to insinuate, to follow
an opinion which is truly probable against the more probable opinion of the
Pope, and other Divines, as out of the doctrine of Vasquez affirming it also to
be the more opinion of Divines, I did in my Theological Disputation Cap. 10
s^^.
clearly convince. It is sufficient for my purpose at this present, that
Catholics may lawfully take the oath, but whether they may also refuse it, I
at this time will neither affirm nor deny. This only I will say, that if
Catholics may lawfully take the oath, and so avoid his Majesty's indignation
against them, and also their own temporal overthrow, and will not, they may
thank themselves, and such like violent spirits, as my Adversary is, who by sleight and cunning endeavors to perplexe their consciences, and guilefully
to persuade them, that it is the more safe and the more probable way to suffer
all temporal miseries and disgraces, which he himself in my opinion, if he
were in their case would not suffer, then to do that which with a safe and
probable conscience they may do.

18 Fifthly, it is also untrue, that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes is conform to the practice of the Church, although it be indeed
conform to the practice of diverse Popes since the time of Gregory the
seventh, who was the first Pope, that trusting to the power and riches of other
men, contrary to the custom of his Ancestors, contemning the Emperors
authority, deprived him of his Empire, a thing before those times not heard
of, says Onuphrius De varia^ (...) Rom: Pont: lib. 4.
which practice nevertheless was then, and has been ever since contradicted by
Catholic Princes and subjects. As also it is untrue, that this doctrine is
confirmed by any one General Council, that it is a point of faith, or the
contrary doctrine heretical, or improbable, as I have partly showed in the
Preface of my Apologeticall Answer, where I answered all those nine Counsels,
which Card: Bellarmine in his Answer to D. Barclay brought to prove his
doctrine in this point to be of faith, and the contrary not Catholic, and
partly I will show beneath, when I shall answer to the Replies, which have been
made by Fa: Lessius, masked under D. Singletons name, (from whom my Adversary
borrows the third part of his book, to wit, eight whole Chapters which he
consumes in defense of the Council of Lateran) to the answers I made to that
Decree of the said Lateran Council, whereon this new doctrine of faith
according to these men is chiefly grounded.

19 Wherefore unless my Adversary be able to convince, as without doubt he is
not, that the opinion, which denies the Popes power to depose Princes, is
altogether improbable, and the State of France, besides many other Doctors, as
thou shall see beneath, to be extreme fools, he will never be able to
demonstrate, that it is most dangerous temeritie, and extreme folly to adhere
to that opinion, (which my Adversary to persuade his Reader, that it is a
singular opinion of one only Author, and as he untruly says, of no one
Catholic, ever calls it my opinion) considering that according to Vasquez
doctrine, which is, as he says 1^.2^. disp. 62. cap: 4.
, the common doctrine of the School men, it is neither folly nor temeritie,
to follow a probable opinion against the more probable, the more common, and
the more sure opinion of the Pope and other learned men, although they should
pretend to convince their opinion by the authority of holy Scriptures,
declarations of General Counsels, the practice of the Church, and other
Theological reasons, which seem to them invincible. For it is usual in a
controversy among Catholic Doctors, to allege for confirmation of both
opinions the aforesaid authorities and proofs, which nevertheless does not
discourage either part from maintayning their opinions, as it is manifest in
the question concerning the superiority of the Pope and General Counsels,
the conception of our B. Lady in original sin, and many questions concerning
the Popes authority to dispense, and now of late in the question touching
grace, and freewill, betwixt the Dominicans, and the Jesuits.

20 Therefore it is rather great temeritie, and extreme folly, that you, my
Catholic Countrymen, should venture your souls and whole estates upon this my
Adversaries writings, whose knowledge in Divinity, is known to be but small,
and his desire to ease your griefs, as you shall perceive beneath Number: 81. 82.
, is also no whit less: besides he handles this controversy, which does so
greatly concern your spiritual, and temporal good or harm, and your
obedience due to GOD and CAESAR, so vnsincerely, and corruptly, that either he
concealeth my answers, or peruerteth the true meaning of my words, rather
thereby to disgrace me with the Reader, and to make him to have a preiudicate
conceit of what I wrote, then really and sincerely to find out the truth, and
by a clear and moderate debating of the controversy to satisfy his Readers
understanding. And this very argument taken chiefly from the Popes Breues,
which this man to terrify, and perplexe the timorous conscience of the devout
Catholic Reader urges here, I have so largely answered in my Theological
Disputation Cap. 10 sec. 2.
, wherein I fully satisfied this objection taken from the authority of the
Popes Breues, and of so many learned men, who condemn the oath as containing
in it many things clearly repugnant to faith and salvation, that I thought he
would have blushed to repeat the same argument here again so nakedly, which I
my self urged there more plainly and strongly, without making any Reply, or
taking any notice of the answers I made in that place thereunto. For there I
showed the difference according to Vasquez doctrine between a doubtful and
disputable question, and that there is neither doubt nor danger of any
imprudence, temeritie, disobedience, or of any other sin not to obey the
Popes declaratiue command, when it is grounded upon an opinion, or doctrine
which is not certain, but disputable, for that diverse Popes have in their
Breues, or Decretall letters declared and taught false and also heretical
doctrine, and that the Popes declaratiue command has no greater force to
bind, then has the doctrine or opinion whereon it is grounded, as Suarez,
whom I related in that place, does expressly affirm. And thus much concerning
my Adversaries first Admonition.

21 Secondly, whereas Widdrington, says my Adversary Number. 12.
professes not to give for his opinion any assured, and certain proofs,
which may breed in the hearers, or Readers a firm and doubtless assent, but
only probable reason drawn from credible principles, which may induce a
probable persuasion, he shows evidently, that his meaning is not to seek
out the truth, but rather to obscure it by wrangling and cauilling, to show his
wit, laboring to maintain paradoxes with some show of probability, knowing
right well, that as Cicero says, there is nothing so incredible, but it may
be made probable by discourse etc. And what else may this man be thought to
intend, but to show his wit, seeing that he pretends to produce no other
proof of his opinion, but only probability, and withal acknowledges, that
the contrary doctrine is, and has been professed, and held by almost all the
learned Catholics that ever have written, at least whose works are now
extant. Is it likely then, that he means to establish the truth, or to quiet
men's consciences by the discussion thereof? No truly. But rather that he
seeks, as I have said, to obscure it, and make it doubtful, when he can not
overthrow it, which is the most devilish devise, that any man could invent to
impugn any point of the Catholic faith; to wit, not to do it all at once,
but by degrees, seeking to shake the foundation of it, first calling it in
question, and then teaching it to be but probable, and consequently doubtful,
to the end that the minds of men hanging in suspense, may be disposed to
admit, as well the error, as the truth.

22 But whether I or my Adversary does intend to establish the truth, or
rather to obscure it by wrangling and cauilling, seeing that he still
persisteth in misinterpreting the meaning of my words, and in dissembling the
true state of the question concerning the modall proposition, which is the
maine controversy betwixt him, and me, (wherein although he shows in deed
in some part his wit, yet verily he shows no sincere and upright dealing) I
leave to the judgment of the indifferent Reader. For first it is untrue, that
I profess, (as my Adversary affirms) to give for my opinion no assured and
certain proofs which may breed a firm and undoubted assent, which the Reader
would quickly have perceived, if my Adversary had been pleased to have
entirely related my words, which are these: wherefore the present controversy
between me, and Card. Bellarmine is not concerning this absolute question, or
proposition, whether the Pope has, or has not power to depose Princes for
heresy or no, but concerning the modall proposition, whether it be so
certain, that the Pope by Christ his institution has such a power to depose
Princes, as that those, who defend the contrary opinion, do expose themselves
to manifest danger of heresy, error, or of any other mortal sin. Wherefore
although in my Apology I brought certain arguments drawn from
inconveniences, which the Logicians call, ad impossible, to prove that Christ
our Lord did not grant such an authority to the Pope, which is the (...) son
then can my Adversary have to tax me, for not bringing any assured or
certain proofs, but only probable, to prove that it is probable, that the
Pope has not power to depose Princes.

26 Wherefore to establish and confirm this doctrine, that it is not a point
of faith, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, or that it is not
improbable, that he has no such power, it is sufficient to answer probably
all the reasons and authorities to the contrary, and to bring probable
proofs, which may cause a probable persuasion, that he has no such
authority: considering that according to the approved ground of all
Philosophers, and Divines, certainty of one part of the contradiction cannot
stand with probability of the other, taking probable in that sense, as the
Divines do take it, and not for that, which has only a show of probability,
and is not truly probable; for if it be certainly true, that the Pope has
power to depose, it is certainly false, and therefore not probable, that he
has not power to depose. And therefore my Adversary rather, seeks to
obscure the truth, and to entangle men's consciences by wrangling and cauilling,
whiles first he requires evident demonstrations, to prove a probable doctrine,
and secondly dissembleth the true state of the question, confounding the
absolute proposition and the proofs thereof with the modall, which distinction
does express the true state of the question, and discovers both his fraud
and weakness, not only in this, but almost in all the rest of his Replies,
and thirdly he concealeth the answer, which I gave to this argument taken from
the authority of the Popes Breues and of other learned men, and also the
reasons, why so many learned Catholics whose books are now extant, have from
the time of Pope Gregory the seventh defended this opinion for the Popes power
to depose Princes. And thus much concerning my Adversaries second admonition,
the weakness whereof will also presently more clearly appear by my answer
to his third and fourth admonition.

27 Therefore it is to be considered for the third point, says my Adversary,
Nu. 15.
what Widdrington means by a probable opinion, or a probable answer, which
no doubt, he understands so, that whatsoever he says, must be held for
probable, how absurd so ever it be; for otherwise he could not challenge to
himself such a privilege of probability as he does, his arguments and
answers being so weak and impertinent, as you shall find them to be; in which
respect he is feign to dissemble the answers already made by some to his
former arguments, and authorities in his Apology, whereto he now remitteth his
Reader very often, without taking so much as any knowledge of the confutation
thereof, as though the same had never been answered, or that every assertion or
position of his, being once laid down, must needs stand for an eternal law,
or were a decree of the Medes and Persians, Dan 6.
quod non licet immutari.

28 But not to return these bitter speeches of my Adversary back upon
himself, which with the same facility, and with far better reason I might
do, first, It is very untrue, that I take probable for whatsoever I do say
how absurd so ever it be, as this man, if it were lawful for me to use his
absurd word, very absurdly affirms, that without doubt I do; Neither do I
take probable for that, which has only a show of probability, as Cicero
took probable in his Paradoxes, but I take probable, as Philosophers and
Divines do take it, as it is distinguished from demonstratiue and fallacious,
to wit, for that, which is approved by wise and learned men in the art, which
they profess, which therefore as in speculation may be embraced without any
imputation of error or folly, so in practice it may be followed without any
note of imprudence, or sin: As in a matter of Physic, that is accounted
probable, which is approved by learned Physicians, of Law by learned Lawiers,
and of Divinity by learned Catholic Divines. Secondly, it is also untrue,
that I have in my Theological Disputation dissembled the answers made by some
to my former arguments and authorities in my Apology, whereto I remit my
Reader oftentimes, considering that my Theological Disputation was wholly
finished, and in the press, before the Replies of D. Schulkenius, and of D.
Weston, and also my Adversaries Supplement were published, so that I could take
no notice of them in my Disputation; for which cause I was constrained to touch
them briefly only in an Admonition to the Reader. But my Adversary himself
to make his own Replies to seem the more probable, and my answers absurd,
foolish, impertinent, ridiculous (for so he is pleased to call them) is not
ashamed to dissemble in many points the true state of the question, and also
the answers, which in my Theological Disputation I made to his chiefest
Replies, especially those whereby he labors to terrify the timorous
consciences of unlearned Catholics, with the pretense of his new Catholic
faith, with the authority of the Popes Breues, and the testimonies of so many
learned men, who have condemned the oath, as containing in it many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation.

29. Now let us see his fourth consideration, by which the Reader may perceive,
how insufficiently he declares what is a probable argument, or opinion, and
how little he satisfies the understanding of unlearned Catholics, who by his
obscure, and confuse description of a probable argument, cannot perceive, what
argument or opinion is probable. Number. 17.
Fourthly, says he, it is to be considered, that to make an argument, or
proof probable, it suffices not that it seem good and true in it self, but
it must also be able in some sort to counterpoyse the arguments and proofs of
the contrary opinion: for often it falls out that the reasons of one part are
so pregnant, that they seem to convince, and yet when they are weighed with
the reasons of the other part, they are neither pregnant, nor so much as
probable: for according to the old proverb, one tale is good until an other
be heard.

30. To which purpose it is to be considered, that many heretics, and namely
the Arians (of whom there are many even at this day) both do, and may well
pretend a far greater probability for their opinion, than Widdrington does
or can for his, considering their abundant allegation of Scriptures, their
subtle shifts in answering the arguments and objections of the Catholics, the
great multitude of learned men of their Sect in times past, and their dignity
in the Church, the Conuenticles assembled, and held in their favor, and
finally the ample propagation of their opinion and Sect, especially in the time
of Constantius the Emperor. For which respects their followers, at this day,
do hold their doctrine not only for probable, but also for infallibly true,
and condemn the contrary for pernicious heresy: whereas Widdringtons grounds
and proofs of his opinion seem to himself so weak, that he dare not affirm
them to be more then probable.

31. Therefore as there is no good Christian that does now hold the arguments
of the Arrians to be so much as probable, considering the potent reasons, and
proofs of the Catholic doctrine in that point, so albeit the arguments and
authorities, which Widdrington produces, were they far more plausible and
pregnant then they are, yet no Catholic could esteem them to be any way
probable, being compared and balanced with the irrefregable proofs of the
other part; I mean the arguments, and necessary consequences drawn from the
holy Scriptures, the authority of almost all the learned Doctors and Divines
that have written of that point, and the practice of the Church for some
hundreths of years confirmed by nine or ten Counsels, S^e Supplem. chap. 2.
number. 76. 77.
whereof some have been the greatest that ever were in Gods Church; and
therefore I say that all this being well weighed, no Catholic man of sound
wit, or judgment can imagine this man's arguments (which he himself houldeth
but for probable) to have any probability in the world, or to prove any thing
else but his weakness, wilfulness, and folly in propounding and mainteining
them.

32. For albeit he teaches out of Vasquez Disput. Theolog. cap. 10. sec. 2.
number. 7. vsque ad number. 21.
, and others, that of two opinions the less probable and less safe may
securely be followed, and that the opinion of a few, yea of one approved
Doctor, suffices sometimes to make an opinion probable, though many hold the
contrary to that one Doctor (to which purpose he fills above a dozen pages of
his book with Vasquez his doctrine and text) yet he is absurd in applying the
same to this our case; for although Vasquez do teach 1 a. 2 a. disp. 62. cap.
1. nu. 1.
that a man may in doubtful cases or questions securely follow the opinion of
a few learned Doctors, though the same be less safe, and probable, then the
contrary opinion held by many, yet he is to be understood to speak only of
such disputable questions, as my Adversary Widdrington himself alleges
Ibidem number. 26.
for example sake out of Vasquez, to wit, whether there are any habits infused
by God alone, concerning which question Vasquez says, Vbi supra disp. 79 cap.
1. and disp. 86.
that albeit Pope Clement the fifth did determine expressly in a Council held
at Vienna, that there opinion who held that there are such habits, is more
probable, then the negative, yet it was never either by that decree, or any
other of Pope, or Council determined to be more then probable, in which
respect he does not condemn the contrary doctrine for heresy,
notwithstanding that he, and the far greater part of learned men do hold the
other to be certainly true.

33. So as Vasquez is to be understood to speak of questions and opinions
altogether undecided, and not of such a doctrine as ours, touching the Popes
power to depose Princes, which, as I have said, has not only been taught by
the learned men of many ages, but also is grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
and confirmed by the practice and decrees of diverse Popes and Counsels, as
well General as Provincial, as (to omit the other mentioned in my Supplement
Cap. 2. number. 76. 77.
) it is evident by the decree of the famous Council of Lateran, which
expressly ordained the practice of it in some cases, and did therefore
necessarily suppose, and firmly believe the verity of the doctrine, as I will
clearly prove Cap. 15. nu. 6. 7. 8.
hereafter in this Reply, and withal show the ridiculous absurdity of
Widdringtons arguments and instances against the same, yea and convince him
Ibidem number. 9. 11. 12.
even by his own testimony to be fallen (to use his own words) into error or
heresy, for not beleiuing this doctrine, which that famous General Council
believed, and ordained to be practiced.

34. In the mean time he is to understand, that whereas to show the
probability of his doctrine, he brings many Authors, partly in his
Theological Disputation, and partly in his Apology, I remit him to D.
Schulckenius; who has answered particularly to every one of them, and proved
clearly, that diverse of them do make flatly against him, and many nothing at
all for him (being truly understood) and that some others are worthily
rejected, being either so absurd, that they are easily confuted by the
circumstances of the places alleged, or else Heretics (as it appears by
their doctrine in other things) or known Schismatikes, who living in the time
of the Emperors or Kings that were deposed, wrote partially in their favor, of
which sort nevertheless there are very few; so as of all the Authors, that he
has scraped together to make some show of probability in his doctrine, he has
no one clear and sufficient witness to justify the same.

35. And therefore seeing that all his pretended, probability consists
partly in the authority of the Authors, and partly in the sufficiency (as he
supposes) of his answers to our grounds, arguments, and authorities, which
answers I shall have occasion to confute in this Treatise, and to show them to
be so far from probability, that they are wholly impertinent, and sometimes
ridiculous for their absurdity; therefore I conclude, that he cannot any way
clear or excuse himself from the note of great temerity and gross error (
yea flat heresy if he be obstinate) in impugning our doctrine grounded upon
such assured and solid foundations as I have here signified, and will more
particularly and manifestly declare hereafter; as also I will put thee in
mind (good Reader) oftentimes by the way to note how probably or rather (to
say truly) how absurdly he argues and answers, to the end thou may the
better judge, how dangerous it will be for thee to venture thy soul upon his
pretense of probability, which is no other but such as any heretic may have
for his doctrine.

36. For all Heretics do think themselves and their follows as good and
sufficient Doctors to make an opinion probable, as he either is, or esteems
his Authors to be; and they never want Scriptures and Fathers that seem to
them to confirm their opinions, and do make as probable answers to our
objections out of Scriptures and Fathers as he does, and many times much more
probable, then he, yea and they may either with his arguments and instances, or
other as probable as they, impugn the authority of any decree of a General
Council, be it never so express against them, saying that the fathers who made
it followed, but a probable opinion, and so might err, as you shall hear Infra
chap. 13. number. 1.
he answers to the decree of the Council of Lateran.

37. And so you see, that if is pretended probability be admitted against the
common doctrine, practice and decrees of the Church, any heretic will not
only easily defend, but also establish his heresy: and any point of Catholic
faith may easily be called in question and made only probable, and consequently
doubtful, obnoxious to error, and to be rejected by any man that list to
embrace the contrary: which truly I leave (good Reader) to thy consideration,
whether it be not the right way to overthrow Catholic Religion, and to
introduce all Heresy and Atheism.

38. This is my Adversaries fourth admonition, the substance whereof although I
could have comprised in few lines, yet I thought good to set it down entirely
word by word as it lies, to the end the Reader may more plainly perceive his
fraudulent, uncharitable, and insufficient proceeding therein. And first he
declares, what is requisite to a probable argument. Secondly, he affirms,
that Vasquez doctrine, which I related in my Theological Disputation, for
following of probable opinions is to be understood to speak only of questions
and opinions altogether undecided, and not of such a doctrine as theirs is
touching the Popes power to depose Princes, which has been taught by the
learned men of many ages, is grounded upon the holy Scriptures etc. Thirdly,
he infers, that any heretic, and namely the Arrians may pretend as great,
yea and far greater probability to prove their heresy, then I do, or can
do to prove my doctrine. Fourthly, he auerreth, that all my pretended
probability consists partly in the authority of those Authors, which I bring
in my Theological Disputation and also in my Apology, and partly in the
sufficiency, as I suppose, of my answers to their grounds, arguments and
authorities; for confutation of the first my Adversary remitteth his Reader to
D. Schulckenius, and for the second he himself promises to show them to be so
far from probability, that they are wholly impertinent, and sometimes
ridiculous for their absurdity, and that therefore I cannot any way clear or
excuse my self from the note of great temerity and gross error, yea, flat
heresy, into which he will, forsooth, convince me even by mine own testimony
to be fallen, for not believing this doctrine touching the Popes power to depose
Princes, which that famous General Council of Lateran believed, and ordained
to be practiced. But how vain are the brags of this glorious boasting man, and
who in very deed is the impertinent, ridiculous and absurd, thou shall have
(good Reader) a taste by my answer to this his admonition, and by my answers to
the rest of his Replies thou shall more fully perceive, as also that I am free
from all note of temerity, error or heresy, and how dangerous it is for thee
to venture thy soul and whole estate upon the credit of this unlearned and
uncharitable man, who as he is known to be a man of no great learning, so
also both here and in the greatest part of his Replies shows great want not
only of learning, but also of charity, sincerity, and also of Christian
modesty, as partly thou have seen already and hereafter shall most clearly
understand.

39. First therefore consider (Courteous Reader) whether Mr. Fitzherbert by his
description of a probable argument intends to quiet and satisfy, or rather
to disturb and perplexe the timorous consciences of unlearned Catholics, who
cannot understand what he means by those words, in some sort, and how an
argument, which is far the less probable, can by those words be distinguished
from an argument, of the contrary opinion, which is by much, the more
probable. For although it be true, that probable arguments for one opinion must
be able in some sort to counterpoise the arguments of the contrary opinion in
the judgment of those, who think that opinion to be probable, and are able
to weigh and balance the intrinsecall grounds, or arguments on both sides, yet
unlearned men, who are not able to judge and examine the intrinsecall grounds of
any opinion, but are only led by authority, can not easily discern, how far
this, in some part, which has so great a latitude, is to be extended. Neither
is my Adversary, as I suppose, so ignorant in philosophy, although perchance
he has spent small time in the study thereof, as to imagine, that probability,
is in the thing it self, as truth and falsehood are, according to that saying
of the philosophers, ex eo quod res est vel non est, propositio dicitur vera
vel falsa: a proposition is said to be true or false, for that the thing it
self, which is affirmed or denied is, or is not.

40 For probability is not in the thing it self, but in the understanding of
him, who approves the opinion or doctrine, in so much that although an
opinion, which once is true, can afterward never be false, nor which once is
false, be afterward ever true, yet an opinion, which once was probable, may
afterward be improbable, and contrariwise, which was once improbable, may
afterward prove probable, according as it shall be approved or disproued by
men skillful in the art which they profess: yea an opinion, which to some
Doctors is improbable, and also heretical, to others may be probable, yea and
approved as the more true opinion: And this proceeds from the diversity of
men's judgments and opinions, where oftentimes are seen, according to the
vulgar saying, quot capita tot sententiae, as many heads so many opinions. That
is probable, say the Philosophers, taking it from Aristotle 1. Top: cap. 1.
, which is approved by wise and skillful men in the art, which they profess:
so that what argument or opinion learned men do approve, is a probable
argument or opinion. And this description of probable is not obscure and
intricate, but clear and perspicuous even to ignorant men, who can easily
discern, what opinion or argument learned men do approve. And therefore well
said Armilla Verbo opinio nu: 2.
, whom I cited in my Theological Disputation cap: 10. sec. 2. nu: 21.
, that a man is not bound always to follow the better opinion, but it
suffices that he follow that, which some skillful Doctors judge to be true:
and learned Nauarra, whom I also related in that book cap: 3. sec: 3. nu: 14.
, for the quieting of scrupulous consciences affirms, in Manuali cap: 27.
number. 288.
that in the Court of Conscience, to the effect of not sinning, it suffices to
choose for true his opinion, whom for just cause we think to be a man of a
good conscience, and of sufficient learning.

41 Wherefore when my Adversary affirms, that to make an argument probable,
it suffices not, that it seem good and true in it self, but it must also be
able in some sort to counterpoyse the arguments of the contrary opinion, if he
mean, that it must always be able in some sort to counterpoyse the arguments
of the contrary opinion, in the judgments of those who are not of the
contrary opinion, and do not approve the argument for good, this, if it were
lawful for me to use my Adversaries indecent words, is absurd and ridiculous,
for that oftentimes it falls out, that some Doctors do think an opinion to
be improbable and heretical, which other Doctors of the contrary opinion do
think not only to be probable, but also to be the more true opinion, as it
is evident in the question touching the superiority of the Pope and Counsels.
For the ancient Doctors of Paris, as Ioannes Mayor, and Iacobus Almainus, Mayor
de auctorit: Ecclesiae circa finem. Almainus de authorit: Ecclesiae cap: 7.
Card: Camerac. de authorit. Eccles. part. 3. cap: 4. Gerson in libello contra
Petrum de Luna. artic: 22. and alibi.
who wrote against Cardinal Caietane concerning this question, thought the
opinion, which held the Pope to be above a General Council, to be improbable,
yea and other Doctors, as Cardinalis Cameracensis, and John Gerson, thought it
to be erroneous and heretical, which nevertheless Cardinal Caietan defended
to be the more true opinion.

42 But if my Adversary mean, as needs he must, if he will speak with
reason, that to make an argument probable, it must always be able in some sort
to counterpoyse the arguments of the contrary opinion, in the judgments of
those, who either are not of that contrary opinion, or else do not reject the
argument as improbable, this is most true: for in the judgments of those, who
do not only reject the argument as improbable, but do absolutely approve it
for good, and for the more probable, it does not only in some sort
counterpoyse, but it does also in some sort overpoyse the arguments of the
contrary opinion, as any man may plainly perceive by Vasquez doctrine, which
because it fully clears this present difficulty, and is able to quiet the
conscience of any man, be he never so ignorant, I related word by word in my
Theological Disputation, Cap: 10. sec: 2.
which doctrine because my Adversary knew right well, that it did amply
declare what is a probable opinion, and how far forth both unlearned, and
learned men may follow a probable opinion against the more common, the more
probable, and the more secure opinion of Catholic Divines, he cunningly
concealeth, as you shall see, the chief and principal point thereof, and yet
he carpeth at me for filling above a dozen pages of my book with Vasquez
doctrine and text, affirming withal, that I am absurd in applying Vasquez
doctrine to this our case, but who is the absurd, you shall forthwith perceive.

43 For whereas Vasquez does teach, that if a learned and skillful man, who
has taken no small pains in studies, and has also thoroughly seen and
examined all the reasons of the contrary opinion, shall judge against all
other writers, who have gone before him, that his opinion is the more probable,
he may although it be the less secure opinion, lawfully embrace it, and in
practice follow it, whose opinion also an unlearned man, who ought according to
reason, says Vasquez, give credit to the learning and honesty of a learned
and virtuous man, may lawfully follow, my Adversary affirms, that Vasquez is
to be understood to speak of questions and opinions altogether undecided, as
is that, which I cited there out of Vasquez, concerning the infusing of habits
by God alone, and not of such a doctrine, as is this concerning the Popes power
to depose Princes, which has not only been taught by the learned men of
many ages, but also is grounded upon holy Scriptures, and confirmed by the
practice, and decrees of diverse Popes and Counsels etc. But whether I be
absurd in accounting that doctrine to be probable, undecided, and questionable
among Catholics, about which the Schoolmen are at strife, and as yet the
controversy is not decided by the Judge, says Trithemius In Chron: monast:
Hirsaug: ad annum 1106.
, and which very many Doctors do defend, says Almainus De dominio not: civ:
and Eccles. in proba^: 2. concl.
, and which the Kingdom of France has always approved for certain says
Pithaeus in Cod. libert. Eccles. Gallic.
, and which the late proceeding of the Parliament of Paris against the
contrary doctrine taught by Suarez, Card: Bellarmine, and others has clearly
confirmed (to omit the form of oath lately propounded by the tiers Estates,)
and that Card: Peron himself does not reject it as improbable, I remit to the
judgment of the indifferent Reader.

44. Yea my Adversary himself, although he untruly and unlearnedly, as you
shall perceive beneath, charge me with heresy, for defending the aforesaid
doctrine as probable, or to use Cardinal Perons word, as problematique, dare
not avouch, that the doctrine is defined by any General Council, which
nevertheless, as I showed in my Theological Disputation Cap: 10. sec. 2. number.
32.
out of Card: Bellarmine, and Canus, is necessary that a decree of a General
Council can make a point of faith, and the contrary doctrine to be
heretical, but with mincing terms only affirms, that it has been taught
by the learned men of many ages, is grounded upon holy Scriptures, and
confirmed by the practice and decrees of diverse Popes and Counsels, especially
of the great Council of Lateran, which expressly ordained the practice of it in
some Cases, and did therefore necessarily suppose, and firmly believe the
verity of the said doctrine. But besides that here is no speech of any
definition, which only can make any doctrine to be of faith, and the contrary
to be heretical, and also it is usual among Divines to affirm, that their
doctrine has been taught by the learned men of many ages, is grounded upon
holy Scriptures, is not only confirmed by the practice, but is also expressly
defined by the decrees of General Counsels, which nevertheless does not
terrify other learned men from impugning their doctrine and opinions, I will
show beneath In the third part, chap. 9. and the rest.
, that the Council of Lateran did neither ordain the practice of that
doctrine, nor necessarily suppose or firmly believe, especially with divine
and supernatural belief, the verity thereof; and I will answer all the
Replies, which my Adversary has taken out of Fa: Lessius (masked under D.
Singletons name) against my answers, and has filled not only a dozen pages,
but well near four dozen pages of his book with Fa: Lessius his doctrine and
text, yet concealing his name, belike to make his Reader believe what a learned
Divine he is now become, and that those Replies were not the fruits of other
men's wits, but the subtle inventions of his own fertile brain, whereas it is
well known, what small skill Mr. Thomas Fitzherbert has in Theological
learning.

45 But if my Adversary had been resolved sincerely to handle this question,
and really to find out the truth, he might easily have gathered out of Vasquez
doctrine, the answer to this his Reply. For when Vasquez affirms, that if a
learned man, who has thoroughly seen, and examined all the reasons of the
contrary part, shall judge against all other writers, who have gone before him,
that his opinion is the more probable, he may although it be the less secure
opinion, embrace it, and in practice follow it, his assertion is general,
whether it be concerning any doctrinal point, which is thought to belong to
faith, or any text of holy Scripture, or any decree or definition of Pope or
General Council, which are in controversy among Catholics. Yea according to
Vasquez doctrine, it is lawful for other men, who hold the contrary opinion
to be the more probable, without any note of temeritie, to embrace it, and in
practice follow it, unless it be a singular opinion and of one only Doctor
(as this doctrine which denies the Popes power to depose Princes is not
singular and of one only, but of many, as I will show beneath:) for then, says
Vasquez, if it be a singular opinion, and of one only Doctor, although it may
be probable to that Doctor (who is not therefore so easily to be condemned of
temeritie) yet to him, who likes not the proper and intrinsecall grounds of
that singular opinion, and of one only Doctor, and sees it to be grounded
upon the authority of one only Doctor, he ought not to account it probable
to this effect, that he may prudently follow it in practice against his own,
and the common opinion of all others.

46 But if it be not a singular opinion and of one only Doctor, although the
learned men of the contrary opinion do urge for their doctrine some law,
decree, or definition, which the contrary part has seen and examined, and
has in some sort answered thereunto, it is lawful for any learned man
according to Vasquez, to follow in practice that other less secure and less
common opinion, against his own opinion, albeit it be the more secure and
common opinion. For when we perceive, says Vasquez, that the Authors of the
contrary opinion have seen, and considered all the grounds and reasons for
our opinion, and have observed that objection taken from that law or decree,
and have endeavored to answer them, and that they were not convinced by them,
we may justly think, that we may prudently and lawfully follow in practice the
opinion of those other men against our own, neither ought we to suppose that
our reasons are evident demonstrations, and which do make the contrary
opinion to be void of all probability.

47 And this doctrine of Vasquez is evident in the question concerning the
superiority of the Pope above a General Council, which has been so long
debated betwixt the Doctors of Rome and Paris. For both of them affirm, that
their opinion is grounded upon holy Scriptures, is confirmed by the practice
and decrees, yea and definitions of General Councels, and yet both of the^,
because they are approved by learned Catholic Divines, are probable, although,
as Nauarra, In cap. Nouit de Iudicijs notab. 3. nu. 84.
out of Ioannes Mayor a learned Divine of Paris relates, that the opinion of
the Parishioners is not permitted to be defended at Rome, nor the opinion of
the Romans to be defended at Paris. And therefore into what foul terms,
trow you, would my Adversary break, if the Doctors of Paris, who do
resolutely hold, that the Pope is inferior to a General Council, should
argue against Card. Bellarmine and others of his opinion, in the same manner,
as this foul mouthed man, who has still in his mouth absurd, ridiculous,
impertinent, foolish, impudent, temerarious, impious, heretical, or erroneous,
that their doctrine has not only been taught by the learned men of many
ages, but also it is grounded upon holy Scriptures, confirmed by the practice
and decrees of diverse Counsels, but especially of the famous Council of
Constance, which did not only ordain the practice of it in some cases, and
therefore necessarily suppose and firmly believe, but did also expressly
define, and consequently command all Christians to believe the verity of that
doctrine, and that therefore Card. Bellarmine is fallen into heresy, for not
believing that doctrine, which that famous General Council, believed,
defined, and ordained to be practiced and also to be believed.

48 By this it is apparent, that Vasquez doctrine is to be understood generally
of all cases, questions, and opinions, which are in controversy among learned
Catholics, although one or both parts do pretend their doctrine to be of
faith, and to be grounded upon the authority of holy Scripture, or some decree
of Pope, or General Council, and that learned Catholics ought not, according
to Vasquez, to be easily condemned of temeritie, and much less of error or
heresy, who do not follow the more common, the more probable, and the more
secure opinion of other Catholic Doctors, although this common opinion seem
to some followers thereof to be an undoubted doctrine, and to be confirmed by
some Decree, Law, or Canon of Pope, or General Counsel, which Decree, Law, or
Canon those learned Catholics have seen, examined, and answered, although
their answers do not satisfy the contrary side. And conformably to this
doctrine did Vasquez, as I observed in my Theological Disputation, dispute
that question, whether there be any habits, which are infused by God alone. For
although he expressly affirms, that it is the constant, without
controversy, and undoubted opinion of the Schoole-Diuines, that there be
certain virtues called Theological, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which of their
own nature are infused by God alone, and that some Doctors, as Andreas Vega,
do hold this doctrine to be of faith, and the contrary to be heretical, or
erroneous, endeavoring to prove the same, not out of the Council of Vienna,
which did only declare it to be the more probable opinion, but out of the
Council of Trent, yet Vasquez would not condemn the contrary opinion not
only of heresy, as my Adversary would cunningly persuade the Reader, but not
so much as of temeritie. From whence I inferred, that, according to Vasquez
doctrine, which my Adversary fraudulently concealeth, the constant, without
controversy, and undoubted opinion of Schoole-Diuines, and which some of them
think to be a point of faith, may sometimes be rejected without any note, not
only of heresy or error, but also of temeritie, which doctrine does clearly
satisfy the common argument drawn from the authority of learned men, who
hold the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes to be a point of
faith, and consequently the oath to be repugnant to faith and salvation. And
thus much concerning the first and second point of my Adversaries fourth
Admonition.

49 As touching the third point it is apparently untrue, and very injurious to
Catholics, and to Catholic Religion to affirm, that the Arrians, or any
other heretics may well pretend a far greater probability for the
establishing of their heresies, then may I and those other Catholics, who hold
it probable, that the Pope has not power to depose Princes. For (besides that
the Arrian heresy was expressly condemned in the first eight General
Counsels, and afterward in many others, and the Arrians have ever been
accounted heretics by ancient Fathers and all other Catholics, whereas there
cannot be alleged so much as any show or color of any one definition of a
General Council, wherein the doctrine which denies the Popes power to depose
Princes is condemned for heretical, but all the proofs that my Adversaries
allege, that the Pope has such a power, are only ouer-wrested similitudes,
facts, examples, inferences, and supposisitions of their own, drawn from the
authority of holy Scriptures, Popes, or Councels) when the Philosophers and
Divines do affirm, that the authority of learned and skillful men suffices
to make the doctrine or opinion probable, which they approve, they understand
of learned and skillful men approving a doctrine belonging to the art, which
they profess, according to that vulgar maxim, vnicuique in sua art perito
credendum est, we must give credit to every man skillful in his art.

50 So that in a point of Law, the authority of skillful Lawiers, and not of
skillful Physicians, in a point of Physike the authority of skillful
Physicians and not of Lawiers, and in a point of Catholic Religion, the
authority of learned Catholics, and who are skillful in points of Catholic
Religion which they profess, and not of heretics, and who do not profess
Catholic Religion, does make the opinion, or doctrine which they approve to
be probable. And therefore my Adversary very insufficiently (not to use those
foul words absurdly and ridiculously, which he so often uses against me)
argues from the authority of learned Catholics to the authority of
heretics, whose doctrine according to the definition of probable, can never
make the opinions, which they approve in points of Catholic Religion, which
they do not profess, to be probable. Neither by this can any point of
Catholic faith, which is known to all learned Catholics to be a point of
Catholic faith, be easily called in question, and made only probable, for
that no learned Catholic will call in question any doctrine, which is clearly
known to be the Catholic faith, and as for heretics their authority can
never make any doctrine belonging any way to Catholic Religion, which they do
not profess, to be probable.

51 But if there should arise any controversy among learned Catholics,
whether this or that doctrine be of faith, and in what sense the words of such
a text of holy Scripture, or of such a Canon, or Decree of Pope or Council are
to be understood, there is no doubt, but that the authority of learned
Catholics may in those cases make their opinion probable although other
Catholics would be so stiff in their own opinion, as to condemn the
contrary part of heresy, error, or temeritie. A manifest example hereof we
have in the Council of Constance, wherein according to John Gerson and other
learned men, who were present at that Council, it was expressly defined, that
the Pope is inferior and subject to a General Council lawfully assembled,
and therefore the contrary to be flat heretical, but since that other
Catholics, especially Roman Divines have called that Decree in question, and
have endeavored to answer thereunto, affirming that it was only meant of Popes
in time of Schism, or that the aforesaid Decree was not confirmed by Pope
Martin in the end of the Council, which answers nevertheless do not
satisfy the Doctors of the contrary opinion, I do not think, but that my
Adversary will confess, that the opinion of the Romans may be accounted
probable, and that the calling of that Decree in question was not the right way
to overthrow Catholic Religion, and to introduce all heresy and Atheism.

52. But if it should perchance fall out, that some Catholics would be so
self opinatiue, as to affirm without any definition at all of the Church,
although under pretext of zeal and devotion to the Sea Apostolic, any
doctrine to be of faith and the contrary to be heretical, and other
Catholics although the far fewer in number should deny the same, especially
in a matter which concerns our obedience due to God and Caesar, if the first
part only should be permitted to write freely what they please, and to tax the
other part of heresy, to omit error, temeritie, folly, ridiculous absurdity
and such like, and this other part should be forbidden to defend their good
names, and to answer for themselves, I leave (good Reader) to thy
consideration, whether this be not the right way to overthrow Catholic
Religion and the undoubted grounds thereof, and to introduce uncertain
opinions for an infallible doctrine of the Catholic faith, which is to open a
wide gap to heresy, Atheism, and evident injustice, and to make among
Christians a perpetual dissension betwixt the Clergy, and Laity, the
temporal and spiritual power. Now that this doctrine for the Popes power to
depose Princes is not by any definition at all of the Church declared to be
true, my Adversary cannot deny, and that it ever has been and is impugned by
learned Catholics, and the contrary has ever been, and is by them approved,
and therefore it is truly probable, and not only has a pretense of
probability I will show beneath, where I will both relate the Catholic
Authors, who deny this authority of the Pope to depose Princes, which only is
sufficient to make their doctrine probable, and also I will discover the
insufficiency of those Replies, which my Adversary has made against my
answers. And thus much concerning the third point.

53. For the fourth and last point, consider, Catholic Countreimen, whether
Mr. Fizherbert intends to declare unto you plainly and sincerely this present
controversy, and by a clear explayning of the question to quiet your
consciences, or rather by wrangling and cauilling to obscure the difficulty,
and blind your understandings. The question betwixt him and me at this present
is, whether it be a probable doctrine, that the Pope has not any power by the
institution of Christ to deprive Sovereign Princes of their temporal power,
and Regal authority: And there are two only grounds to persuade any man, that
this or that doctrine or opinion is truly probable. The one are called
intrinsecall grounds, to wit, the arguments and reasons, which are drawn from
holy Scriptures, sacred Canons, Theological reasons and such like, to prove
that doctrine or opinion: and these grounds are proper only to learned men,
who are able to weigh and examine the arguments on both sides; ^^e other are
called extrinsecall grounds, which do only consist in the authority of those
learned men, who do hold that doctrine or opinion, because according to that
which has been said before, that doctrine is truly probable, which is
approved by wise and skillful men in the art which they profess; and by these
only grounds unlearned men can be persuaded, that any doctrine or opinion is
truly probable.

54. Now my Adversary seeing, as he says, that all my pretended probability
consists partly in the authority of those Authors, which I have brought in
my Theological Disputation, and in my Apology, and partly in the
sufficiency, as I suppose, of my answers to their grounds, arguments and
authorities, yet he takes upon him in this Reply only to confute some of my
answers to their intrinsecall grounds, and for the confutation of the
authorities which I bring, he remitteth his Reader, to D. Schulckenius, who,
as he says, has answered particularly to every one of them. Seeing therefore
that there is no sufficient way to satisfy the understandings of unlearned
men, that the doctrine, which holds the Pope to have no authority to depose
Princes, is not truly probable, but by showing that no learned Catholics do
approve the same, for that unlearned men are not able to examine the
intrinsecall grounds of any Theological question, but are only led by
authority, and extrinsecall grounds, and if they once perceive, that learned
Catholics do approve any doctrine they will presently also perceive that
doctrine to be truly probable, is there any likelihood, that Mr. Fitzherbert
intended to give satisfaction to his unlearned Countreimen, by replying to some
of the answers, which I made to their arguments, and intrinsecall grounds of
their doctrine, which intrinsecall grounds unlearned men cannot examine, and
for an answer to the authorities and extrinsecall grounds which I brought,
which only grounds unlearned men can understand, to remit his English Readers,
and who for the most part understand not Latin to D. Schulckenius a Latin
writer.

55. Besides, from my Adversaries own words the Reader may easily perceive a
great fraud of his. For my Adversary confesses, that I have brought many
Authors partly in my Theological Disputation, and partly in my Apology,
which is very true; for in my Theological Disputation of set purpose I chose
out certain Authors named in my Apology, which I thought did speak more
plainly, and against which no just exception could be taken; whereunto also I
added certain other Authors which in my Apology were not named at all: And
yet my Adversary remitteth his Reader for an answer to them all, to D.
Schulckenius, who has only answered (but how insufficiently you shall see
beneath) those authorities which I brought in my Apology: for my Theological
Disputation he could not at that time see, it being then but in the PRINTERS
hands. But the plain truth is, that unless my Adversary would have showed
apparently to wrangle and cavil, he could take no just exception whereby his
Reader might be fully satisfied, against those Authors, which I brought in my
Theological Disputation, and therefore he thought it his best course cunningly
to shift them of, and not to meddle with the answering of them at all, least
the Reader perceiving so many learned Catholics to join with Widdrington in
denying this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes especially to be a
point of faith, should presently observe both the fraudulent proceeding of my
Adversary, who labors to persuade his Reader, that only Widdrington does
impugn this authority of the Pope to depose Princes, and also that the
contrary doctrine being approved not only by Widdrington, but also by so many
learned Catholics is, and ought to be accounted truly probable, and therefore
may according to Vasquez doctrine without any note of temeritie be embraced by
any Catholic. But of these authorities I will treat more at large beneath. And
thus much concerning my Adversaries fourth Admonition, and all the four points
thereof.

56. Now to come to my Adversaries fifth and last admonition, which indeed, as
he truly says, is worthy to be noted, but not for any truth therein to be
observed, but for the manifest fraud and falsehood therein contained: The first
and last consideration shall be, says my Adversary, Number. 25. and seq.
that Widdringtons doctrine is dangerous and pernicious not only to the
consciences of Catholics, (as I have showed) but also to his Majesty's
service, which he pretends to further and advance thereby; for he cannot
deny, but that the contrary opinion being probable (as he confesses it to be)
may be lawfully embraced by all men; whereupon it follows, that any man may
not only refuse the oath lawfully, but also hold, that his Majesty may be
deposed by his own subjects upon a sentence of Excommunication and Deposition,
and that consequently they may lawfully take arms against his Majesty in that
case; and this being so, what security has his Majesty, or advancement of his
service by this man's doctrine? For albeit many do now take the Oath, and
swear that they think in their conscience, that the Pope cannot depose the
King; yet for as much as it is, and always will be probable, in the opinion of
some learned men, that they have sworn a thing, which is false, and
consequently that their Oath is inualide, it follows (according to the
grounds of his doctrine) that they may break their Oath, seeing that they may
always probably persuade themselves, that they promised and swore a thing
false and unlawful, and that therefore they are not bound to observe it.

57. Furthermore, if his Holiness should at any time dispense with them
particularly for their Oath, or excommunicate and depose his Majesty,
discharging his Subjects of their bond of fidelity, and all others of
Allegiance, this man cannot deny, but that it is probable at least, that then
they are free from the Oath, and consequently that they may (even according to
his doctrine of probability) concur to the deposition of his Majesty: and
therefore seeing that his doctrine does not give any security to his Majesty,
and that according to his opinion any man may as lawfully condemn and refuse
the Oath, as approve and take it, it is evident, that his said doctrine is not
only vain and fruitless to his Majesty, but also dangerous and pernicious,
no less impugning the authority of his Majesty commanding it to be taken,
then of his Holiness forbidding it.

58. Whereupon I infer three things; the first, that he is neither so good a
subject to his Majesty, as he pretends, nor such an obedient child to the
Church as he professes to be. The second is, that his books deserve to be
prohibited no less in England then Rome; and therefore truly wise men in
these parts do greatly marvel how it can stand with the wisdom of his
Majesty's Council to permit them to be printed and published in England as we
see they are. The third is, that he is one of those, whom God threatens in the
Apocalypse, Apoc. 3.
to spit out of his mouth, saying of such indifferent men as he, Vtinam esses
aut calidus, aut frigidus etc. I would thou were either hot or cold, but
because thou art lukewarm, I will begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.

59. And this shall suffice, good Reader, for the present, touching those
aduertisements and considerations, which I meant to give thee concerning
Widdringtons doctrine in general: and therefore I will now pass to the
examination of his answers to me in particular, and lay down in order as much
of the text of his Admonition, as concerns me, to the end that he shall not
have occasion to say, that I have concealed or dissembled any thing that he
has said against me; as also that thou may see, how probably he has
answered me, and thereby the better judge of the probability, as well of his
answers to other men, as of his whole doctrine in his Theological Disputation,
which as I understand, thou shall shortly see fully confuted in Latin to his
confusion, Besides that, I doubt not, but thou shall also, even in this my
Reply, see a clear confutation of the chief grounds of his doctrine, and of
his principal arguments and answers touching the Popes power to depose
Princes, which is the maine question betwixt him and us, and specially
impugned, and abiured in the new oath.

60. But what strange paradoxes and positions void of all probability Mr.
Fitzherbert dare adventure to maintain, yea and to persuade his Majesty, and
the wisdoms of his most honorable privy Council, that it is dangerous to
his Majesty's safety, to have this doctrine for the Popes power to depose his
Majesty, to be so much as called in question in his Dominions, thou may,
good Reader, clearly perceive by this his last Admonition, wherein thou shall
observe the manifest fraud and falsehood of this man. For if Mr. Fitzherbert had
either sincerely, or entirely related my opinion and doctrine, or else had put
in mind his Reader against what kind of Adversaries I do oppose, any man of
mean understanding would presently have perceived (as I observed elsewhere, In
the Admonition to the Reader before my English Purgation sent to his Holiness.
which my words I think it not amiss to set down here again) that it is
too too apparently and shamefully untrue, that my manner of handling this
question probably can be dangerous or pernicious to his Majesty, as my
Adversary endeavors to persuade his Majesty, not for any love that he is
known to bear unto the State, but to the end by all likelihood, that he and
such like violent spirits may write more freely of this subject, and without
being controlled or contradicted by Catholics, who, as he is persuaded, do
little regard the writings and opinions of Protestants concerning this or any
other doctrine.

61. For it may be dangerous to his Majesty to handle a question probably
against one Adversary, which will be nothing dangerous to handle it probably
against another. As for example, if it were agreed upon by all Catholics, that
the Pope has no power to depose his Majesty, then it would be dangerous to
his Majesty, that any Catholic should call this in question, and dispute it
probably: but if on the contrary side all Catholics should agree in this, that
it were certain, unquestionable, and a point of faith, that the Pope has
power to depose his Majesty, and to absolve his Subjects of their Allegiance,
to command them to take arms against him etc. then if a Catholic should call
this in question, or which is all one, dispute it probably, and maintain, that
it is not certain, that the Pope has such an authority, but that it is
questionable, and probable that he has it not, no man of any sense or
understanding can affirm, that such a manner of disputing this question
probably against those Adversaries, who hold it for certain and
unquestionable, can be any way dangerous or pernicious to his Majesty.

62 Now behold the manner, which I have taken in handling this controversy.
Card: Bellarmine, Fa: Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, Suarez, and some other
Divines, especially of the Society of Jesus, whom Mr. T. F. in every step, as
though he were their creature, (as now he is become one of their company,)
does follow, have laid this for a sure and undoubted ground, that it is a point
of faith, and to be believed as certain, and under pain of eternal damnation
by Catholics, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, to absolve Subjects
from their allegiance, and thereupon to command them to take arms, and raise
tumults against their Prince so deposed. So that you see, that these men have
already laid the danger and undoubted overthrow to his Majesty's Person and
Crown, if the Pope should perchance depose him, in that they affirm, that all
Catholics are in that case bound in conscience to forsake him, and to fulfill
the Popes command to the destruction of his Majesty's Person and State. This
doctrine, to wit, that it is a point of faith, and an undoubted principle of
Catholic Religion, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and to inflict
all temporal punishments by way of coercion, and that all Catholics are bound
in conscience to forsake his Majesty, and to take arms against him, I have
taken upon me for two principal reasons to impugn, and do not doubt clearly
to maintain the same, against the clamours of Mr. T. F. or any other
whatsoever.

63 My first reason was, for that it is against the truth and purity of the
Catholic Church, She being a pillar and ground of truth, that doubtful
opinions, and which among Catholics are only in controversy, and by the
Parliament of Paris have been condemned as scandalous, seditious, damnable, and
pernicious, should be enforced upon English Catholics, as an undoubted
doctrine of the Catholic faith, to the utter overthrow of themselves, and
their whole posterity, by men who are in no danger to loose, but rather to
gain temporal advancement by their writings. My second reason was to assure
his Majesty, that all English Catholics may, if they will, according to the
grounds of Catholic Religion be true and constant Subjects to his Majesty,
and that notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication or deprivation
denounced, or to be denounced against his Majesty by the Pope, whereby his
Subjects should be absolved from their Allegiance, or commanded not to obey him
in temporal causes, they may with a safe conscience, and also in practice
(mark well what I say) they are bound to adhere to his Majesty, to obey him
in temporal causes, as still remaining their true and lawful Sovereign, and
to resist any such sentence of Excommunication or deprivation.

64 The reason wherefore I affirmed, that Catholics may with a safe conscience
adhere to his Majesty, and resist the Popes sentence of deprivation, was, for
that it is a probable opinion, and which with a safe conscience, and without
danger of heresy, error, or temeritie may be embraced by Catholics, that the
Pope has no authority to depose Princes, nor to inflict any temporal
punishments by way of coercion, but that the last punishment, to which the
coerciue power of the Church does extend, are only Ecclesiastical and
spiritual Censures. Wherefore that which my Adversary affirms, that I
confess, it to be probable, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and
that the oath cannot lawfully be taken, is very untrue, unless he mean that I
confess it for Disputation sake, or, as we usually say, Dato, sed non concesso,
it being admitted, not granted, for that it makes nothing for, or against the
question which is in hand. Therefore positiuely I neither confess it, nor deny
it, approve it, or condemn it, nor with that part of the contradiction,
whether it be probable, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and whether
it be probable, that the Oath may not be taken, do I at this time intermeddle,
but whereas my Adversaries do so violently maintain, that it is certain, and
an undoubted doctrine of faith, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and
that the oath is repugnant to faith and salvation, and therefore can not
lawfully be taken, I at this present do affirm the contrary, to wit, that it
is probable, that the Pope has not power to depose Princes, and that the oath
may lawfully be taken.

65 But the principal reason, which I brought for the securing of his Majesty
(which Mr. Fitzherbert fraudulently concealeth) that English Catholics not
only may for the reason aforesaid, but also in practice are bound to adhere to
his Majesty, and to resist the Popes sentence of deprivation, was, for that
supposing it to be speculatiuely uncertain, whether the Pope has any such
power to depose a King or no, it is an undoubted rule De regulis Iuris in 6^.
among the Lawyers, and grounded upon the light of nature and principles of
Divinity, that in causa dubia sieve incerta melior est conditio possidentis, In
a doubtful or disputable case, the state of him that has possession is the
better. And again, Cum sunt iura partium obscura, fauendum est Reo, potius
quam Actori, when it is unknown whether of the parties who are in suite, has
right, the defendant is to be preferred or favored before the plaintiff.
Seeing therefore that from the very first beginning of this controversy,
concerning the authority of Popes, and Sovereignty of Kings, that is, from
the time of Pope Gregory the seventh, who was the first Pope, that challenged
unto him this temporal power over Kings (call it temporal or spiritual as
you please, for sure it is that the effect is temporal) has been uncertain,
disputable, and ever contradicted by Catholics both Kings and Subjects, and
therefore it can not be said, that the Pope was ever in possession of this
authority (although we should grant, that power, right, or authority may be
said to be possessed) it consequently follows, that what opinion soever any
Catholic follow in speculation, concerning the Popes power to depose Princes,
yet in practice, until this Controversy concerning the Popes power to depose
Kings, and the right of Kings not to be deposed, shall be decided, as yet it is
not, he can not with a good conscience endeavor to thrust out a King so
deposed from the Kingdom or Dominions which he lawfully possesses.

66 Whereupon in the end of my Apology I inferred this conclusion, whereof
also in my Epistle Dedicatorie to his Holiness I made mention: And therefore
if either Pope, Prince, or any other of a foreign country should attempt to
thrust an heretical Prince out of the kingdom, which he possesses, this
controversy concerning the deposition of Princes being undecided, he should
contrary to the rules of justice do that Prince most manifest wrong. And much
more a Subject can not be excused from manifest treason, what soever opinion in
speculation he does maintain concerning the Popes temporal power, who should
in practice, under pretense perchance of devotion to the Sea Apostolic, not
duly also considering the bond of his Allegiance toward his Sovereign,
endeavor to thrust his lawful Prince out of his kingdom, which he
possesses, notwithstanding any Excommunication or sentence of deprivation
denounced against him by the Pope.

67 But because D. Schulkenius, has endeavored to confute that reason, which
I out of the aforesaid rule of the Law, In causa dubia melior est conditio
possidentis, I brought to prove, that no man in practice can with a safe
conscience obey the Popes sentence of deprivation, so long as this controversy
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes remains undecided, I will
briefly declare, how insufficiently he obiecteth against that reason. First
therefore he affirms Cap. 15. ad nu. 468. page 629. and page 633. ad nu. 470.
, that this doctrine to depose Princes is not doubtful or in controversy
among Catholics, but it is certain and of faith, and none but heretics and
schismatikes do defend the contrary, and therefore that rule In causa dubia
etc. In a doubtful or disputable cause the condition of the possessour is the
bettter, can not be applied to the Popes power to depose Princes, But how
untrue this is, and also how slanderous and injurious it is to many learned
Catholics especially to the most Christian Kingdom of France, I will clearly
show beneath, in so much that for this cause only if there had been no other,
his book was deservedly burnt publikly at Paris.

68 Secondly, D. Schulkenius would seem to affirm that the aforesaid rule, In
causa dubia, etc. In a doubtful, or disputable cause the state of him, who
has possessions is the better, is not a rule of the Law, for that says he, I
find not in the rules of the Law, In a doubtful, or disputable cause, but, In
a like or equal case the state or condition of him, who has possession is the
better. But it D. Schulkenius will cavil about the words, and not regard the
sense, I may likewise say, that he finds not in the rules of the Law, In an
equal or like case but in an equal and like cause the state of him, who has
possession is the better. But because cause and case, like, equal doubtful,
uncertain, and disputable have all one sense, for that if two causes or cases
be doubtful, uncertain, or disputable, they are like or equal in that,
therefore I regarding the sense, and not the words, did rather use the words,
doubtful, uncertain and disputable, then like, or equal, both for that the
former words do declare the sense of the rule more plainly, and also because
Divines in alleging that rule of the Law do commonly use the word doubtful,
as it may be seen in Dominicus Sotus, Lib. 7. de instit. q. 3. ar. 2.
Ioannes Azor, Tom. 1. lib 2. Instit. cap. 18.
Ioannes Salas, Dis. 1. sec. 9. de Legibus.
and Gabriel Vasquez, Prima secundae disp. 65. cap.
and therefore Vasquez citing the aforesaid rule takes like and doubtful for
all one, The aforesaid rule, says he, Disp. 66. ca. 7
In dubijs, seu in pari causa etc. In doubts, or in a like cause the state of
the possessor is the better etc.

69 Wherefore D. Sculckenius perceiving, that this exception of his against the
aforesaid rule is only verbal, will not absolutely deny the rule, but
answers thirdly, that if there be such a rule of the Law (as without doubt in
sense there is both in the Canon, De Regulis Iuris in sexto.
and Civil Law, and in express words the Divines and Lawiers do cite it so)
it does make for the Pope, ff. De regulis Iuris regula 170. In pari causa etc.
who has been for many hundred years in possession to judge and depose
Seclar Princes, especially in a cause belonging to faith. But this answer of
D. Sculckenius is very insufficient. For first, although we should grant, that
right, power, or authority may be said to be possessed, in that sense, as
Possession is taken in Law, (whereas according to the Lawiers, as Molina the
Jesuit observes, De Iustitia tract. 2. Disp. 12.
possession properly is only of corporal things, and right, power, and such
like spiritual things are only said to be as it were possessed, yet
supposing that it is a doubtful, uncertain, and disputable question, whether
the Pope has power to depose Princes or no, as the Pope is said to be in
possession of his right to depose Princes, so Princes may be said to be in
possession of their right not to be deposed by the Pope; and therefore in this
cause is like, or equal, doubtful or disputable, as well for Princes right
not to be deposed, as for the Popes right to depose them; and on the other side
Princes are not only in possession of their right not to be deposed by the
Pope, but also in quiet, peaceable, and lawful possession of their Kingdoms
and temporal Dominions, which only are properly said to be possessed, in
respect whereof this rule favors only Princes, and not the Pope, and
therefore in this doubtful and disputable case of the Popes power to depose
Princes, the state and condition of Princes, who are in lawful possession, not
only of their right not to be deposed by the Pope, but also of their Kingdoms
and Dominions which they possess, is, according to the aforesaid rule, to be
preferred.

70. Moreover, that the Popes right, power, or authority to depose Princes may
be said to be possessed, (if possession properly be of rights) it is
necessary, that he exercise that power to depose Kings, they knowing thereof,
and bearing it patiently and without contradiction, as may clearly be gathered
out of Tract. 2. de Instit. disp. 14.
Molina, and Lib. 2. cap. 3. dub. 11.
Lessius: And the reason is evident, for otherwise if any man should challenge
a right, be it good or bad, and should exercise that pretended right, the
contrary part contradicting, he may nevertheless be said to be in lawful
possession of that right. And so if temporal Lords should pretend to have a
spiritual Jurisdiction over temporal and spiritual persons, and should
exercise that pretended spiritual Jurisdiction over them, they contradicting
and excepting against the same, they might nevertheless be said to be in
possession of that spiritual Jurisdiction. But Christian Kings from the time
of Henry the fourth Emperor, who was the first Emperor, that ever was deposed
by the Pope, until the time of Henry the fourth most Christian King of France,
who was the last King, whom the Pope deposed, have ever resisted and
contradicted this authority of the Pope to depose them. And therefore although
Popes have for as many hundreds of years, as have been since the time of Pope
Gregory the seventh, challenged this authority to depose Kings, yet they
cannot be said to have been for one year, or one day in possession of that
authority over Kings, seeing that Kings have ever gainsaid and contradicted
it. And although there should perchance have been some one, or other Christian
King, who for some private, or public respect has not resisted the Popes
sentence of deprivation denounced against him, but rather yielded thereunto,
yet this cannot be a sufficient warrant to prejudice his Successors, or that
the Pope may be said to be in possession of his pretended authority to depose
Kings in general, but at the most to depose that King in particular, who did
not resist or gainsay, but rather acknowledged the authority, which the Pope
claimed to depose him.

71. Fourthly, and lastly D. Schulckenius answers, that the aforesaid rule is
to be understood, when the controversy is betwixt two inferior parties who
are in suite, and not betwixt the Judge, and the party accused, or if we will
apply it to the Judge, and the party accused, the Judge is to be preferred
before the party accused, but the Pope is Judge over all Christian Kings and
Princes, and therefore this rule, says he, is in favor of the Pope. But how
unsound and insufficient is also this Reply of D. Schulckenius, it is very
apparent. For First, although the Pope be Judge over all Christian Kings and
Princes in spiritual causes and punishments, yet in temporal causes and
punishments they have no Judge, or Superior besides God, the supreme Judge of
all both Kings and Popes; and therefore well said our learned Countreiman
Alexander of Hales, 3 part. q. 40. mem. 5. q. 4.
expound those words, A King is to be punished by God alone, with material
punishment: And again, A King has no man, who may judge his facts to wit, to
inflict corporal punishment: And again, A king does excel, as it is written
1. Pet. 2. it is true, in his degree, to wit, to exercise corporal punishment,
with which punishment, if he offend, he has none to punish him but God alone.

72. Yea rather contrariwise the Roman Emperors were in times past Judges in
temporal causes of all the Roman Empire and of every member thereof both
Clergy and Laity: but the deposition of Kings is a temporal cause and
punishment, for what crime soever whether temporal or spiritual a King be
deposed: and therefore the controversy about deposing Kings betwixt the Pope
challenging to himself that authority, and Kings, who are supreme Judges in
temporalls denying it, is not betwixt the Judge and the party accused, but at
the least betwixt two equals in temporal causes, whereof the Pope, who first
challenged this power to make Kings no Kings is the plaintiff, and Kings who
defend their ancient right, and prerogative not to be deposed by the Pope, are
the defendant: and so also that second rule of the Law, Cum sunt iura partium
obscura etc. When (...) is not clear whether of the parties, who are in suite,
have right, the defendant is to be preferred before the plaintiff, favors,
Kings, and not the Pope, who only from the time of Gregory the seventh claimed
this authority to make Kings no Kings.

73. Secondly, I do not think, that any Lawyer will affirm, that if a Judge,
who is only known to have authority in civil matters, as civil is opposed
to criminal, should challenge a Jurisdiction in criminal causes, and condemn
a man to death, before he showed that he had sufficient warrant from the
Prince so to do, the party condemned is bound to obey that Judge, or that the
aforesaid rule, In a like or doubtful cause he that has possession it to be
preferred, should favor the aforesaid Judge, and not the party condemned, who
is not only in possession of his life, but also has right to defend his life,
until the Judge show sufficient warrant, or it is otherwise publicly known,
that he has authority to take it away. Neither is it a sufficient warrant for
the Judge, that it is known, that he is a Judge in civil matters, unless it
be also known that he is a Judge also in criminal causes, as likewise it is
not a sufficient warrant for the Pope to deprive Kings of their temporal
kingdoms, that it is clear that he is a Judge in all spiritual matters,
unless also it be clear, as yet it is not, that he is also a Judge in
temporal causes, and to inflict temporal punishments by way of coercion, as
without doubt are the taking away of temporal kingdoms, for what crime soever
they be taken away.

74. Wherefore that Dialogue, which D. Schulckenius makes betwixt the Pope,
and a convicted heretic, whose goods are without any controversy confiscated
both by the Civil and Canon Law, is unaptly applied to the deposing of Kings,
which has been, and is at this present in controversy among Catholics.
Besides, that this Dialogue also supposes, that the Pope is in possession of
his authority to depose Kings, and that Kings are not in possession of their
right not to be deposed by the Pope; and that the Pope is a Judge of temporal
Kings in temporal causes, and to punish them with temporal punishments by way
of coercion: and also, that the aforesaid rule favors the Judge, and not the
person conuented before the Judge, when the authority of the Judge over the
person conuented is not sufficiently known, all which, as I have showed
before, are very untrue. And by this thou may perceive, good Reader, how
insufficient are the exceptions, which D. Schuclkenius brings against my
argument grounded in the aforsaid rule of the Law, as in very deed are all the
rest of his Replies against my Apology, as God willing ere long, (for I cannot
answer fully and exactly as I intend all my Adversaries at once) I will most
clearly show.

75. Consider now (do are Countrymen) first, the insincere dealing of this my
Adversary T. F. who concealeth the chiefest part of opinion and doctrine for
the securing of his Majesty of the constant loyalty and allegiance, wherein
all his Catholic Subjects are in conscience bound unto him, that thereby he
may cause his Majesty to be jealous of my fidelity, and to account me no good
Subject, as this man slanderously affirms, that I am neither a good Subject,
nor a good Catholic, or child of the Church, as I profess my self to be, but
that I am fallen into flat heresy, from which I cannot any way clear or excuse
my self, for impugning that doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes,
which is grounded upon such assured and solid foundation, as this man
(forsooth) here has signified but how guilfully and unsoundly you have partly
seen) and he will more particularly and manifestly declare hereafter, where
also his particular frauds and falsehoods I will more particularly and
manifestly lay open to his own shame and confusion. But for all his slanderous
words, I trust in God, that it will appear to all men, that insurrexerunt in me
testes iniqui, Psalm. 26.
and mentita est iniquit as sibi; that false witnesses have risen up against
me, and that wickedness has be lied her self: and that I will ever prove my
self to be both a good Subject to his Majesty, and also a good Catholic,
and a dutiful child of the Catholic Church, as partly I have proved here
already, and will more particularly and manifestly declare hereafter. In the
mean time let Mr. Fitzherbert examine well his Catholic faith, and consider
what a kind of Catholic he is, who so stiffely maintains uncertain
opinions for the Catholic faith, which, if it be truly Catholic, cannot be
exposed to any falsehood or uncertainty, as this doctrine for the Popes power to
depose Princes, which with Catholic faith he pretends truly to believe,
may in very deed be false, and without all doubt is uncertain and
questionable among Catholics.

76. Secondly consider, how untruly Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that my manner
of disputing this question probably concerning the Popes power not to depose
Princes, and the lawful taking of the Oath, does not only give no security to
his Majesty, but is also dangerous and pernicious to his Majesty's safety, and
how unlearnedly he argues from speculation to practice. For although I should
admit not only for Disputation sake, as only I do, but also positiuely
confess, that in speculation it is probable, that the Pope has power to
depose Princes (whereas with that affirmative part of the question, to wit,
whether it be probable that the Pope has power to depose Princes I do not
intermeddle, but I do only handle the negative part, and do affirm, that it
is probable he has no such power, which manner of disputing against such
Adversaries, who hold it not only probable, but certain, that he has such a
power, can in no sort be dangerous or pernicious to his Majesty's safety, as I
clearly showed before) nevertheless this my Adversary very unsoundly from
hence infers, that because in speculation it is probable, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes, therefore in practice it is lawful to concur to:
the actual deposing or thrusting them out of the possession of their
Kingdoms, or for Subjects notwithstanding any sentence of deposition to bear
arms against them, so long as this question concerning the Popes power to
depose Princes remains disputable and undecided. Wherefore my firm, resolute
and constant opinion is, that the Pope has not power to dispe^ce or absolve
any of his Majesty's Subjects what opinion soever in speculation they follow
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes, from any promissorie parts of
the Oath, which only do belong to practice, and as for the assertory parts of
the Oath, which belong to speculation, they are not subject to the Popes power
of dispencing, as I showed at large in my Theological Disputation Cap. 6. sec.
3.
.

77. Now whether this my doctrine does not only give no security to his
Majesty, but is also dangerous and pernicious to his Majesty's safety (as
this my Adversary to procure his Majesty's displeasure against me falsely and
unlearnedly affirms) if the Pope should denounce any sentence of deprivation
against him, I leave to the judgment of any sensible man. Neither is it
unusual that an opinion or doctrine may in speculation be probable, which yet
in practice it is not lawful to follow, as may be seen in the ministering of
corporal physic, and of those Sacraments which are necessary to salvation.
For although it be probable, that such a medicine will cure such a dangerous
disease, for that learned Physicians are of that opinion, although other
learned Physicians think the contrary to be true, or that such a matter or
form be sufficient to the validity of the Sacrament, for example sake of
Baptism, because learned Divines hold it to be sufficient, although other
learned Divines be of the contrary opinion, and so in speculation both
opinions be probable, yet in practice we are bound by the law of charity to
apply to our neighbor those remedies either spiritual or corporal, which are
out of question and controversy, and to leave those that are questionable, if
certain and undoubted remedies can be had: So likewise although it be probable,
that such a house or land does not by a lawful title belong to him who is in
lawful possession thereof, for that learned Lawyers are of that opinion,
although other learned Lawyers think the contrary to be true, and so in
speculation both opinions be probable, yet in practice we are bound by the
rules of Justice not to dispossess him by violence of that house or land,
before the Judge has decided the controversy.

78 Thirdly, consider the reason, why this my Adversary T. F. is so greatly
offended, that I for this present do only take in hand (by answering probably
all the arguments which are objected on the contrary side) to show, that it is
probable, that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes; and consequently
that any man may with a safe and probable conscience take the Oath; for that
the doctrine concerning the Popes power to depose Princes, is by this my
Adversaries own confession, the maine question betwixt him and me, and the
chief ground wherefore the Oath is judged to be unlawful. His reason therefore
is, for that he saw right well, what great advantage I had against him, and
what little advantage he had against me in arguing or rather answering in this
manner; and therefore he calls it in heat of his zeal, as you have heard,
The most deuilish device that any man could invent. And truly if I should at
this first beginning have treated of this controversy in any other manner,
then by handling it probably in that sense as I have declared, I might worthily
have been taxed of great imprudencie in giving my Adversary more advantage
against me then was needful. For this is the state of the question, whether it
can be clearly convinced by the authority of holy Scriptures, ancient
Fathers, General Counsels, or by necessary inferences from any of them, as
my Adversaries pretend to convince, that it is an undoubted doctrine of faith,
and the contrary not to be maintained by any Catholic, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes, and consequently that the Oath can not lawfully be
taken. This is the question.

79 Mark now the advantage I have. For first I am not to prove, but only to
answer, to defend, not to oppose. Secondly, it is sufficient for me, that my
Answers be only probable, but their Replies must not be only probable, but
also convincing, and which can not with any probability be answered. So that
if I should go about at the first to prove my opinion to be most true, which
my Adversaries contend not to be questionable, I should, as it is evident,
greatly disadvantage my self. For in such controversies as are so violently
maintained by the Adversary, that he will not grant the contrary part to be
questionable, it is necessary to proceed by degrees; first, to make the thing
questionable and disputable, which the adverse part will not have to be called
in question; and after this is once agreed upon, then to examine whether
opinion be the truest. For perchance it may fall out, that as the opinion for
the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin, before Scotus did oppose
himself herein against S. Thomas and his followers, was scarce accounted
probable, yet afterward it was daily more and more embraced, so that it is now
esteemed to be by far the more true opinion, and as Alphonsus, Salmeron in
Rom: 5. Disp: 51. deinde.
, and Franciscus Tom. 2. Disp: 3. sec. 5.
Suarez do affirm, agreed upon by the consent almost of the vninuersall
Church, and of all Ecclesiastical writers, Bishops, Religious Orders, and
Universities: And as that opinion, which holds, that the Pope can not
dispense in the solemn vow of Religious chastity, neither in any lawful
marriage before it be consummate, is accounted by very many learned men to be
the truer opinion, notwithstanding the practice of many Popes to the contrary;
So it may fall out, that in process of time, this opinion, which denies the
Popes power to depose Princes, may be accounted by the greatest number of
learned men to be by far the more true opinion, and may be agreed upon by the
consent almost of the Universal Church, and of all Ecclesiastical writers,
Bishops, Religious Orders, and Universities, notwithstanding the practice of
many Popes, and the vehement opposition of the Jesuits at this present time to
the contrary.

80 Fourthly consider, how little beholding are English Catholics to this my
Adversary T. F., who will needs enforce them even with the temporal overthrow
of themselves, and of their whole posterity, to defend that doctrine to be of
faith, which the State of France accounts scandalous, seditious, damnable and
pernicious, and also endeavors to persuade his Majesty, that no Catholic
can, according to the grounds of Catholic Religion, be a true and loyal
Subject to his Majesty, but at the Popes pleasure, or which is all one, so
long only as the Pope shall not depose him, which he may do at his pleasure.
But we have great affiance in his Majesty's singular wisdom, and element
disposition, whereof we have had both by his Majesty's gracious Proclamation,
public books, and effectual deeds, sufficient trial, that he will not be
drawn by the false suggestion of this my Adversary (who would have all his
Catholic Subjects to be of the same violent spirit as he is) to have all his
Catholic Subjects in the same degree of jealousy, but that he will ever make
a distinction betwixt them, who are his true hearted Subjects, and most loyal
in all temporal affairs, and will adventure all that they have, and are, in
defense of his Majesty's Royal Person and dignity, against any sentence of
deprivation whatsoever, which shall be denounced against him by the Pope
(assuring themselves that it is conformable to the grounds of Catholic
Religion which they profess, and not repugnant to that spiritual obedience
wherein they stand bound to the supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church) and
those other Catholics, who thinking it to be a point of faith, that the Pope
has authority to dethrone Sovereign Princes, and to make temporal Kings
private men, will only defend his Majesty, and yield him temporal obedience,
until the Pope after his sentence of deprivation shall command them the
contrary.

81 But what small relief are English Catholics to expect from Mr.
Fitzherberts hands, if it were in his power to relieve them, you may (Catholic
Countrymen) conjecture by this, that toward the end of Queen Elizabeth her
reign (when those four Reverend Priests were at Rome to seek redress of
Pope Clement the eight, to whom they and other of their brethren had appealed,
for the manifold wrongs and slanders wherewith they were charged both at home
and abroad, at which time this my Adversary running from Cardinal to
Cardinal to inform against them, made no scruple of conscience to disgrace
and slander them, as Schismatikes, Spies, Rebels, and disobedient persons to
the Sea Apostolic etc. as now in his public writings he handles me) he and
some others upon whom he depended, fearing lest that her Majesty should show
some favor, and give some sort of toleration to such her Catholic Subjects,
whom for their constant loyalty she might securely trust (for out of her
Princely and merciful disposition She had already showed over great favor to
those oppressed Priests, considering the present laws of the Realm made
against them) had so little commiseration of the continual calamities of
distressed Catholics, that he was not ashamed to advise then his Holiness in
a little Treatise, or Pamphlet written in Italian, that it was not good, or
profitable to the Catholic cause, that any liberty or toleration of Religion
should be granted by the State to the Catholics of England.

82 And that this is most true he can not for shame deny, and I have also
heard diverse virtuous Priests, and Laymen, who were then at Rome, protest upon
their salvation, that they did both see and read the aforesaid Italian
Pamphlet, affirming withal, that it was thought then by diverse at Rome, that
this my Adversary T. F. was in that business only an agent and instrument
for others, upon whose command and beck he wholly depended, who feared, least
that if her Majesty should have granted which they then greatly suspected,
any toleration or mitigation of the Law to those her Catholic Subjects, who
would give sufficient security of their true, unfeigned, and constant
loyalty, it would have been the ready way to have thrust all the Jesuits
quite out of England. Now what designements this my Adversary can have, and
what construction you may make of such his proceedings, and whether he
sincerely intends so much your good, as his private ends, and of those upon
whom he now depends, and how diligently you are to examine his words, deeds,
and writings, who dare adventure with such palpable fraud to delude his
Holiness, his Majesty, and your selves, as partly you have seen in this his
Preface, and more fully you shall see beneath, I leave, Catholic Countrymen,
to your prudent considerations.

83 Lastly, the applying of those words of the Apocalypse, I would thou were
either hot or cold, etc. to me being but a slanderous calumny affirmed
without proof, needs no confutation. And with the same facility might
Carerius, and the Canonists apply them to Cardinal Bellarmine and others of
his Society, for which cause he calls them wicked politicians, who are so
luke warm, that they will not grant with the Canonists, that the Pope is not
only a spiritual, but also a temporal Lord of the whole Christian world.
True it is that I am not of so fiery a spirit, as under pretense of zeal to
approve Gunpowder plots, or that desperate doctrine, from whence such furious
attempts do proceed, neither under color of fervent devotion to attribute to
the Pope an authority over the Kingdoms, bodies, and lives of temporal
Princes, which is not known to be granted him by Christ, and which is more
scalding, to brand those Catholics with heresy that have not the like
fervor: Neither am I so cold as to deny either to Pope or Prince, that
authority which is known to be due to them, all extremities I hate, virtue
consists in a mean, neither to take from Caesar, and give it to God, nor to
take from God, and give it to Caesar, but to render to God and Caesar, that
which is their due.

84 And this shall suffice (Dear Countrymen) touching those advertisement and
considerations, which Mr. Fitzherbert has given you concerning my doctrine in
general, and therefore I will now pass by degrees to the examination of his
Replies to me in particular, and I doubt not to discover also herein so
plainly his manifold frauds and falshods, that you have just cause not to
hazard your consciences and whole estates upon such his fraudulent words and
writings, as partly you have already seen in this his Preface, how vnsincerely
and guilefully in every one of his advertisement and considerations he has
proceeded, and more clearly you shall see beneath in this Treatise, which
Treatise to the end you may more plainly understand the chief grounds of this
controversy touching the Popes power to depose Princes, which is the maine
question, as my Adversary confesses, betwixt him and me and specially
impugned in the new oath of allegiance, I will divide into three principal
parts.

In the first I will set down those Authors, which I brought in my
Theological Disputation to prove, that any Catholic might by reason of
extrinsecall grounds, and the authority of learned Catholics probably
persuade themselves, that the Pope has not by Christ his institution any power
to depose Princes, together with a confutation of the Replies, which Card.
Bellarmine masked under D. Schulkenius his name, to whom my Adversary here
remitteth his English Reader, has made against them.

In the second I will examine all the principal arguments which Card.
Bellarmine has brought to prove the union and subordination of the temporal
power to the spiritual, which subordination my Adversary here supposes to be
a chief foundation, whereon the doctrine for the Popes Power to depose Princes
does depend, and also the Replies which D. Sculckenius has made to confirm
the said pretended union and subordination.

In the third and last part I will discover in particular the insufficiency or
Mr. Fitzherberts whole Reply, in the same manner, order, and number of
Chapters, which he has observed in replying to my Answers.

The first part,
Wherein THOSE AVTHORITIES AND testimonies of learned CATHOLICS, which Mr.
FITZHERBERT cunningly passes over, and for answer to them remitteth his
English Reader to D. SCHVLCKENIVS a Latin writer, are briefly, and
perspicuously examined.

BEfore I come to examine the particular points of my Adversaries Reply, and to
make manifest his immodest, insufficient, and also insincere proceeding
therein, I think it not amiss, first to set down the testimonies of those
Catholic Authors, which I brought in my Theological Disputation to prove,
that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is not a point of
faith, and the contrary heretical (as Mr. Fitzherbert following the steps of
Card. Bellarmine, and some few others of his Society would gladly enforce
English Catholics even with incurring their Sovereigns high displeasure, and
with the utter overthrow of their temporal estates to believe) to the end the
Reader may thereby clearly perceive both the silly and shuffling answers of
D. Schulckenius, and also the insufficient and crafty dealing of Mr.
Fitzherbert, who taking upon him in this his Reply to satisfy English
Catholics, those especially that understand not the Latin tongue (for
otherwise he would doubtless have replied in Latin, as he by me was answered
in Latin) and to make them see, as he says, In the Preface, number. 28.
a clear confutation of the grounds of my doctrine, and of my principal
arguments and answers touching the Popes power to depose Princes, which is the
maine question betwixt him and me, and specially impugned and abiured in the
new oath, nevertheless he clean omitteth to answer my chief, principal,
yea and only grounds, which I brought to persuade unlearned men, that the
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is not a point of faith to wit,
extrinsecall grounds, drawn from the testimony of learned Catholics, who
maintain the contrary doctrine, by which unlearned men are chiefly, if not
only, lead, and for confutation of these grounds he remitteth his English
Reader to D. Schulckenius a Latin writer, and wrangleth only about
intrinsecall grounds, the strength, or weakness whereof unlearned men cannot
comprehend, as though, forsooth, M. Fitzherbert, who has taken out of Fa.
Lessius masked under the name of D. Singleton, a whole Treatise touching the
decree of the Council of Lateran, and put it here in his english Reply, as
though it were the invention of his own wit, would have spared to have
borrowed also of D. Schulckenius the answers, which he made to those Catholic
Authors by me alleged, if he had thought that those answers would by English
Catholics have been so greatly applauded.

The first CHAPTER,
Wherein the authority of John Trithemius a famous man of the Order of S.
Benedict, is examined.

1. THe first authority, which I brought in my Theological Disputation, and
also in my Apology, was of John Trithemius a famous Abbot of the Order of S.
Bennet, and a man of singular learning and piety, who writes, that in his
time, to wit in this present age, wherein nothing has been newly defined
either by Popes, or Counsels concerning the Popes power to depose Princes (for
all the Decrees of Popes or Counsels, which by Card Bellarmine and others are
usually alleged to confirm the aforesaid authority, were long before
Trithemius his time) this question touching the Popes power to depose the
Emperor was in controversy among the Schoolmen, and as yet not decided by
the Judge. His words are these: In Chronico monast. Hirsaug. ad annum 1106.
He indeed (Henry the fourth) was the first of all the Emperors, who was
deposed by the Pope. The Schoolmen, or Scholastikes Scholastici.
are at strife concerning this point, and as yet the controversy is not
decided by the Judge, whether the Pope has power to depose the Emperor, or
no, which question for that it belongs not to us let us leave undiscussed.

Page 127. ad number. 33.
2. To this authority D. Schulckenius answers in this manner. If Trithemius
by Schoolmen, or Scholastikes understand those, who treat of Divinity
scholastically, as S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Aegidius, Durandus, and others,
he is manifestly deceived, neither is it any marvel if he be deceived, seeing
that he was not skillful in that learning. But if he call Scholemen,
Grammarians, Historiographers, Poets, he says something. For truly this point
is in controversy among Grammarians, as Valla, Historiographers, as Sigebert,
Poets, as Dantes. But although it be in controversy among them, and in their
opinions the Judge has not as yet decided the question, yet it is not in
controversy among learned Divines, and Lawyers, who are not ignorant in holy
Scriptures, and in the venerable Counsels of the holy Church. For although
among these there be a controversy about the manner, how the Pope can do it,
yet there is no question whether he has power to do it. And what need is
there to ask advise of Trithemius, who oftentimes has erred in the history,
which he professes, as Antonius Posseuine has noted in his Apparatus, seeing
that we have the common opinion of Doctors, and decrees of Counsels, which
do make the matter clear. Thus answers D. Schulckenius.

3. Mark now how many shifts, and shufflings be in this answer. If
Trithemius, says he, by Scholastickes, or Scholemen understand those, who
treat of Diunitie scholastically, as S. Thomas etc. he is manifestly deceived:
As though forsooth only scholasticall Divines and scholasticall Divinity were
to be had in estimation, and positive Divines, who do not handle those subtle
Schoole-quirks, but do treat of holy Scriptures and other questions of
Divinity after a plain and positive manner, as they were wont to be handled
by the ancient Fathers, before Peter Lombard, the Master of the sentences his
time, were not to be regarded. True it is, that Trithemius by the word,
Scholasticke, does commonly understand, not only those, who profess
Scholasticall, or School-Diuinity, as it is now adays distinguished from
positive Divinity, but by Scholastikes he understood Schoolmen and Students in
general, whether they professed Positive or Scholasticall Divinity, as it may
evidently appear by his Treatises de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, and de viris
Illustribus, where he has this word, Scholastike, above an hundred times, and
uses it for a Schooleman, student, scholar, or scholar like in general.

4. And although Trithemius by the word, Scholastikes or Schoolmen, had
understood not only Students in Divinity in general, but particularly those,
that profess Scholasticall Divinity, as it is distinguished from positive, yet
that he had been therein manifestly deceived, as D. Schulckenius so boldly
affirms, is manifestly untrue. For Iacobus Almainus, a famous Doctor, and
Schoole-Diuine of Paris, and according to Fa. Azor the Jesuit Lib. 2. Instit.
cap. 14.
, a Classical Doctor, who flourished in Trithemius his time, does also
affirm In Lib. de Dom. not, ciu. and Eccl. in pro. 2 ae. concl.
as I observed in my Apology, Number. 122.
that very many, or most Doctors, among which some no doubt were
Schoole-Diuines, are of opinion, that the Pope by the institution of Christ
has not power to inflict any temporal punishment, as death, banishment,
privation of goods, much less of Kingdoms, nay nor so much as to imprison,
but that the power, which he has by the institution of Christ, is only
extended to Excommunication, or some such spiritual punishment, and that his
using of other punishments does proceed merely from the positive Law, and
privileges of Princes. It belongs, says he, to the nature of the Laike
power, to have authority to inflict (he means by way of coercion and
constraint) temporal punishment, as are death, exile, privation of goods etc.
but the Ecclesiastical power by the institution of God can inflict no such
punishment, yea cannot so much as imprison, vt plerisque Doctoribus place^, as
very many or most Doctors (for so much the word, plerique, does signify) are
of opinion, but it is extended only to spiritual punishment, as
Excommunication, and the other punishments which it uses, are from the pure
positive Law. And a little before he affirmed, that the Ecclesiastical and Lay
power of Jurisdiction in the external Court are so distinguished in respect of
the punishments, which can be inflicted by either of them, that by one only a
corporal punishment, and by the other precisely a spiritual can be
inflicted. Now what words can be more clear then these, to which
nevertheless D. Schulckenius gives no answer, and yet my Adversary after his
usual manner very boldly affirms, that D. Schulckenius has answered
particularly to every one of the authorities; which I brought either in my
Apology, or Theological Disputation.

5. The like words has John Gerson, another famous Classical Doctor, and
Schoole-Diuine of Paris, who lived before Trithemius, and Almaines time. There
are, says Gerson, De potest. Eccles. consider. 4.
who do affirm, that this punishment of Excommunication is the last which the
Ecclesiastical power of Jurisdiction by the only first institution of Christ
can inflict; so that it is not extended to imprisonment, or that any man be
adjudged to death or corporal whipping, but when the Ecclesiastical Judge
does this, he does it by the grant of Princes, as the Clergy by the de^otion
of Princes has received much authority of temporal Jurisdiction, which
Jurisdiction or Censure is nevertheless called spiritual, as also the
temporal goods of Ecclesiastical persons are called spiritual, because they
are dedicated and applied to the^, who serve the Church, as also the breads of
proposition, the first fruits, the tithes, alse the vessels of the Temple, and
such like were in the old Law called sacred or holy, so also the new Law does
observe the same.

6. Secondly, it is no marvel, says D. Schulckenius, that Trithemius be
deceived, if by Schoolmen he understand Scholasticall Divines, seeing that he
himself was not skillful in that science. As though, forsooth, none can know,
when men of any profession be at variance touching any difficult question
belonging to that Science, but those only, that be skillful in the same
profession. Physicians may easily know, when learned Lawyers are at strife
concerning a point of Law, and so both of them may easily know, when learned
Divines are at contention about a Theological question; and writers of
histories may also know, when Divines or Lawyers are at debate about any point
of Divinity or Law, and may also, without passing the bounds of their
profession relate the same to others. And therefore it is no marvel, that
Trithemius being not only a mere Historiographer, but also a learned positive
Divine, as by his manifold works it does clearly appear, might easily
perceive, that it was at that time a controversy among Scholasticall Divines,
whether the Pope had authority to depose the Emperor or no. Neither is it
necessary, that the controversy should be made known by printed books, but
it suffices that it be made manifest by word of mouth, and public opposition
and contradiction in Schools, as all men, who frequent the Schools, may by
daily experience most clearly perceive.

7. Thirdly, but if Trithemius, says D. Schulckenius call Schoolmen,
Gramarians, Poets, Historiographers, he says something. For truly this point
is in controversy among Grammarians as Valla, Historiographers as Sigebert,
Poets as Dantes, and in their opinions the Judge has not as yet decided the
question. Mark now the fraud and cunning of this man. For who would not by
this his answer imagine, but that those three Authors were mere Grammarians,
Historiographers, Poets, and not Divines? where as it is manifest, that
although for Grammar, Histories, and Poetry they were singular, and inferior
to none of their times, yet they were all of them also learned Divines, as
Trithemius in his book de Ecclesiasticis Scriptoribus does sufficiently
witness. Laurentius Valla, says he, In verbo Laurentius Valla.
a noble man of Rome, the Prince by far of Grammarians of this age, a
Philosopher, Rhetorician, and a most excellent Divine etc. Dantes, says he, In
verbo Dantes.
by Country a Florentine, a most great student in his time of all men, as well
in Divine Scriptures as Secular learning, and very learned, a Philosopher, and
a Poet inferior to none of that age. Sigebert, says he, In verbo Sigebertus.
a monk of the order of S. Benedict, a most great student from his youth in
Divine Scriptures, and very learned, and in secular learning inferior i^none
of his time. And yet D. Schulckenius would cunningly persuade his Reader, that
Valla was a mere Grammarian, Dantes a mere Poet, and Sigebert a mere
Historiographer. Moreover, Trithemius could not by Schoolmen only understand
Valla, Dantes and Sigebert; for that his words are of the present tence and
time; He does not say, It has been a controversy among the Schoolmen, but
it is a controversy among the Schoolmen, and adhuc, and as yet, till now,
hitherto, to this present time, the question is not decided by the Judge.
Therefore Trithemius his words are not so to be understood, as D. Schulckenius
expounds them, that in the opinion of Valla, Dantes and Sigebert, who all
lived above a hundred For Sigebert lived in the year 1111 Dantes in the year
1321. Valla in the year 1420. and Trithemius in the year 1519.
years before Trithemius his time, but according to his own opinion the
question is not at this present decided by the Judge.

8 Fourthly, But what need is there, says D. Schulckenius, to ask advise of
Trithemius, who oftentimes has erred in the history, which he professes, as
Antonie Posseuine has noted in his Apparatus; But first, be it so, that
Trithemius giving credit to the relation of others, has erred sometimes in his
history (for all those oftentimes Posseuine does in particular reduce only to
three) must therefore no credit be given to other his relations; especially,
when other Doctors of the same age do relate the same? And does not Card:
Bellarmine himself confess, as appears by his Recognitions, that he has
oftentimes erred in points of Divinity, which depend not so much upon
relation, as upon judgment? must therefore no credit be given hereafter to his
judgment in other points of Divinity? or will he like it well, that his own
words, which he uses here against Trithemius, be retorted back upon himself,
what need is there to ask the advice of Card: Bellarmine, who, as he himself
confesses, has oftentimes erred in points of Divinity, which he professes.

9 Secondly, observe good Reader, how palpably and grossly, not to say
shamefully, both Posseuine, and D. Schulckenius also, giving credit to
Posseuine, have themselves erred, in reprehending unworthily Trithemius his
errors. For three particular things Posseuine relates In verbo Ioannes
Trithemius.
, wherein he affirms Trithemius to have erred in his history. The first is,
in that Trithemius affirms In verbo Laurentius Justin.
Laurentius Iustinianus to have been of the Order of the Celestines. And
nevertheless Posseuine himself a little after in the word Laurentius
Iustinianus does in express words affirm, that he was of that Order.
Laurentius Iustinianus, says Posseuine, a Venetian, of the Order of the
Celestines, the first Patriarch of Venice etc. The second is, in that
Trithemius affirms one Hugo a Dominican and Cardinal to be Barchionensis,
and does not make mention whether he was of Barcilona in France or in Spain.
But although Trithemius was not so exact in distinguishing those two places,
yet considering that every error includes a falsehood, and Trithemius in the
aforesaid relation affirmed no falsehood or untruth, he can not justly by
Posseuine be therefore taxed of error.

10 The third error, wherewith Posseuine charge them, is, in that he
affirms Abbot Ioachim to have been condemned in a general Council, where
as the Council, says Posseuine, did not condemn the man, but the doctrine,
which was against the Master of the Sentences. But truly I can not but greatly
marvel, how Posseuine could be so grossly mistaken, unless he would of set
purpose forge something, whereby he might disgrace Trithemius. For if he had
but briefly run over that place of Trithemius, which he cites, he could not
but have seen, that Trithemius did only affirm Ioachims doctrine, and not his
person to be condemned in the Council. Tractatus autem quem scripsit etc. But
the Treatise (says Trithemius In verbo Ioachim Abbas.
in the place cited by Posseuine) which Abbot Ioachim wrote against Peter
Lombard Bishop of Paris, is condemned in a General Council, as appears in
the beginning of the Decretalls, Damnamus.

11 Wherefore to return back D. Schulckenius his words, what need had D.
Schulckenius to ask advice of Posseuine touching Trithemius his errors,
seeing that Posseuine himself has therein not only grossly erred, but also
in other his relations, as in affirming John Gerson Chancelour of Paris to be
of the Order of the Celestines (wherein also Card: Bellarmine in his late
treatise of Ecclesiastical writers has erred with him) yea and sometimes
which is less excusable, when of set purpose he pretends to recall and amend
his former error; as in verbo Durandus a S. Porciano, whom in his former
Edition, as he says (for I never saw it) he affirmed to be Bishop of Melda, as
truly he was, and of the Order of S. Dominike: and now, forsooth, in his
corrected Edition he will needs have him to be Bishop of Liege, and to have
lived in the year 1035. and that Hermannus Contractus, who lived in the year
1054. makes mention of him, and yet he will also have him to be of the Order
of Dominike: And nevertheless Posseuine himself a little before In verbo
Dominicus Guzmannus.
affirmed, that S. Dominike dyed in the year 1221. which was two hundred
fourteen years after Durandus flourished. Now let D. Schulckenius, or any
other, who makes so great account of Posseuines Apparatus, either accord these
two, that Durandus a S. Porciano was according to Posseuine of the Order of S.
Dominike, and yet that according to the same Posseuine he lived well near 200.
years before S. Dominike did institute his Order, or else not to give
hereafter so great credit to all that Posseuine affirms, seeing that he has
so grossly erred both in falsely taxing Trithemius of those errors, and also
(which is more gross) when purposely he endeavored to amend his own error.

12 Lastly, we have, says D Schulckenius, the common opinion of Doctors, and
decrees of Counsels, which do make the matter clear. And therefore although
among learned Divines and Lawyers there be a controversy concerning the manner
how the Pope may do it, yet there is no question whether he has power to do
it. But first we have the authority of Trithemius, that it is a controversy
among the Schoolmen, and as yet not decided by the Judge, not only in what
manner the Pope may depose the Emperor, but whether he has any power at all
to depose him. Then we have the authority of Almaine a learned Schoole-Diuine,
and a Classical Doctor, that it is the opinion of very many Doctors, that
the Ecclesiastical power by the institution of Christ can only inflict
spiritual Censures, and not any temporal punishment, as death, exile,
privation of goods, much less of kingdoms, nay nor so much as imprisonment.
And therefore although it be the more common opinion of Doctors, that the Pope
has power to depose Princes, especially of Lawyers, who as Pope Pius the fifth
did plainly confess to that famous Lawyer Navarre in Comment. super cap: Non
liceat Papae. 12. q. 2. 3. number: 6.
, do attribute more authority to the Pope then is sufficient (for that the
greatest part of those Authors cited by Card: Bellarmine, who in express
words affirm, that the Pope has such a power, are Lawyers, men also for the
most part unskillful in Divine Scriptures, and the law of God, as Dominicus
Sotus affirms Jn 4o. did. 18. q. 1. ar. 1.
) yet it is not the more common opinion of Doctors, that it is a clear and
certain doctrine not to be called in question by any Catholic, that the Pope
has such a power.

13. Few only Divines there are, and for the most part Jesuits who of late
years have by might and maine endeavored without sufficient grounds to make
the matter clear, and to be an undoubted point of faith. But until they bring
more clear decrees of Counsels, or more pregnant proofs from holy
Scriptures, then hitherto they have brought, they will never make the matter
clear, but still it will remain a controversy among Catholics, not only in
what manner the Pope may, but whether he has any power at all to depose the
Emperor or no, as it was in Trithemius and Almaines time, since which time no
clear decree of any Council has been made to that purpose, for all the
decrees of Counsels, which by Card. Bellarmine are urged to prove that
doctrine, and have been answered by me and others, and shall beneath be
answered more at large, were long before their time. And thus much concerning
the first authority of Trithemius, and Almaine.

Chap. 2.
Wherein the authority of Albericus Roxiatus a famous Lawyer is briefly
debated.

1. THe second testimony, which I brought in my Theological Disputation, and
also in my Apology to prove this doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes not to be certain, Jn verbo Albericus Roxiatus.
without controversy, or a point of faith, was of Albericus Roxiatus, a most
famous Professor, as Trithemius writes, of the Canon and Civil Law, and a
man excellently learned, and according to Fa. Azor Lib. 2. Just. cap. 14.
, a Classical Doctor, who lived in the year 1340. above a hundred years
since the Council of Lateran, which is now so greatly urged. For this Author
calls in question four of the most principal Canons or Decrees of Popes
registered in the Canon Law, which do seem most to favor their authority to
depose Princes, and to dispose of the temporalls, especially of the Roman
Emperor (among which one is that famous, and so often inculcated by my
Adversaries, sentence of deposition denounced against Frederick the Emperor
by Pope Innocent the fourth in the presence of the Council of Lions) and he
affirms that none of them are in his opinion agreeable to law, or right, but
that they were made by Popes, against the rights, and liberty of the Empire.

2. The Pastors of the Church, says he, In Dictionario verbo Electio.
putting their sickle into others harvest, have made four Decrees, or
Decretalls. The one concerning the election of the Emperor, which begins,
Venerabilem, and of this it is there noted by all men. An other is about the
deposing of Friderike the Emperor, extra de sententia and re iudicata cap. Ad
Apostolicae in sexto, where also of this it is noted by all men. An other is
concerning the discord betwixt Henry the Emperor, and Robert King of Sicily,
and the sentence of treason published by the Emperor against him: which Decree
is in Clementina de sententia and re iudicata cap. Pastoralis. Another is in
Clementina prima de Iureiurando, that the Emperor is bound to swear
allegiance to the Pope, and concerning some authority of the Pope over the
Emperor. Which Decretalls, whether they be just or no, God he knows. For I
without prejudice to sounder advice do believe (and if it should be erroneous I
recall it) that none of them be agreeable to right. Yea I believe that they are
published against the rights and liberty of the Empire, and I do think that
by God they were instituted distinct powers, whereof I have noted sufficiently
lege prima Cod. de Summa Trinitate and Fide Catholica. Thus Albericus.

3 Observe now, good Reader, how slightly D. Sculckenius would shift of this
authority, which is so plain and manifest. Albericus, says he, speaks
wavering and altogether doubtful, and he adds, and if it should be erroneous
I recall it: and he is convinced of error by Azor lib. 10. cap. 6. q. 3. These
be all the exceptions that D. Schulckenius takes against this authority. But
first this word doubtful or wavering, as out of Vasquez I observed in my
Theological Disputation Cap. 10. sec. 2. nu: 18. 19. 20. and 81.
, may be taken two manner of ways, either when one is so doubtful, that he
has no determinate assent of either part, but remains perplex betwixt both,
judging neither part to be either true or false, in which sense that word,
altogether doubtful, which D. Schulkenius uses here, if he will not speak
improperly, can only be taken; and when we are thus doubtful concerning any
matter, we are always bound to choose the surer part; neither is it lawful to
do any thing with a doubtful conscience, taking doubtful in this sense: Or
else the word, doubtful, may be taken, when we have a determinate assent or
judgment that one part is true or false, but yet we are not certain, and
therefore have some fear of the contrary, which fear does not exclude a
determinate assent and judgment that one part is true, for every assent,
judgment or opinion, which is only probable, does always imply a fear; but
fear consists in this, that he who is fearful, or judges with fear, has
two assents or judgments, the one direct, whereby he judges determinately,
that one part is true, the other reflexe, whereby he judges, that although he
thinks it true, yet in very deed it may be false, for that it is not
certain, but Disputable and in controversy among Doctors, and therefore only
probable: and when we are thus doubtful or fearful concerning any matter, we
are not bound to choose the surer part, but it is sufficient to choose that which
is probable, neither is it unlawful to do any thing with such a doubtful, or
fearful conscience, as in that place I declared out of Vasquez.

4. Now if D. Schulckenius by those words, wavering and altogether doubtful,
understand, as of necessity he must, if he will speak properly, that
Albericus had no determinate assent, judgment, or opinion concerning the
injustice of those Decretalls, this is manifestly false, and those words, I do
believe that they are not agreeable to right, and I do believe that they are
published against the rights and liberty of the Empire etc. do clearly
convince D. Schulkenius of apparent untruth. But if D. Schulckenius by those
words wavering and altogether doubtful, do only mean, that Albericus was
indeed of opinion, that those Decretalls were unjust, yet he did not hold his
opinion for certain, and without all controversy, and therefore was not
obstinate in his own opinion, but was ready to recall it, if it should prove
to be erroneous, and that he would not condemn other men, that should think
the contrary, (as now adays it is too frequent to condemn other men) this is
very true; for so much only do import those his words, and I do believe under
correction, or without prejudice to sounder advise, and if it should be
erroneous I recall it; this nevertheless does not hinder, but that we have the
opinion of a man excellently learned, and of a Classical Doctor, that the
sentence of deposition denounced against Frederike the Emperor by Pope
Innocent the fourth in the presence of the Council of Lions, and three other
famous Decrees of Popes registered in the Canon Law touching the Popes power to
dispose of temporalls, were unjust, and made against the rights and liberty of
the Empire.

5. Secondly, but Albericus is convinced, says D. Schulckenius, of error by
Azor. But besides that this lets not, but that Albericus is of opinion, that
the Pope has no power to depose Princes, this also is even as true, as that
which D. Schulckenius said before concerning the errors, which he said
Posseuine had observed in Trithemius his history. For besides that all the
arguments, which Azor brings to prove in general, the Popes authority over
the Emperor in temporalls, are but triuiall, and have been already answered
partly by D. Barclay, partly by my self, and now of late very exactly by Mr.
John Barclay, to whom as yet no answer has been made, one only argument in
particular Azor urges against Albericus, which is this, that the Roman
Emperor was instituted by the authority of the Church, by whose grant also
the Roman Empire was translated from the Grecians to the Germans or
Frenchmen, and that he is created as a Patron, defendour, Protector, and Tutour
of the Church, from whence he infers, that the Pope did not put his sickle
into another man's harvest, but did use his own right, when he made that Canon
concerning the election of the Emperor, and when he exacteth an oath of the
Emperor.

6. But that this is no conuincing proof, I showed clearly in my Apology Number
404. and seq.
. For the Roman Empire was not instituted by the authority of the Roman
Church, seeing that he was instituted before there was any Roman Church at
all, and continued for a long time together the Sovereign Lord in temporalls
of the Roman Church. Neither was the Roman Empire translated from the
Grecians to the Germans or French men by the grant of the Roman Church, if by
the Roman Church be meant only the Clergy of Rome, but it was translated by
the grant, suffrages, and authority also of the Laity, who in the west parts
were subject to the Roman Empire. True also it is, that all Catholic Princes
ought to be Patrons, defenders, and protectours of the Roman Church (but the
Roman Emperor more specially) they being children and members of the
Catholic Roman Church, and every member is bound to defend eath other, but
especially to defend the head. And therefore I will easily grant, that the Pope
may exact, if need require, not only of the Roman Emperor, but also of all
other Catholic Princes an oath of spiritual allegiance, but that Catholic
Princes are subject to the Pope in temporalls, and that the Pope may exact of
them an oath of temporal allegiance, this is that I utterly deny, neither will
Card. Bellarmine, or any other be able by any sufficient argument to convince
the contrary; wherefore it cannot with any show of probability be denied, but
that we have the testimony of Albericus, a man excellently learned, and a
Classical Doctor, that the Pope has no authority to depose Sovereign
Princes, and to dispose of their temporal dominions.

Chap. 3.
Wherein the authority of Ioannes Parisiensis, a famous Doctor of Paris, is
examined, and the exceptions of D. Schulckenius against it are proved to be
insufficient.

1. THe third authority, which I brought in my Theological Disputation Cap.
3. sec. 3. number. 7.
and also in my Apology Number. 121.
, was of Ioannes Parisiensis. a famous Divine of the Order of S. Dominike, and
as Trithemius relates In verbo Ioannes Parisiensis.
, most learned in the holy Scriptures, and who in the University of Paris was
for a long time together a public Professor, and left behind him many
Disciples. He flourished about the year 1280. which was 65. years after the
great Council of Lateran, which is now adays so greatly urged by our
Adversaries. This Doctor therefore although he be of opinion, that if a King
should become an heretic, and incorrigible, and a contemner of Ecclesiastical
Censures, the Pope may do somewhat with the people, whereby the King may be
deprived of his Secular dignity, and be deposed by the people, to wit, he may
excommunicate all those, to whom it belongs to depose the king, who should
obey him as their Sovereign: Nevertheless he is clearly of this opinion,
that it belongs not to the Pope, to depose iuridically Kings or Emperors for
any crime whatsoever although it be spiritual, or which is all one to deprive
them Almainus de potest. Eccl. q. 2. cap. 8.
of their kingdoms by a definitive sentence, in such sort, that after the
sentence be published they shall have no more regal power and authority. For
he affirms, De potest. Regia and Papali cap. 14. ad. 20.
that excommunication, or such like spiritual punishment is the last, which
may be inflicted by a spiritual Judge. For although, says he, it belong to an
Ecclesiastical Judge to recall men to God, and to withdraw them from sin,
yet he has not power to do this, but by using those means, which be given
him by God, which is by excluding them from the Sacraments, and participation
of the faithful. Wherefore although Parisiensis be of opinion, that the
temporal commonwealth has in some causes of great moment authority to
depose their Prince (with which question I do not intend at this time to
intermeddle) yet concerning the principal controversy, which is betwixt me
and Card. Bellarmine, to wit, whether it be heretical erroneous, or
temerarious to affirm, that the Pope has no power to deprive Princes of their
Royal right and authority, Ioannes Parisiensis does most plainly, as I have
now showed, contradict the opinion of Card. Bellarmine. Thus I wrote in my
Theological Disputation.

2 Mark now, good Reader, with what fraud and falsehood D. Schulckenius
endeavors to pass over this authority. Ioannes Parisiensis, says he Page
64. 65. 66. ad number: 4.
, is not for the contrary opinion. For although he gives less to the Pope,
then he ought, yet he gives as much as suffices for our purpose. For what
does it appertain to the question which is in hand, whether the Pope do
depose immediately by his sentence, or that he may by his right withdraw his
subjects from their obedience and cause them to depose? But who would not
admire the wonderful boldness of this man? For the only question betwixt me
and Card. Bellarmine is, and ever has been, whether the Pope has authority
to deprive Princes of their Kingdoms immediately by his sentence, in such
sort, that after his sentence of deprivation be denounced, they, who before
were Kings and had true Regal authority, are then no more Kings, and have no
true and lawful right to reign; and yet now he being pressed with the
authority of Ioannes Parisiensis, blusheth not to affirm, that it does not
appertain to the present question, whether the Pope may depose immediately by
his sentence, which nevertheless is the only question betwixt him and me, or
by commanding and causing the temporal Commonwealth to depose their Prince,
with which question I have sundry times in my Apology affirmed that I would
not intermeddle. For most certain it is, even according to Card: Bellarmines
own doctrine in Tract: contra Barcl. cap. 21. page 202.
, that the Pope can not withdraw, discharge, or absolve subjects from their
obedience immediately by his sentence, unless he have authority to deprive
immediately and by his sentence their Prince of his Princely power and
authority, for that authority in a Prince, and obedience in subjects are
correlatiues, and one depends on the other, and the obligation of obedience
does so long endure in the Subject, as the dignity, power, or Jurisdiction
does endure in the Superior, says Suarez in Defensione fides etc. lib. 6.
cap: 3. nu. 6.
, and to deny obedience to a Prince so long as he remains Prince, and is not
deprived of his Princely power, is clearly repugnant, says Card: Bellarmine
in Tract: contra Barcl: cap. 21. p. 202.
, to the law of God, and nature.

3 This therefore is the opinion of Parisiensis touching the Popes authority to
dispose of the temporal goods, or dominions either of Kings, or private men.
And first concerning the goods of private men he affirms De potest. Regia
and Pap. cap: 6. 7.
, that the Pope is not a Lord, to whom the property of Church livings does
belong, but only a dispencer of them, but of the goods of Laymen he is not so
much as a dispencer; unless perchance in extreme necessity of the Church, in
which necessity also he is not a dispencer, but a declarer of the law. And
because in extreme necessity of faith and manners, all the goods of the
faithful, yea and Chalices of Churches are to be communicated, the Pope, who
is supreme not only of the Clergy, but of all the faithful, as they are
faithful, has authority, as he is general informer of faith and manners, in
case of extreme necessity of faith and manners to dispense in this case the
goods of the faithful, and to ordain them to be exposed, as it is expedient
for the common necessity of faith, which other wise would be ouerthrown by the
invasion of Paga^s, or other such like accident. And this ordination of the
Pope is only a declaration of the law, to which he may by Ecclesiastical
Censures compel the faithful. But in cases not of necessity, but of some
special utility, or when it is not apparent, that the goods of Laymen do
help such utility, or necessity, the Pope has not authority to compel any
man, but concerning this he may give indulgences for giving aid to the
faithful, and no other thing is granted him in my opinion. Thus writes
Parisiensis. wherefore in his opinion the Pope has no authority to deprive a
Layman of his goods, or any part thereof, even in necessity of faith and
manners, but only to declare, that he is bound by the law of God to give such
part of his goods, as the necessity of the Church shall require; which if he
neglect to do, the Pope has no other authority to compel him thereunto,
then by Ecclesiastical Censures, which are the last punishments, which the
Ecclesiastical power by the institution of Christ can inflict.

4 In the very like manner Parisiensis discourses of the disposing of
Kingdoms, and of deposing temporal Princes, as I before related out of him.
For first he affirms, that the Pope has no authority to depose a King
iuridically, or, which is all one, to deprive him by a iuridicall sentence of
his right to reign; and secondly, that the people, or temporal commonwealth
may, and in some exorbitant cases are bound to depose their Prince; and so the
Pope not by a iuridicall sentence of deprivation, but by declaring what the
people are by the law of God bound to do, and by Ecclesiastical Censures
compelling them thereunto, may according to Parisiensis, concur to the
deposing of a Prince by means of the people, which if the people,
notwithstanding the Popes Censures neglect to do, the Pope has no further
power to depose him, for that Ecclesiastical Censures are, according to him,
the last punishment, which the Ecclesiastical power can inflict.

5 Wherefore two things are affirmed by Parisiensis, the one, that the Pope
has no authority to deprive Princes immediately by his sentence of their
Princely power, and this is that only, which is in controversy betwixt me and
Card: Bellarmine: the other, that the people, or temporal commonwealth have
that authority in some exorbitant cases: and this is only a philosophical
question, and wherewith I would never intermeddle, as being impertinent to the
question concerning the Popes authority to deprive him. And although many
Catholic Doctors do agree with Parisiensis in this point, yet many other
learned Catholics, whom I cited in my Apology Number. 411.
, do dissent from him herein, to which opinion do incline very many of the
ancient Fathers, who expounding those words of the King and Prophet, Psalm: 50.
I have sinned to thee alone, do affirm, that Sovereign Princes, for that
they are inferior to God alone, to wit, in temporalls, can be punished with
temporal punishments by God alone. And therefore D. Schulckenius may be
greatly ashamed to affirm so boldly, that Parisiensis does not make for my
opinion, and that it does not appertain to the question which is in hand,
whether the Pope may depose Princes immediately by his sentence, or by means
of the people, seeing that the only question betwixt us is, whether the Pope
has power to deprive Princes of their Royal power immediately by his
sentence, and not what authority the commonwealth has to deprive them.

6 But D. Schulckenius perceiving, that this his answer to the authority of
Parisiensis was but a mere shift and evasion, has reserved but not in this
place another answer, whereby he imagined to clean overthrow the authority of
this famous Doctor and Schoole-Diuine. For he beneath Page 394. ad number. 201.
replying to the answer, which I made to those words of S. Bernard urged by
Card. Bellarmine to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, Quid tu denuo
vsurpare gladium tentas etc. whereof beneath Part. 2. ca. 9.
I will treat more at large, in confirmation of which my answer I cited the
authority of Ioannes Parisiensis, D. Schulckenius writes thus: There is no
great regard to be had of the authority of Ioannes Parisiensis whatsoever he
says, for that other his errors are condemned by the Church in the common
Extrauagant Vas electionis: and also in the 14. chapter of the same Treatise
he mingleth many errors. The like answer, but more biting makes Fa: Lessius
in his Singleton. It is to little purpose, says he, Page 29.
what Ioannes Parisiensis does say, because he alleges very many other false
citations and histories, as being a Schismatike. Another censure but more
temperate Card. Bellarmine gives of him in his book of Ecclesiastical
writers. Ioannnes Parisiensis, says he, Page 380.
of the Order of the Preachers, was famous about the year 1296. He wrote upon
the four books of the sentences, and diverse Quodlibets: but especially of
Kingly and Papal power, and because it was his hap to live in trouble
sometimes by reason of the discord between Pope Boniface the eight, and Philip
the fair, King of France, and he lived and taught at Paris, he seems to be
more inclined toward the King, then the Pope.

5 But truly it is strange, that men of such singular learning, and religious
profession should so rashly and without sufficient grounds be so transported,
as, contrary to the rules of Christian Charity and Justice, to defame and
slander learned and virtuous men, and those especially, who being dead cannot
defend themselves. For first it is an apparent and too too manifest slander,
which Fa: Lessius, speaking with all dutiful respect to his reverence, does
affirm that Ioannes Parisiensis was a Schismatike; neither can he out of any
approved Author, or by any probable reason prove any such thing: and
therefore what great account he has to make at the dreadful day of judgment,
for unjustly taking away, as much as lies in him, the good name of so famous a
man, and in so foul and heinous a crime as Schism is, I remit to the
examination of his own conscience. Besides, that Parisiensis mingleth many
errors in the 14. chapter of his Kingly and Papal power, as D. Schulckenius
affirms, and that he alleges many false citations and histories, as Fa:
Lessius says, is also untrue, and it had been fitting for them to have
alleged some one of them, that thereby some credit might have been given them
for the rest. Unless whatsoever is not agreeable to D. Schulckenius his
doctrine, which he thinks to be certain must be accounted an error, and
whatsoever Fa. Lessius has not seeene. or read must be esteemed a false
citation or history. True it is, that Parisiensis in that 14. chapter does
teach, that the Pope cannot judge of temporal causes, but in regard of the
sin, and that he cannot depose Princes by his sentence, and that the last
punishment, which an Ecclesiastical Judge can inflict, are spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Censures which indeed are no errors, whatsoever these severe
Censours say to the contrary. True also it is, that Parisiensis cites a place
out of Hostiensis, at which Fa. Lessius does indiscreetly carp, Page 30.
affirming, that he finds no such thing in Hostiensis, yea and that
Hostiensis has not written upon the chapter Ad Abolendam tit. de Haereticis,
as Widdrington judges, as neither upon other texis. But nevertheless I found
in Ostiensis upon the chapter Ad abolendam that which Ioannes Parisiensis cited
out of him; and to say that Hostiensis did not write upon that chapter Ad
abolendam, is so manifest an untruth as I observed in another place In my Latin
Appendix against Fa: Suarez part. 1. sec. 7 number. 14.
, that I wonder how F. Lessius, who is reputed to be a man of so great reading,
could be ignorant thereof.

6 Moreover, that Parisiensis seems to be more inclined to the King then to
the Pope, he then living and teaching at Paris, is indeed affirmed, but not
proved by Card. Bellarmine. And if this manner of censuring learned men and
excepting against their authority, as men partial, may be approved, it is the
ready way to overthrow the testimony almost of all the Authors on both sides.
For it may in the same manner be answered, that as such Authors wrote
partially in favor of Kings, so others wrote partially in favor of Popes; And
therefore Parisiensis himself foreseeing this objection replieth thus: For to
say, says he, De potest. Regia and Papali c. 21. ad 41.
that so worthy men, among whom some also were Popes, did write against their
conscience in favor of Princes, or for fear of them, is to stretch forth his
mouth against heaven. For contrariwise it might be said more probably, that
those Doctors, who do so vnmeasurably advance the Popes authority, do speak
for fear or favor of him, seeing that they are Ecclesiastical persons, who
may by him get greater preferment. And especially since that they say (although
not well) that the Pope does graciously embrace them, who do amplify his
authority, and depresseth them, who do say the contrary.

7 Furthermore, neither can D. Schulckenius in my opinion sufficiently prove,
that Ioannes de Poliaco, whose errors were condemned by Pope John the 22. in
that Extrauagant Vas electionis, was this Ioannes Parisiensis, who made the
Treatise of Kingly and Papal power, but some other Doctor of Paris, who was
called by that name, and lived about that time. And my conjectures are these.
First, for that the errors, which Ioannes de Poliaco maintained concerning
confessions made to the mendicant Friars, were against the privileges which
were granted to the mendicant Friars, and therefore it is not like that he who
wrote the Treatise of Kingly and Papal power, and was himself of the order of
the preaching Friars, would preach and teach against the privileges granted to
his Order. Secondly, if this Ioannes de Poliaco had been of the Order of the
preaching Friars, as all Authors affirm that Ioannes Parisiensis, who wrote
the Treatise of Kingly and Papal power, was, it is very like, that Pope John
the 22. who condemned his errors, would have named him so to be in his
Extrauagant as he did, in his other Extrauagants name of what Order those
Authors were, whose errors he condemned, as Michael of Cesena, William Occam,
Henricus of Cena, and others: who nevertheless are in some sort excused from
error by D. Sanders De visib. monarch lib. 7. number 161.
.

8. Thirdly, there is no Author that I have read, who says, that Ioannes de
Poliaco, whose errors were condemned, was of the Order of the preaching
Friars, neither does Prateolus, who usually sets down, of what Order those
Authors whom he relates, are, affirm, that this Ioannes de Poliaco was of
that Order, whereas most Authors, who speak of Ioannes Parisiensis, that wrote
the Treatise of Kingly and Papal power, do affirm, that he was a Dominican
Friar. Fourthly, neither is, there any Author that I have read, who does
affirm, that Ioannes Parisiensis, who made the Treatise of Kingly and Papal
power, was called Ioannes de Poliaco. Lastly Ioannes Parisiensis was famous in
the year 1280. according to Trithemius, and Kisengremus, and according to
Card. Bellarmine in the year 1296. both which may very well be true, for that
it may very well fall out, that the same man may be a famous Teacher and
Preacher for sixteen years together, but it is very unlike, that one man
should for one and forty years together at the least be a famous Reader and
Preacher, which we must grant to be true, if Ioannes de Poliaco, whose errors
were condemned, and he in person recalled them before the Pope and Cardinals
in public Consistory at Auinion in the year 1321. and was commanded to teach
and preach in the Schools, and pulpit the contrary doctrine, was our Ioannes
Parisiensis, who wrote the Treatise of Kingly and papal power, and was famous
in the year 1280.

9. But to conclude this point, be it so, that our Ioannes Parisiensis, and
Ioannes de Poliaco were one and the self same man, which yet, as I have
showed, has no great likelihood, nevertheless the maintaining of those errors
does little repair the authority of Ioa^nes Parisiensis in this point, but
rather from hence a forcible argument may be drawn to prove, that it is no
erroneous doctrine, to hold, that the Pope has no authority to depose
Princes by his sentence. For besides that it was no great blemish either to the
learning or virtue of Ioannes de Poliaco, to hold that doctrine concerning
confessions, which was condemned in that Extrauagant, seeing that both many
other learned men at that time as Henricus de Ga^dano quodl. 2. q. 26. and
quodl. 10. q. 1.
a famous Doctor of Paris, Durandus a S. P^rtiano In 4. did. 17. q. 1.
a great Schoole-Diuine, yea and the whole University of Paris, as witnesses
Ioannes Mayor In 4. did. 17. q. 6.
, a famous Doctor of the same University, did maintain the same; and also
that he was ready at the first condemnation thereof to recall it, and to
preach the contrary; if at that time the Pope and Cardinals had also been
persuaded, that it was an erroneous doctrine to affirm, that the Pope has no
power to depose Princes by his sentence, and that it belongs to the Pope to
recall men to God, and to withdraw them from sin by no other coerciue means,
then by excluding them from the Sacraments and participation of the faithful,
and that Excommunication, or such like spiritual punishment is the last, which
may be inflicted by the spiritual Judge, all which Ioannes Parisiensis in his
treatise of Kingly and papal power did publicly maintain, without doubt the
Pope, if he had thought this doctrine to be erroneous, would also have
compelled him to recall it, it being so greatly prejudicial to his own
Pontifical authority. And therefore notwithstanding all the exceptions, which
Card. Bellarmine and Fa. Lessius do take against Ioannes Parisiensis, we have
the testimony of this learned Catholic, and famous Schole-Diuine, that the
Pope has no authority to depose Princes by his sentence, which is the only
question at this time between me, and Card. Bellarmine.

Chap. 4.
Wherein the authority of M. Doctor Barclay a famous and learned Catholic is
briefly examined.

1. THe fourth testimony, which I brought both in my Theological Disputation
Cap. 3. sec. 3. number. 28.
, and also in my Apologieb, was of Mr. Doctor Barclay a most learned man, and
yet no more learned then religious, (howsoever some falsely and unchristianly do
slander him) in his book de Regno printed at Paris in the year 1600. with
privilege of the most Christian King of France, where he affirms, that
Kings, who do omit, or are negligent, to keep Gods commandments, to worship
him religiously, and to use all care and diligence, that their subjects do not
revolt from true Religion, and fall into Idolatry, Iudaisme, or heresy, are
to be judged by God alone, because only to God they are subject, speaking of
temporal judgment and subjection, although the Pope, being the supreme
Prince, and universal Pastor of the Chuch, has power to condemn with
spiritual judgment all kings and Princes, offending against Gods law, as they
are Christians, and children of the Church, and to deliver them to invisible
tormentours to be punished with the rod of the invisible spirit, and with the
two edged sword of Excommunication.

2. But Card. Bellarmine in his book against D. Barclay Per totum.
little regards his authority; and now in his Sculckenius he affirms, Page
110. ad number. 28.
that Catholics will make no more account of Barclay, then they do of
Marsilius de Padua, and of my self (an easy answer to shift off the
authority of any learned Catholic) And again, who does not marvel, says
D. Schulckenius, that seeing Card. Bellarmine has in this point clearly and
soundly after his accustomed manner confuted Barclay, Widdrington durst not
only adventure to write against him without sufficient ground, but also to
oppose the said Barclay, as a testimony of truth against Card. Bellarmine.

3. But notwithstanding this glorious brag of D. Schulckenius so highly
commending himself, and his clear and sound confuting of Barclay after his
accustomed manner, it cannot be denied, but that Doctor Barclay was a very
learned man, and lived and died like a virtuous Catholic, and (...) he was in
times past, as Posseuine also relates, In verbo Gulielmus Barclaius.
a Counselor to the Duke of Lorraine, and Master of Requests, and in the
university of Mussepont a Professor of the Canon and Civil Law, and also
Deane, and that his book was printed at Paris with a special privilege of
the most Christian King of France, and is by Posseuine related among other
approved books, and no exception taken by him against it. And therefore who
does not marvel, that D. Schulckenius durst adventure so bouldly to affirm,
Part. 1. cap. 2. number: 2.
that Catholics will make no more account of D. Barclay, a famous and learned
Catholic, then of Marsilius of Padua, a known and condemned heretic, although
not for this point touching the Popes power to depose Princes, but for other
his assertions which I related in my Appendix against Fa. Suarez Wherefore
although perchance some Catholics do with Card. Bellarmine make small account
of Doctor Barclaies authority, as also they would make of the authority of
any other Catholic, were he never so virtuous or learned, that should write
against them in this point, nevertheless other Catholics do greatly regard
his authority for the aforesaid cause, and they are also persuaded, that they
have as probable reasons to think, that he did not write partially in favor
of Princes or any other person, as that Card. Bellarmine did not write
partially in favor of the Pope, and some other of his followers in favor of
him, and their Order.

4 Neither has D. Schulckenius in very truth any great cause so greatly to
vaunt of his clear and sound confuting of D. Barclay, for that both his son
Mr. John Barclay a learned Catholic has most clearly showed the said
confutation to be very unsound, to whom as yet no Reply has been made, and yet
his book was printed at Paris by the Kings Printer three years since; and
also the Bishop of Rochester, a learned Protestant, has out of Catholic
grounds convinced D. Schulckenius his brag, of the clear and sound confuting
of D. Barclay, to be but vain. wherefore let Card: Bellarmine first make a
clear and sound Reply to the aforesaid Answers, and then he may have some
cause to boast, that he has clearly and soundly confuted D. Barclay. In the
mean time it can not be denied, but that notwithstanding all the clamours of
our Adversaries, this doctrine, which does now so vehemently maintain the
Popes power to depose Princes is, and has ever been impugned by virtuous and
learned Catholics.

Chap. 5.
Wherein the authorities of Mr George Blackwell, and of many other English
Priests are at large debated.

1. THe first testimony, which I brought in my Theological Disputation Cap.
3. sec. 3. number. 9.
, (to which D. Schulckenius does not answer) was of Mr. George Blackwell a
virtuous and learned Catholic Priest, and once the Archipraesbyter of the
English Seminary Priests, who maintained even until death (for not half a
quarter of an hour before he dyed he confirmed the same) the oath to be
lawful, and that the Pope has not power to depose Princes to which also
(besides Mr. William Warmington in his moderate defense of the Oath, Mr. John
Barclay in his book against Card: Bellarmine in defense of his Father, printed
at Paris by the Kings Printer; and Mr. William Bars in his book de Iure
Regio, and many other learned Catholics of this Kingdom both Priests and
Laymen, whose names for just causes I forbear to set down, for that they had
not showed themselves by public writings) I added the testimony of those
thirteen Reverend and learned English Priests (with whom twice thirty others
would have joined, if their protestation had not been made so suddenly) who, to
give assurance of their loyalty to the late Queen Elizabeth, did by a public
instrument, written in parchment, profess, and made it known to all the
Christian world, that She, being at that time excommunicated by name, and
deprived by the sentence of Pope Pius the fifth, of her Regal power and
authority) had nevertheless as full authority, power, and Sovereignty over
them, and over all the Subjects of the Realm, as any her Highness
Predecessors ever had. And that notwithstanding any authority, or any
Excommunication whatsoever, either denounced, or to be denounced by the Pope
against her Majesty, or any borne within her Majesty's Dominions, which would
not forsake the defense of Her, and Her Dominions, they thought themselves not
only bound in c^^^cience not to obey this, or any such like Censure, but also
did promise to yield unto her Majesty all obedience in temporalls.

2 Now it is evident, that this their protestation, which I did at large set
down in my Appendix to Suarez Part. 2. sec. 1.
, can no way be justified, but upon supposall, that the Pope had no authority
to depose the Queen. For if he had authority to depose Her, She being then
by the Popes sentence deprived of all her Regal authority, power, and
Sovereignty, could not have, as they professed, as full authority, power, and
Sovereignty over the^, and all the Subjects of the Realm, as any of her
Predecessors ever had before: Neither also could they (although She had not
been then deposed) lawfully promise, as out of Suarez I will convince beneath
Number: 7. 8.
, that notwithstanding any authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever,
either denounced, or to be denounced against her Majesty, or any borne within
her Majesty's Dominions, they would nevertheless yield unto her Majesty all
obedience in temporalls, thinking themselves bound in conscience not to obey
this, or any such like Censure, unless they did suppose, that the Pope had no
power to depose her Majesty, or to absolve her Subjects from their obedience.

3 And if perchance any of those Priests should now be of opinion, that the
Pope has power to depose Princes, and to excuse his former protestation,
should answer, that he only intended to acknowledge her Majesty to be at
that time Queen, and to reign de facto, but not de iure (besides that he
should show himself to be an egregious dissembler, equiuocatour, and deluder
both of her Majesty, and also of his Holiness, and should therefore deserve
to be greatly punished, both for deluding the State in a matter of so great
weight, and also for bringing Catholic Religion in obloquie among Protestants
by such detestable dissimulation, not to call it flat lying and cosoning, which
ought to be abhorred of all men, ^^^t especially Catholic Priests, who both by
their words and deeds ought to be a pattern to others of Christian sincerity)
this Answer can not stand with the words which he protested.

4 For first mark the Preamble to their Protestation, which clearly confuteth
the aforesaid answer. Whereas (say they) it has pleased our dread Sovereign
Lady to take some notice of the faith and loyalty of us, her natural borne
Subjects Secular Priests (as it appears in the late Proclamation) and of her
Prince-like clemency, has given a sufficient earnest of some merciful favor
toward us (being all subject by the laws of the Realm to death by our return
into the Country after our taking the Order of Priesthood since the first year
of her Majesty's reign) and only demands of us a true profession of our
Allegiance, thereby to be assured of our fidelity to her Majesty's Person,
Crown, Estate, and dignity, We, whose names are underwritten, in most humble
wise prostrate at her Majesty's feet, do acknowledge our selves infinitely
bound unto her Majesty therefore, and are most willing to give such assurance,
and satisfaction in this point, as any Catholic Priests can, or ought to give
unto their Sovereigns. First therefore we acknowledge the Queens Majesty to
have as full authority, power, and Sovereignty over us, and over all the
Subjects of the Realm, as any her Highness Predecessors ever had; and further
we protest etc.

5 Now were it not an intolerable deluding and mockery, for any of those
Priests (this Preamble considered) to affirm, that by the aforesaid words, he
did only intend to acknowledge her Majesty to be Queen, and to reign de
facto, but not de iure? was this the notice, that her Majesty took of the
faith of Secular Priests, rather then of Jesuits? and did her Majesty by those
words (and only demands of us a true profession of our Allegiance, thereby
to be assured of our fidelity to her Majesty's person, Crown, Estate and
Dignity) demand of them, that they should acknowledge her to be Queen only
de facto, but not de iure? And can Catholic Priests of other Countries give to
their Sovereigns no other assurance of their loyalty, then only to
acknowledge them to be their Kings, and to reign over them de facto, but not
de iure, as these Priests did acknowledge themselves to be most willing to
give such assurance and satisfaction in this point unto her Majesty, as any
Catholic Priests can or ought to give unto their Sovereigns? No man could
make doubt, but that she was Queen, and did reign de facto, and so much the
whole Christian world, and her sworn enemies could not but acknowledge. So
that, according to this shameless answer, those Priests did give no other
assurance of their loyalty to Queen Elizabeth, then any man might give to a
known and manifest usurper, and by those words to have as full authority,
power and Sovereignty as any her Predecessors ever had) did acknowledge her to
have no other power and authority, then any known usurper has, and which her
known enemies, and who accounted her no lawful Queen, would also acknowledge
her to have, that is to be Queen, and to reign de facto, but not de iure.

6. Secondly, although one may truly acknowledge an usurper to be King, and to
reign de facto, for that this does only imply an act, fact, or possession,
which may be without any right at all, yet no man can truly acknowledge, that
an usurper, or who is King de facto only, and not de iure, has authority,
which does import a rightful and lawful power, to reign, and much less, to
have as full authority and power, as ever any his Predecessors ever had, who
were Kings, and reigned not only de facto but also de iure, or, which is all
one, did both actually reign, and also had full power and authority to reign.

5 Thirdly, not only the aforesaid acknowledgement, that her Majesty, being
at that time deprived by the Pope, had nevertheless as full power and
authority, as any her Predecessors ever had before, does necessarily suppose,
that the Pope had no authority to deprive her, but also, although she had not
been at that time deprived by the Pope, the other clause of their
protestation, which contained a promise to obey her in all temporal causes, and
to defend her etc. accounting it their duty so to do, notwithstanding any
authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever denounced or to be denounced
against her Majesty, or every one borne within her Majesty's Dominions that
would not forsake the aforesaid defense of her Majesty etc. thinking
themselves not bound in conscience to obey this or any such like Censure, does
necessarily suppose and imply the same, to wit, that the Pope had no authority
to depose her, which Fa. Suarez arguing against the like clause contained in
the new Oath of Allegiance does most clearly convince, whose argument therefore
I will set down word by word, only turning his speech to the Priests, which he
applies to the Kings Majesty.

8 For to take away all manner of evasion, says Suarez, In Desens. lib. 6.
cap. 3.
I demand, whether those Priests do understand, that the sentence of the Pope
deposing a baptized Queen for crimes may be just, or they believe that it is
always unjust. The first they will not in my opinion affirm, for otherwise
they should promise a most wicked thing, to wit, not to obey a just sentence,
which implies in it a just command. For if the sentence be just, the command
also, which enioyneth subjects to observe it, must also be just, seeing that
otherwise it cannot be put in execution. Also if the sentence of deposition
denounced against a Queen may be just, it will also be effectual, therefore
it has the effect of that punishment which it imposes. Wherefore seeing that
the punishment imposed by the sentence of deposition from her Kingdom, is to
deprive her actually, or effectually of her dominion and property to her
Kingdom, a just sentence does effectually deprive her of her Kingdom,
therefore it is against justice and obedience due unto the Pope to resist that
sentence, and to defend the Queens person against the execution of that
sentence, therefore he that believes the first, and nevertheless promises
this second, does promise a thing clearly unjust and wicked.

9 And besides it implies a contradiction to be willing to yield obedience and
allegiance, as thinking thy self bound so to do, to one whom thou know to
be by a just declaration and sentence effectually deposed from her Kingdom. As
if the Pope himself should exact of Christians a promise, that notwithstanding
any sentence or declaration of deposing him for any crime even for heresy
denounced by whatsoever general Council, they will defend him in his See, and
will yield him the same obedience and allegiance, their promise were wicked,
for that it were a wicked thing, and against the Church and Faith. Such
therefore is the promise of those Priests, if the aforesaid sentence against the
Queen be supposed to be just. This therefore those Priests without doubt
will not admit, neither also are they, as I think, so inconsiderate of their
affairs, that if they grant the Popes sentence denounced against a Queen may
be just, nevertheless they will deny that against the Queen of England it may
have the same justice. For what greater immunitie or innocence can they
allege in the Queen of England, then in other Princes, who have been rebels
to the Roman Church, or forsakers and impugners of the faith. Or although they
do not acknowledge, that the Queen for that time had not committed any thing
worthy of deposition, how do they know, that for the time to come she cannot?
and yet their promise is absolute, notwithstanding any authority, or any
sentence of Excommunication denounced or to be denounced against the Queen, or
every one borne within her Majesty's Dominions. etc. Wherefore there is no
doubt, but that the ground of this promise and profession is, that such a
sentence cannot be just. Wherefore from hence we evidently conclude, that
those Priests by the aforesaid words do profess, that the sentence of
deposition against the Queen can neither be valid nor just. For in very deed
this they do profess, when they promise not to obey, nor to observe such a
sentence.

10. Whereupon we do moreover conclude, that those Priests do profess, that
the Pope has not power to denounce such a sentence, seeing that for no other
cause they do believe the sentence to be unjust, but for that it is given
without power and Jurisdiction in the Pope to depose a Queen. Neither can
those Priests allege in such a sentence any other cause of injustice, which is
perpetual, and may be a ground of this part of their profession. for their
profession does not speak of a sentence already denounced, but absolutely of
a sentence denounced or to be denounced against the Queen: therefore it does
comprehend every sentence, whether it be given the party being heard, or not
heard, whether for disagreement in religion, or for any other crime, or cause
whatsoever. Wherefore the injustice which those Priests do suppose to be in
that sentence and whereupon they ground their profession is no other, but for
that they believe, that it cannot proceed from a lawful power and
Jurisdiction. And therefore I conclude that they profess, that the Pope has
not power and Jurisdiction to give a sentence of deposition against the Queen
for any cause. Thus argues Father Suarez. So that it is evident, that those
thirteen reverend Priests must of necessity suppose, if they will have their
protestation and promise to be just and lawful, that the Pope has no power to
deprived Princes of their Regal right and authority.

11. And by this fifth testimony it is also apparent, that not only M. Doctor
Barclay, and Widdrington, as Card. Bellarmine in his book against Barclay, and
now in his Sculckenius against me, untruly affirms, but many other English
Catholics (to omit those other learned Catholics of other Countries, of whom
I have spoken before, and the Kingdom and State of France, of which I will
speak beneath) In the next Chapter.
are of opinion, that the Pope has no authority to deprive Sovereign Princes
of their temporal Kingdoms and dominions. Which also may moreover be
confirmed by the petition, which some English Catholics did exhibit to Queen
Elizabeth deceased after the discovery of Parries conspiracy, wherein these
express words are contained: In consideration of all which necessary points,
we do protest before the true living God, that all and every Priest and
Priests, who have at any time conuersed with us, have recognized your Majesty
their undoubted and lawful Queen tam de iure, quam de facto. who
nevertheless was at that time and long before deprived of her Princely power,
right and dignity by the public sentence of Pope Pius the fifth.

12. And to these authorities we may add the testimonies set down in the end
of Mr. Blackwells Latin examination, of Bishop Watson, Abbot Fernam, Doctor,
Cole, John Harpesfield, and Nicolas Harpesfield) all of them very famous and
learned Catholics) who upon the publishing of the Bull of Pius Quintus against
Queen Elizabeth, being examined by the Magistrate in the year 1578. and
demanded, whether notwithstanding the aforesaid Bull, or any other sentence of
the Pope denounced or hereafter to be denounced against the said Queen, they
did think, that she was their true and lawful Queen, and that they, and all
other English and Irish men did as Subjects owe to her Majesty obedience,
faith, and loyalty, as to their lawful and true Queen, and Sovereign
Prince, they did all with uniform consent acknowledge, and confess, that
notwithstanding the aforesaid Bull, or any other sentence or declaration of the
Pope already denounced, or hereafter to be denounced against the said Queen,
she was their true, and lawful Queen, and that they did owe unto her
obedience and allegiance as to their lawful Prince. And Nicholas Harpesfield
answered more plainly and distinctly, that notwithstanding the aforesaid Bull,
sentence and declaration of the Pope, or any other already denounced, or
hereafter to be denounced by the Popes authority, he did acknowledge her to be
his true Queen, and was to be obeyed, as a true Queen, and had as ample and
full Regal authority in all civil and temporal causes, as either other
Princes have, or her most noble Progenitors ever had. The like also M. Edward
Rishton, and M. Henry Orton both learned Priests did answer.

13. But M. James Bosgraue a learned Jesuit in his declaration made in the
year 1582. did more plainly and fully set down his opinion concerning the
power it self to depose, that he did think and that before God, that the Pope
has no authority, neither de facto, nor de iure, to discharge the Subjects of
the Queens Majesty, or of any other Christian Prince of their allegiance for
any cause whatsoever, and that he was inwardly persuaded, in his conscience,
that the Queens Majesty both is his lawful Queen, and is also so to be
accounted, notwithstanding any Bull or sentence, which the Pope has given,
shall give, or may hereafter give, and that he is ready to testify this by
Oath, if need require. Mr. John Heart also a learned Jesuit in his conference
with M. Rainolds in the tower in the year 1584. and in his Epistle to the
indifferent Reader did answer as effectually: As for that, says he, which M.
Rainolds affirms in one place, Chap. 7. diuis. 7.
that I have told him, that my opinion is, the Pope may not depose Princes,
indeed I told him so much. And in truth I think, that although the
spiritual power be more excellent and worthy then the temporal, yet they are
both of God, neither does the one depend on the other. Whereupon I gather as a
certain conclusion, that the opinion of them, who hold the Pope to be a
temporal Lord over Kings and Princes, is unreasonable, and improbable
altogether. For he has not to meddle with them or theirs ciuilly, much less
to depose them, or give away their Kingdoms: that is no part of his
commission. He has in my judgment the Fatherhood of the Church, not a
Princehood of the world: Christ himself taking no such title upon him, nor
giving it to Peter, or any other of his disciples. And that is it which I meant
to defend in him, and no other sovereignty.

14 Mr. Camden also relates In Annalibus rerum Anglic. etc. page 327. ad ann.
1581.
, that when Fa: Campian, and diverse other Priests were demanded by the
Magistrate, whether by the authority of the Bull of Pius Quintus her Majesty's
Subjects were absolved from their oath of allegiance in such sort, that they
might take arms against her Majesty? whether they did think her to be a
lawful Queen? whether they would subscribe to the opinion of D. Sanders, and
Bristow touching the authority of that Bull? whether if the Pope should make
war against the Queen, they would take his or her part? Some answered so
ambiguously, some so headily, others by wrangling ^^rgiuersando
, or by silence did shift off the questions so that diverse plain dealing
Catholics began to suspect, that they harbored some treachery: and one James
Bishop a man devoted to the Pope of Rome did write against these men, and did
soundly show, that Constitution, which is obtruded in the name of the Council
of Lateran, (whereon all the authority to absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance, and to depose Princes is grounded) was no other then a decree of
Pope Innocent the third, and never received in England: yea and that Council
to be none at all, nor any thing there decreed at all by the Fathers. By all
which it is evident, that few English Catholics were of opinion, that the Pope
has power to depose Sovereign Princes, until these later Jesuits, and such
as adhered to their opinions, began to defend so eagerly the Bull of Pius
Quintus, and to maintain with such vehemency his aforesaid authority to
depose Princes, as a point of faith, which doctrine how prejudicial it has
been, and is at this present to Catholics, and Catholic Religion, I leave,
Catholic Reader, to thy prudent consideration.

Chap. 6.
Wherein the authority of the Kingdom, and State of France is at large
discussed.

1. THe sixth and last testimony which I brought in my Theological Disputation
Cap. 3. sec. 3. number: 12.
, and also in my Apology Number: 30. and seq.
and which only, if there were no other, would suffice to prove that the
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is not a point of faith, was
taken from the authority of the most noble, and most Christian Kingdom and
State of France, which ever held the contrary to be the more true, sound, and
assured doctrine. And first to omit the authority of Iacobus Almaine, a famous
Schoole-Diuine of Paris, whereof I spoke before, who affirmed, that very many,
or most Doctors were of opinion, that the Pope has not by the institution of
Christ authority to inflict temporal punishments, no, nor so much as to
imprison, much less to deprive Princes of their Kingdoms or lives) in a
general Parliament, or assembly of all the States of France held at Paris in
the year 1593. the Cardinal de Pelleue, and other Prelates, who then were
present, took exceptions against certain decrees of the Council of Trent,
which Laurentius Bochellus relates, among which that of the 25. session, chap:
19. wherein the Council forbids Kings to permit single combats, was one.
The Council of Trent, say they, does excommunicate and deprive a King of the
City or place, wherein he permits to fight a single combat. This article
is against the authority of the King, who can not be deprived of his temporal
Dominion, in regard whereof he acknowledges no Superior at all.

2 Secondly, Petrus Pithaeus, a man, as Posseuine the Jesuit relates, truly
learned, and a diligent searcher of antiquity, in his book, of the liberties
of the Church of France, printed at Paris by authority of the Parliament in
the year 1594, does out of a general maxim, which France, as he says, has
ever approved as certain, deduce this particular position: That the Pope can
not give as a prey the Kingdom of France, nor any thing appertayning
thereunto, neither that he can deprive the King thereof, nor in any other
manner dispose thereof. And notwithstanding any admonitions, Excommunications,
or Interdicts, which by the Pope may be made, yet the subjects are bound to
yield obedience due to his Majesty for temporalls, neither therein can they be
dispensed, or absolved by the Pope.

3 Mark now, good Reader, what silly shifts D. Schulckenius has found out to
repel the aforesaid authorities. To the first he answers, Page 121. ad number:
31.
that it is not credible, that the Cardinal of Pelleue, and the other Prelates
should affirm that, which Bochellus relates. For the Council of Trent, says
he, does not decree, that Princes are absolutely deprived of the City and
place, wherein they shall permit single combat, but with a restriction, that
they are deprived of the City, fort, or place, which they hold of the Church,
or which they hold in fee farm. Therefore the Council does not speak of the
King of France, or other absolute Kings, unless Bochellus will have the
Kingdom of France to be given to the Kings by the Church, or that the King is
not a direct Lord, but a feudarie. Therefore it had been great imprudence and
malignitie, to deprave so spitefully the words of the sacred Council, as
Bochellus has depraved, which ought not to be presumed of the Cardinal of
Pelleue, and of the other Prelates.

4 But truly it is not credible, that Bochellus durst presume to commit so
great, and public a forgerie, as to falsify the Records of the highest Court
of Parliament, and assembly of the three States of the Land, especially
printing his book at Paris, where without doubt he should not want men both to
find out easily, and also to punish severely so great a forgerie, and withal
affirming, that those articles were extracted out of the Register of the
assembly held at Paris in the year 1593, and putting down such particular
circumstances, as naming not only the day of the year, but also of the month,
to wit, the 19. of April, when the Lord Abbot of Orbais did on the behalf of
the Lord Cardinal of Pelleue bring a coppie of them etc. and setting down all
the articles in French, whereas the maine corpse of his book was Latin.

5 Neither is the reason, which D. Schulckenius brings, to make this
testimony seem incredible, of any great moment. For first it is untrue, which
he says, that the Council did not speak of the King of France, and other
absolute Kings. The words of the Council are clear to the contrary. The
Emperor, says the Council, Kings, Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earls, and
temporal Lords by what other name soever they be called, who shall grant a
place for single combat in their Countries among Christians, let them be
excommunicated, and understood deprived of the Jurisdiction and Dominion of the
City, fort, or place, which they hold from the Church, wherein, or whereat
they shall permit single combat, and if they be held in fee farm, let them
forthwith be taken for the direct Lords: but they that shall fight the combat,
and they that are called their Patrimi, let them incur ipso facto the
punishment of Excommunication, and forfeiture of all their goods etc. So that
it is plain, that the Council speaks of Emperors, and of other absolute
Kings and Princes.

6. Secondly, although it be clear, that those words [let them be deprived
of the City, Fort, or place which they hold from the Church] be spoken with a
restriction and limitation only to those Cities, Forts, or places, which be
held from the Church, yet the words following [and if they be held in fee
farm, let them forthwith be taken for the direct Lords] may absolutely, and
without the aforesaid restriction be understood of those Cities, Forts or
places, which be held in fee farm either from the Church, or from some other
Sovereign Prince, as from the direct Lord of them. So likewise the punishment
of the confiscation of goods may be understood as well without the territories
of the Church, as within the Popes dominions, and may also be understood to
comprehend absolute Princes, if perchance they should either be Patrimi, or
fight themselves in single combat. And so by consequence it might be inferred,
that, if the Council has authority to deprive absolute Kings of those
dominions, which thy hold in fee farm from other absolute Princes, or to
confiscate their goods, or else the goods of their subjects without their
consent, the Council also has authority to deprive for the same cause
absolute Princes of their Cities, Forts and places, whereof they are absolute
Lords. And so the Cardinal of Pelleue, and other Prelates of France might
understand the Council in that sense, as also D. Weston in his Sanctuary q.
28.
does understand them, and thereupon urges those words of the Council of
Trent as a principal argument to prove, that the doctrine for the Popes power
to depose Princes is a point of faith, and decreed by the Council of Trent,
who little thought, that he should therefore have been censured of imprudencie
and malignitie, as D. Schulckenius censureth the Prelates and Parliament of
France, if they should understand in that manner the Council of Trent, as
Bochellus relates, and D. Weston expounds it.

6. To the second testimony of Petrus Pithaus, D. Schulckenius answers in as
shuffling a manner. First, I answer, says he, Page ^ 24.
that Antonie Posseuine commends Petrus Pithaeus for a learned man, and a
diligent searcher of antiquity, and relates all his works, and also his
death, and yet he makes no mention of this book, and I confess I never saw
it. But although neither Posseuine, nor D. Schulckenius ever saw that book,
yet I have seen it, and read it, and it was printed at Paris by the authority
of the Parliament in the year 1594. and it has those maxims and positions
which I related in my Apology. And therefore we have the testimony of a very
learned Catholic, and a diligent searcher of antiquity, by Posseuines
confession, that France has ever held this position for undoubted, that the
Pope has no authority to deprive the King of France of his Kingdom, and that
notwithstanding any admonitions, Excommunications etc. his subjects are bound
to obey him in temporals.

7. His second answer is, that whosoever is the Author of that book, it is
clearly false, that France has always approved that doctrine for certain.
Mark now the reasons, which D. Schulckenius brings to convince this very
learned man, and diligent searcher of antiquity of manifest falsehood. For first
it is repugnant, says he, to the Council of Claramont, wherein Philip the
first was excommunicated and deprived of his Regal Honor and Crown by Pope
Vrbanus the second, whereof see Iuo Carnotensis in his 28. epistle to Vrbanus.
But it is most clearly false, that Philip was in that Council deprived of his
Regal Honor and Crown, as both I In Prefat. ad Resp. Apol. nu. 36. and seq.
, and Mr. John Barclay In Prolegom. number. 75.
have clearly showed heretofore, for that no Historiographer writes, that he
was deposed in that Council, but at the most only excommunicated, for that
he had forsaken his lawful wife Berta, and had married Bertrada, who was also
wife to another man. For Sigebert, Aimonius, Matthew Paris, Nauclerus, Paulus
Aemilius, Robertus Gaguinus, Papirius Massonius, the Author of the fragment of
the history of France published by Petrus Pithaeus with Glaber, Genebrard, and
Vignerius do relate that Philip was excommunicated by Vrbanus, and as some of
them say, in the Council of Claramont, but none of them make mention, that he
was deposed or deprived of his Royal honor and Crown.

8. Neither can it any way be proved out of Iuo, that Philip was deprived by
Pope Vrbanus of his Royal Honor and Crown, for that Iuo at that very time,
when Philip was excommunicated, did in express words account him his Lord and
King, and offered him his faithful service, as to his Lord and King: This
only can be gathered out of Iuo, that King Philip was desirous to honor his
new Queen, or rather Concubine Bertrada, by putting the Royal Crown or
Diadem on both their heads in a public solemnity, which for that it was a
religious ceremony, and usually done in the Church at the time of Mass, by the
Primate of the Land, and Philip was at that time excommunicated and deprived of
all holy rites and ceremonies of the Church, Pope Vrbanus for bad all the
Bishops of France to crown in that sort the King, and his new supposed Queen,
for Philip himself was long before crowned King of France, and this
solemnity, which Pope Vrbanus forbade, or the want thereof did not give or
take away from King Philip any jot of his Royal power and authority.

9. Secondly, it is repugnant, says D. Schulckenius, to the examples of
Gregory the great, of Zachary, and of other Popes. But to those examples both
I have answered at large in my Apology, Number. 382. and seq. and number. 404. and
seq.
and also since that Mr. John Barclay Ca. 40. and 42.
, to whom as yet no Reply has been made, and first, that those words of S.
Gregory, Lib. 2. epist. post. epist. 38.
honor suo priuetur, let him be deprived, or I would to God he may be deprived
of his honor (for both ways it may be Englished, as that the verb priuetur
may be of the Imperative, or of the Optatiue mood) do not contain a
iuridicall sentence, command or decree, as likewise neither those words, which
are spoken in the like manner by S. Gregory, and cum Judah traditore in inferno
damnetur, and let him be damned in hell, or, I wish he may be damned in hell
with Judas the traitor, but only either a zealous imprecation See Baronius ad
annum 1097. number 51.
against them, who should infringe his privilege, if they did not repent, or
else a declaration, that they were worthy for their contempt, to be deprived
of their honor, and to be condemned to hell fire with Judas the traitor:
from whence it cannot be inferred, that the Pope has authority to deprive by
a iuridical sentence those Kings who infringe his privilege of their Regal
Honor, or to condemn them by a iuridicall sentence to hell fire.

10. So likewise to that example of Pope Zachary I answered, Number. 404. and seq.
that he did not by any iuridicall sentence of deprivation deprive Childerike
of his Kingdom, and create Pipin King, but only gave his advise, counsel,
and consent, or at the most command to the Peers of France, that they ought,
or might lawfully (the circumstances which they propounded to Zachary being
considered) deprive Childerike of his kingdom, and create Pipin king: but this
argues no authority in the Pope to depose Princes by any iuridicall sentence
of deprivation, but at the most an authority in the common wealth to depose
their King in some cases of great moment, which is not the question, which we
have now in hand. And therefore the Gloss In cap. Alius 15. q. 6.
with other grave and learned Authors cited by me in my Apology Number. 404. and
seq.
do expound those words of Pope Gregory the seueth: Zachary deposed
Childerike, thus, Zachary gave his advise and consent to those who deposed
him: and those words, which some Chronicles have, Childerike was deposed by the
authority of Pope Zachary, Lupolbus Bambergensis, Ioannes Parisiensis, and
Michael Coccineus do expound in the like manner, that Childerike was deposed by
the authority of Pope Zachary not deposing Childerike, and creating Pipin
King, but only declaring, that he might be lawfully deposed by the Peers of
France, whereof they were in some doubt, for that they had sworn to him
allegiance, and therefore they craved the opinion, and advise of Pope Zachary
to be resolved by him of that doubt, for that the University of Paris did not
flourish at that time, says Ioannes Mayor, Jn 4. did. 24. q. 3. circa sine^.
de potest. Regia and Papal. c. 15.
and so Pipin was anointed King by the election of the Barons, says Ioannes
Parisiensis, and by the authority of the Pope declaring the doubt of the
Barons, which also they might have done without the Popes consent upon a
reasonable cause.

11. But because Card. Bellarmine will never cease to inculcate still the same
authorities, which by me, and others have been so often answered, I think it
not amiss to add something here concerning that, which I did in general words
insinuate in my Apology, Number. 382.
and is more expressly touched by Nicholas Vingerius in his History of the
Church of France, and more particularly urged by the Bishop of Rochester in his
answer to Card. Bellarmines Treatise against Barclay; to wit, that the
privilege which is said to be granted by S. Gregory to the Monastery of S.
Medard, and which is so greatly urged by Card. Bellarmine, and others, is not
so authentical, as Card. Bellarmine, and others suppose it to be, which may be
proved by many probable conjectures; as by the style, and phrase, which is not
agreeable to S. Gregory's, and also by the date of the year of our Lord, which
is not agreeable to the manner of dating of those days, but principally by the
persons, who are subscribed for witnesses to that privilege. For S. Austin
Bishop of Canterbury, and Mellitus Bishop of London, and Theodorike King of
France, are subscribed for witnesses to that privilege, and yet neither S.
Austin, nor Mellitus, were Bishops, nor Theodorike King at that time, which
Card. Baronius also does in express words affirm Ad annum 893. number. 85.
. But I confess, says he, that the subscriptions of the Bishops, and of
Theodorike King of France do not agree to these times: for many Bishops, who
are found subscribed, are known to be created some certain years after, as
to speak nothing of the rest, Augustine Bishop of Canterbury, and Mellitus of
London, who, as it is manifest, were neither at this time Bishops, nor gone for
England; neither at this time did Theodorike reign in France, but Childebert,
and Gunthramn. Wherefore my opinion is, that the subscription was afterward
adjoined. Thus Baronius. But considering that Theodorike not only in the
subscription, but also in the privilege it self is named King, at whose
instance S. Gregory says he granted that privilege, Baronius might with the
same reason have affirmed, that not only the subscription, but also the
privilege it self was afterward made, and adjoined to S. Gregory's Epistles,
which without doubt Baronius would quickly have acknowledged, if it had not
been for those words honor suo priuetur, which he thought made greatly for
the Popes power to depose Princes, seeing that upon far weaker grounds he
sticks not to deny oftentimes priueledges, and antiquities, which never
before were called in question.

12. And although Pope Gregory the seventh in his Epistle to the Bishop of
Metz does not cite this privilege, of S. Gregory granted to the Monastery of
S. Me^ard (which is no small conjecture, that this privilege was not extant in
those days among the Epistles of S. Gregory, for otherwise it bearing so
great a show of being authentical by the subscription of 30 Bishops, and the
King and Queen of France, who were witnesses thereunto, it would by all
likelihood have been cited by Pope Gregory the seventh) but an other
privilege granted to an other Monastery by S, Gregory in his Epistle to one
Senator Abbot Lib. 11. epist. epist. 10.
wherein S. Gregory did not say honor suo priuetur, let him be deprived of his
honor, but potestatis, honorisque sui dignitate careat, let him want, or, I
desire he may want, not his honor, but the worthiness of his power and
honor, which words are not so forcible to prove the Popes authority to
deprive Kings of their princely honor and power, but at the most to declare
them to be unworthy of it for some crime committed by them, and to be worthy
also to be damned in hell with Judas the Traitor, for that many a one may be a
true King, and have princely power and honor who is unworthy thereof.
Nevertheless, (besides that the aforesaid words do contain no sentence of
deprivation, but only a curse, or imprecation, which kind of imprecations
even containing anathema was frequent in the priueledges granted by Laymen,
yea and upon sepulchers, that men should be fearful to violate them, as
Baronius Ad an. 1097. Number. 51.
relates) also this privilege mentioned in S. Gregory's epistle to Senator,
is not so authentical, both for that it has neither date of any year, or day
when it was written, nor subscription of any witness, which by likelihood it
would have had, if there had been any authentical copy thereof, and also for
that the Author of the book entitled de vnitate Ecclesiae who is thought to
be Venericus Bishop of Vercellis, and lived in Pope Gregory the seventh his
time, answering that epistle of Pope Gregory the seventh to the Bishop of Metz
does bouldly affirm, that those words, potestatis honorisque sui dignitate
careat, let him want the worthiness of his power and honor, were not in those
days extant among the works of S. Gregory. Whereby the Reader may easily
perceive, what weak demonstrations and authorities Card. Bellarmine does so
often inculcate to convince this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Painces
to be a point of faith.

13 Thirdly, it is also repugnant, says D. Schulckenius, to those most famous
French writers, whom I related before. But although it be true, that the most
part of those seventeen French writers related by Card: Bellarmine in his
book against Barclay, and now in his Schulckenius against me, are of opinion,
that the Pope has power to depose Princes, this nevertheless may also be
true, which Petrus Pithaeus affirms, to wit, that France, understanding
thereby the State of France, has ever held, the the Pope has no authority to
deprive the King of France of his Kingdom. May it not truly be said, that the
Kingdom, and State of England has from the first year of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, even to this present time, held, that the Catholic Roman Religion is
not the true Religion, notwithstanding that not only seventeen, but
seventeen thousands there have been of English Catholics, since the first
beginning of her reign, till now, who have held the contrary. wherefore when
Petrus Pithaeus affirmed, that France has ever held, that the Pope has no
authority to depose their King, by France he did not understand every
particular Frenchman, but the State and temporal Governors of the Kingdom
of France, which his assertion is also confirmed by the State and Parliament of
Paris, first in the censuring of Card: Bellarmines book against D. Barclay,
then in burning his Schulckenius written against me, afterward in condemning
Suarez book against his Majesty's Apology for maintayning so stiffly this
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, and to dispose of all their
temporalls, which they call a scandalous, and seditious, a damnable, and
pernicious doctrine, and now lastly, by the decree of the Parliament of Paris
the second of January of this present year 1615, wherein it is ordained, that
it shall not be held for problematique; and also by the new oath of allegiance
like unto that of ours, (but that ours is more sweet, and more modest, as the
Cardinal du Peron Page 100.
affirms) which those of the lower house of the general assembly of all the
States of France, (whom the same Cardinal du Peron, in his speech to them,
confesses to be Catholics Page 96.
,) endeavored to have made for a fundamental Law.

14 Lastly, it is also repugnant, says D. Schulckenius, to reason, it is
repugnant to the principles of the Catholic faith. For if the Subjects of the
King of France be bound to obey their King being excommunicated, and that they
can not be absolved from this obedience by the Pope, it follows that either
the King of France can not be bound by Christ his Vicar with the bond of
Excommunication, or that his Subjects can not be loosed from the bond of their
allegiance and obedience. Both are repugnant to the words of Christ, who said
to his Vicar, whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth shall be loosed also in
heaven. Neither did Christ except the King of France, or his Subjects, and who
has excepted them I can not tell. This I know, that no man could by right
except them. and whosoever will not be subject to the keys of the Church, I
know, and with a clear voice I do pronounce, that he will neither be a
Christian, nor can ^^e appertain to the kingdom of Christ.

15 Great words to small purpose. For although it be true, that Card:
Bellarmine, Suarez, and some few others are, or seem to be of opinion, that it
is against reason, and against the principles of the Catholic faith, to hold,
that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, yet it is also true, that
other learned Catholics are of opinion, that it is neither against reason, nor
against the principles of the Catholic faith to hold, that the Pope has no
such authority. Must the opinion of Card: Bellarmine, or of Suarez, or of any
other learned Catholic, be a rule of reason to all other learned Catholics,
or to be accounted by all Catholics the principles of the Catholic faith?
All Catholics do confess, that the Pope has authority to excommunicate a
Christian King, and that Subjects are not bound to obey an excommunicated King
in those things, which the Censure of Excommunication of it own nature, and by
the institution of Christ does forbid; but to absolve Subjects from their
temporal allegiance either by virtue of Excommunication (which being a
spiritual Censure has neither of it own nature, nor by the institution of
Christ such a temporal effect) or by the sentence of deprivation, this many
learned Catholics, with the State of France do affirm not to belong to the
Popes spiritual authority to bind, or loose.

16 True also it is, that all Christians are subject to the keys of the
Church, but these keys are spiritual, not temporal, of the kingdom of
heaven, and not of earthly kingdoms; neither is any Christian excepted from
that authority, which Christ gave to S. Peter by those words, whatsoever thou
shall loose etc. But those words are not to be understood of temporal, but
only of spiritual bindings and loosings, as I have often showed; neither did
any of the ancient Fathers ever extend the keys of the Church, to the
absoluing of Subjects from their temporal allegiance, or to the depriving of
Kings and Princes of their temporal lives, liberty, kingdoms or goods, as by
some Catholics of these latter ages, contrary to the true meaning and
institution of Christ, and to the understanding and practice of the primitive
Church, they have been violently wrested. To that whatsoever thou shall loose
etc. I answer, says Ioannes Parisiensis, according to S. Chrysostom and
Rabanus, that by this is not understood any power to be given but spiritual,
to wit, to absolve from the bond of sins. For it were foolish to understand,
that by this is given a power to absolve from the bond of debts, and much less
from that great and high debt of temporal allegiance.

16. These be all the exceptions which D. Schulckenius takes against those
authorities, which I brought in my Theological Disputation: Now let any
indifferent Reader judge, whether he has sufficiently answered those
authorities, or rather by cauilling and shuffling labored cunningly to shift
them off, and whether Mr. Fitzherbert might not blush to affirm so boldly,
that D. Schulckenius, to whom he cunningly also, as you have seen, remitteth
his English Reader, for his answer to those authorities, has answered
particularly to every one of them, and proved clearly, that diverse of them
make flat against Widdrington, and many nothing at all for him (being truly
understood) and that some others are worthily rejected, being either so absurd,
that they are easily confuted by the circumstances of the places alleged, or
else heretics (as appears by their doctrine in other things) or known
Schismatikes, who living in the times of the Emperors or Kings that were
deposed, wrote partially in their favors, of which sort nevertheless there
are very few, so that of all the Authors, that Widdrington has scraped
together to make some show of probability in his doctrine, he has no one
clear and sufficient witness to justify the same, which how true it is, or
rather most clearly false, I remit to the consideration of the indifferent and
judicious Reader.

17. For the testimony of John Trithemius, a learned and virtuous Catholic,
who expressly affirms, that it is a controversy among Schoolmen, and as yet
not decided by the Judge, whether the Pope has power to depose the Emperor or
no, partly he rejects, partly that word Schoolmen he ridiculously
expounds to be Historiographers, Grammarians, Poets, as Sigebert, Valla,
Dantes, who nevertheless are by Trithemius himself related to be also
excellent Divines, and partly to repel his testimony he falsely, grossly,
and unadvisedly taxes him with errors committed in his history, and for
proof thereof he remitteth his Reader to Posseuine, who, as you have seen,
both in that, and also other points of history has shamefully erred himself:
and nevertheless, that which Trithemius affirms, Iacobus Almaine a famous
Schoole-Diuine, and classical Doctor of Paris, who lived also in those days,
confirms to be true, whose words D. Schulckenius does cunningly pass over
without any answer at all. Albericus, a Classical Doctor of the canon and
civil Law, for that he delivers his opinion with submission, and is ready
to recall it, if it should prove erroneous, as every good Catholic ought to
do, he will have to speak wavering, and altogether doubtful. Ioannes
Parisiensis, a most learned Schoole-Diuine partly he will have to make nothing
for my opinion, and yet he confesses that Parisiensis is of opinion, that the
Pope has no authority to deprive a Prince of his Kingdom by a iuridicall
sentence of deprivation, which nevertheless is the maine and sole point, which
I contend to prove: and partly to clean overthrow his testimony he taxes him
without sufficient ground of many errors, which errors nevertheless although
he should have maintained, do clearly confirm this doctrine against the
Popes power to depose Princes. The testimony of Mr. D. Barclay a famous,
learned and virtuous Catholic he no more regards then of an heretic. To M.
Blackwell and those other English Priests he answers nothing. The Records of
the general assembly of the States of France related by Bochellus with such
particular circumstances, that no man can misdoubt of them, for a frivolous
reason he accounts incredible, The testimony of Petrus Pithaeus, a very
learned Catholic, and a diligent searcher of antiquity by Posseuines
confession, affirming that France has ever held for certain, that the Pope
has no authority to depose their King, also for frivolous reasons he utterly
reieiecteth, which nevertheless the late proceeding of the Court of Parliament
against his, and such like books has sufficiently confirmed. And if this
manner of answering authorities is to be admitted, who may not easily shift
off any authorities whatsoever, especially when they shall have their
trumpetters to extol all their writings and answers to the sky, and to
depresse their adversaries, and who shall seem to make against them, whether
they be living or dead, even to the pit of hell, appeaching them of heresy,
error, schism, and such like heinous crimes?

18. Many other authorities I brought in my Apology, which do clearly
contradict Card. Bellarmines doctrine (which only I took upon me to confute)
whereof some of them do expressly affirm, that the Church of Christ has
only a spiritual, and not a temporal sword; Others, that temporal Princes
are in temporal affairs next under God, and to be punished with temporal
punishments by God alone, and that the temporal power is independent of the
spiritual: Others, that neither Childerike was deposed, nor the Roman Empire
translated from the Graecians to the Germans, or French, by the Popes sole
authority, but by the consent, suffrages, and authority also of the people,
which nevertheless are principal authorities, which by Card. Bellarmine and
others are brought to prove the Popes power to depose Princes: Finally others,
although they be of opinion, that the Pope has authority to depose Princes
for heresy, or, which is a far different question, to declare them to be
deposed (for so writes Antonius de Rosellis) yet they deny that for other
temporal crimes or for insufficiency in government a Christian Prince can be
deposed by the Pope, whereas Card. Bellarmine does not limit his authority to
any crime or cause, but does absolutely, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, in
order to spiritual good extend this pretended authority.

19. Neither is it true, that I brought the authority of any heretic for
proof of my opinion, as M. Fitzherbert without any shame or conscience
untruly affirms: I omitted of set purpose to name Marsilius of Padua, for
that not only his book, but also himself is placed among heretics in the
Catalogue of forbidden books. And although I had urged his authority in that
sort, as I did urge it in my Appendix against Fa. Suarez, yet it had been in
my judgment a forcible proof; not for that I think the authority of an
heretic, barely considered by it self, to be of any force to prove
affirmatively any doctrine to belong to faith, but for that Marsilius, writing
a book of purpose to defend the right and Sovereignty of Emperors and Kings
against the Popes power to depose them, wherein here and there he scatters
many heresies, he should by Catholic Authors, who write of heresies, as
Castro, Prateolus, D. Sanders and others, be particularly taxed of those
heresies, and yet his doctrine against the Popes power to depose Princes, which
was the principal subject of his book, should not be censured by them as
heretical or erroneous, for this is a forcible argument, that those Catholic
writers did not account his doctrine in that point to be heretical or
erroneus, although they thought it perchance to be the less probable doctrine.

20. True also it is, that in my Apology I alleged Sigebert for my opinion,
for that he vehemently impugned this pretended doctrine for the Popes power to
depose Princes, both against Pope Gregory the seventh, and also Paschalis the
second, calling it a novelty, not to say an heresy, and answering, as he
says, with strong arguments of the Fathers the Epistle, which the said
Gregory wrote to Hermannus Bishop of Metz in reproach of Kingly power. But
Sigebert, says D. Schulckenius, was a Schismatike, and his books against
Gregory the seventh, and Paschalis the second are condemned by the Catholic
Roman Church. But truly it is strange, and greatly to be lamented, to see some
Catholics now adays, especially who profess sanctity of life, and pretend
to have a tender and timorous conscience so easily to defame, and slander other
Catholics, who dislike their opinions or proceedings, with such enormious
crimes, as are Schism, heresy, and Apostacy. What reason had Card. Baronius,
of whom D. Schulckenius has taken the same, to call Sigebert a Schismatike (he
being by no other Author, that I have read, before Baronius, charged with that
heinous crime, but was ever reputed a learned, virtuous, and religious
Catholic) truly I cannot in any wise perceive. Schism is a rebellious
separation from the unity of the Church, or a refusing to obey the Pope, as he
is the visible head of the Church, and Christ his Vicegerent on earth.

21: For observe diligently, says Card. Caietane 2a. 2a. q. 39. ar. 2. in
resp. ad 2m.
that to refuse to obey the Popes command may happen three manner of ways.
First, in regard of the thing commanded. Secondly, in regard of the person
commanding; and thirdly in regard of the office of the Judge, or commander. For
if one does even with obstinacy contemn the Popes sentence, to wit, for that
he will not fulfill that, which the Pope has commanded, as to abstain from
such a war, to restore such a State etc. although he should most greiuously
sin, yet he is not for this a Schismatike. For it falls out and that often,
that one will not fulfill the command of his Superior acknowledging him
nevertheless to be his Superior. For if one upon a reasonable cause has the
Pope for a person suspected, and therefore does not only refuse the Popes
presence, but also his immediate judgment or sentence, being ready to receive
from him not suspected Judges, he neither incurreth the crime of Schism, nor
any other crime. For it is natural to shun hurtful things, and to be wary
of dangers. And the Popes person may govern tyra^nically, and so much the
easier, by how much he is more potent, and fears no revenger on earth. But
when one refuses to obey the Popes command or sentence in regard of his
office, not acknowledging him to be his Superior, although he do believe he
is, then properly he is a Schismatike. And according to this sense are to be
understood the words of S. Thomas and such like, for even obstinate
disobedience does not make Schism, unless it be a rebellion to the office of
the Pope, or of the Church, so that he refuse to subject himself unto him, to
acknowledge him for Superior etc. Thus Card. Caietane.

22. Now what Author ever said, that Sigebert refused to obey in this sort
Pope Gregory's command, or that he acknowledged Guibert the Antipape, and not
Gregory, to be the true and lawful Pope. True it is that Sigebert was blamed
by some, as Trithemius In verbo Sigebertus.
relates, for that he adhering to the Emperor Henry being a persecutour and
rebel to the Roman Church, wrote letters and treatises against Pope Gregory
the seventh, whih did not become his profession, but that Sigebert did depart
from the unity of the Church, or that he refused to obey and subject himself
to Pope Gregory, as not acknowledging him to be his Superior, which is
necessarily required to make one a Schismatike, or that he adhered to the
Emperor Henry in his rebellion to the Roman Church, and in deposing Gregory,
and creating Guibert Pope, neither D. Schulckenius, nor any other is able to
prove out of any ancient or modern writer.

23. True also it is, that Sigebert was of this opinion, that the Pope had no
authority to depose the Emperor, and therein he opposed himself to Pope
Gregory, and answered, as he says, all his arguments with strong testimonies
of the Fathers, and upon this ground he adhered to the Emperor, acknowledging
him to still remain the true and lawful Emperor, and refused to obey Pope
Gregory's command, wherein he strictly ordained, that no man should account
Henry the fourth to be true and lawful Emperor: But considering that the
doctrine for the Popes power to dethrone temporal Princes, and the practice
thereof, was then new in the Church of God, and never heard of before, for
which cause it was called by Sigebert a novelty, not to say an heresy, and
since that time there has ever been a great controversy, says Azor Tom. 2.
lib. 11. cap. 5. q. 8.
, concerning this point, betwixt Emperors and Kings on the one side, and the
Bishops or Popes of Rome on the other, and the Schoolmen are at variance about
the same, and as yet the Judge has not decided it, says Trithemius, and very
many Doctors are of opinion that the Pope has no such authority, says
Almainus, and the State of France has ever maintained the same for certain,
says Pithaeus, and the late practice of the Parliament of Paris (to omit all
the authorities of our learned Countrymen) does most clearly confirm the
same, it is neither reason, nor conscience to charge Sigebert with Schism, for
impugning that new doctrine and practice, which was never heard of before in
the Church of God. And therefore many complained, says Az^^ in the same place,
that Gregory the seventh did depri^e Henry the fourth of the administration of
the Empire.

24 For although the Bishops of Rome, (says Onuphrius, a man, as Posseuine
confesses, of exceeding great reading, and whom Paulus Manutius calls a
deuourer of Histories) were before honored, as the heads of Christian
Religion, and the Vicars of Christ, and the Successors of Peter, yet their
authority was not extended any farther, then either in declaring or
maintayning positions of faith. But yet they were subject to the Emperors, all
things were done at the Emperors back, they were created by them, and the
Pope of Rome durst not presume to judge, or decree any thing concerning them.
Gregory the seventh, the first of all the Bishops of Rome, being aided with
the forces of the Nortmans, trusting in the riches of Countess Mathildis, a
woman most potent in Italy, and being encouraged with the discord of the
German Princes, who were at civil war among them selves, contrary to the
custom of his ancestors, contemning the authority and power of the Emperor,
when he had gotten the Popedom, did presume, I do not say, to excommunicate,
but also to deprive the Emperor, by whom, if he was not chosen, he was at the
least confirmed, of his Kingdom and Empire. A thing not heard of before that
age. For the fables which are carried abroad of Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo
Iconomachus, I do nothing regard. Thus Onuphrius Lib: 4. de varia creat. Rom:
Pont.
.

25 Lastly, it is also true, that Sigeberts books in answer to the letters of
Pope Gregory, and Pope Paschalis are put in the Catalogue of forbidden books,
but that they are forbidden or condemned by the Catholic Church, or the
Catholic Roman Church, as D. Schulckenius affirms, unless by the Catholic
Church, or Catholic Roman Church he understand those few Cardinals, and
Divines of Rome, who are appointed by the Pope for the examining, permitting
and forbidding of books, (which were a very strange and ouer-strict
description of the Catholic Church) is altogether untrue. Neither is it
known, for what cause those books of Sigebert are put in the Catalogue of
forbidden books; as likewise two books of mine written especially against
Card: Bellarmine, have of late by a special decree of the aforesaid
Cardinals, and especially of Card: Bellarmine, who has been pleased to be a
Judge, witness, and accuser in his own cause, been prohibited, and I under
pain of Ecclesiastical Censures commanded to purge my self forthwith, but
the cause wherefore they are forbidden is not therein expressed, neither as yet
have they given me to understand, of what crime either in particular, or in
general, I am to purge my self, although in my purgation written to his
Holiness long ago The 24. of June 1614.
, I have most humbly and instantly desired it, and have protested to be most
ready to purge my self of any crime whatsoever I shall know to have committed,
which their strange proceeding does clearly argue, that they have no small
distrust in their cause, and that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes is not so clear a point of faith, as Card: Bellarmine, and his
followers would have the Popes Holiness and the Christian world with out
sufficient grounds to believe.

26 Seeing therefore that there be many causes, wherefore books may be
forbidden, and which in general are reduced to these two heads, either that
they are repugnant to faith, or else to good manners, which the late
instructions for the correcting of books published by the commandment of Pope
Clement the eight, do in so large, yet doubtful a manner extend, that scarce
any book can be found which treats of the Popes authority, but some
Correctour or other may easily except against it, (as those books are to be
corrected, which are against Ecclesiastical liberty, immunitie, and
Jurisdiction, so that if a Canonist be the Corrector, he will have that blotted
ou^, which denies the Popes direct power in temporalls, and that Clergy are
not exempted by the law of God and nature from the coerciue power of Princes
etc.) unless it can be proved, that Sigebert books were put in the Catalogue
of prohibited books, for that they impugned the doctrine for the Popes power
to depose Princes, no good argument can be drawn from that Catalogue, to
impeach Sigeberts credit for the impugning of that doctrine. Neither can Card:
Baronius, nor Card: Bellarmine be excused from grievous detraction, in charging
Sigebert, who both in his life and after his death was accounted a learned,
virtuous, and religious Catholic, with that execrable crime of schism, for
which at the day of judgment they shall render an exact account, unless they
can prove, that he did separate himself from the unity of the Church, or
disobey the Popes command, as not acknowledging him to be the true visible head
of the Church, and the Successor of S. Peter.

27 I omit now to declare how Catholics ought to carry themselves in times of
Schism, when more then one pretend to be the true and rightful Pope, and
whether those, who adhere to a false Pope, persuading themselves for probable
reasons, that he is the true and lawful Pope, are to be condemned of Schism,
and to be accounted formal Schismatikes; concerning which question read John
Gerson in his Treatise thereof. This only at this present I will demand, that if
to reject the testimony of Sigebert, or any such like Author, it be
sufficient without any other proof, to say, as Mr Fitzherbert answers, that
they living in the time of the Emperors and Kings that were deposed, wrote
partially in their favor, why may it not with the same facility be answered
to the authorities of many others of the contrary side, that they living in
the time of the Popes, who took upon them to depose Kings and Emperors (for
this has ever been a great controversy, says Azor, betwixt Kings and
Emperors on the one side, and the Bishops of Rome on the other) wrote
partially in their favor? May not Popes have their flatterers, and who do
attribute unto them more ample authority, then is fitting, as of the Canonists
Pope Pius the fifth affirmed to that learned Navarre in cap. Non liceat. 12. q.
2. nu: 6.
, as well as Kings and Emperors? See above cap: 3. nu. 6. what Parisiensis
says of this flattering.

20 Wherefore to make an end of these Authorities, I will only request the
judicious Reader, that he will be pleased to consider these two things: first,
the reasons which I brought both in my Apology Number. 449.
, and also in my Cap. 3. sec. 3. nu. 15. and seq.
Theological Disputation, which D. Schulckenius passes over with silence, why
there are to be found so few Authors at this present, whose writings are now
extant, who deny the Popes authority to depose Princes in comparison of those,
who do maintain the same, which being duly considered, the Reader will
easily perceive, that it is a great marvel to find in any Catholic book
any one sentence or clause, which seems any way to call in question this
temporal authority of the Pope: and nevertheless there are at this present,
and ever have been, as I have clearly showed before, many virtuous and learned
Catholics, who notwithstanding all the clamours, and threatenings of our
ouer-violent Adversaries, are of this opinion, that the Pope has no such
authority to deprive Kings and Princes of their temporal dominions.

21 The second is, that if the doctrine of that learned Navarre, an excellent
Divine, and most skillful in the Law, (says Posseuine) of Bartholomaeus Fumus
in his Aurea armilla, of Gabriel Vasquez See the Preface. nu. 40. 43.
and of other Divines be true, that in the Court of conscience it be sufficient
to this effect, that we shall commit no sin, to choose his opinion for true,
whom for good cause we think to be a man sufficiently learned, end of a good
conscience, and that no man is bound to follow always the better opinion, but
it suffices to follow that opinion, which some skillful Doctors think to be
true: how much the more may our Catholic Countrymen prudently persuade
themselves, that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, which doctrine
not only one learned, and virtuous man, but very many with the State of France
do approve, and who also have diligently read, examined, and abundantly
answered all the reasons, arguments, and authorities, which their learned
Adversaries have objected to the contrary? And this I hope may suffice for the
first part, and for clearing all those authorities, which I brought in my
Theological Disputation from all the exceptions, which D. Schulckenius has
taken against them. Now we will examine the reasons, and intrinsecall grounds
of this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes.

THE SECOND PART
Wherein ALL THE PRINCIPAL ARGVments, which Card. Bellarmine brings to prove
the union and subordination of the temporal and spiritual power, together
with the Replies, which are brought, by D. Schulckenius to confirm the same,
are exactly examined.

Chap. 1.
The true state of the question concerning the union of the temporal and
spiritual power is declared.

1. BEcause my Adversary Mr. Fitzherbert, and all the rest, who do so
vehemently maintain the Popes power to depose Princes, do much rely upon the
union, and subordination of the temporal power to the spiritual, as upon a
principal proof grounded upon the light of reason, before I come to examine
the particular points of his Reply, I think it not amiss for the better
understanding of what shall be said hereafter by either of us concerning this
subordination, or union, to declare, in what sort these two powers are among
Christians united and subordained, and what a weak ground this subordination
is to prove, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, to dispose of
temporalls, and to punish temporally by way of coercion or constraint. And to
proceed orderly herein, and that the Reader may clearly perceive, what is the
true state of the question, betwixt me and Card. Bellarmine and not be carried
away with a confuse concept of I know not what kind of union and
subordination, I will first set down that which is certain, and out of
question, and then what is in controversy between us concerning this union
and subordination.

2. First therefore I agree with Card. Bellarmine in this, that the civil or
temporal power of it own nature, and being considered precisely by it self,
is a distinct power from the spiritual, and no way subject or subordained to
it (as in my Apology Number. 132. and seq. and nu. 150. 153. 154.
I affirmed out of Card. Bellarmine) but they are two several, distinct, and
disunited powers, and not depending one of the other, and have distinct ends,
distinct functions, distinct laws, distinct punishments, distinct, Magistrates
and Princes. And this is very apparent partly in infidel Countries, where
there is true civil or temporal power (says Card. Bellarmine Lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. c. 6.
) without any order or reference to any true Ecclesiastical or spirit all
power: and partly in the time of the Apostles, who had true and perfect
spiritual power without (...) true supreme temporal or civil authority. And
from hence it follows, that as the supreme spiritual Prince, or Pastor is
subject to none in spiritual ^o also the supreme temporal Prince is subject
to none in temporalls.

3. Secondly, we do also agree in this, that although among Christians the
temporal, and spiritual power do still remain two distinct supreme powers,
for that the Mediator betwixt God and men Christ Jesus has also by proper
actions, and distinct dignities distinguished either power, as Pope Nicholas
the first does well affirm In epst. ad Micha^lem Imp. Cum ad verum did. 96.
, yet they are so united, and conjoined together among Christians, that
temporal authority and spiritual authority, temporal authority, and
spiritual subjection, temporal subjection and spiritual subjection (to omit
spiritual authority and temporal subjection) may be united and conioined, at
one or diverse times, in one and the self same Christian man: by reason of
which union and conjunction the same Christian man may be both a temporal, and
also a spiritual Prince, as we see in the Pope, who by the institution of
Christ is the supreme spiritual Pastor of the Church, and by the consent of
Christian Princes and people is become also a temporal Prince: the same
Christian man may be both a temporal Prince, and also a spiritual subject, as
are all Christian Princes, who, as Princes, are supreme in temporalls, and as
Christians, are subject in spirituals to the spiritual Pastor of Christ's
Church; the same Christian man may be both a temporal, and also a spiritual
subject, as are other Christians whatsoever; and whether the same man may be a
spiritual Prince, and yet a temporal subject, depends on that question,
whether and in what manner our Savior Christ has exempted Clergy men, and
especially the Pope from subjection to temporal Princes. But the question
betwixt me, and Card. Bellarmine is, whether this manner of union and
conjunction of these two powers, or subiections in the same Christian man, be
sufficient to make the whole Christian world to be formally one complete and
total body, or common wealth, consisting of spiritual and temporal power,
whereof the Pope is the supreme visible head, or else, notwithstanding the
aforesaid union and conjunction, the temporal and spiritual common wealth
among Christians do still remain formally two total and complete bodies or
common wealths, the one consisting only of spiritual, and the other only of
temporal power, although materially, and accidentally united in one subject,
in that manner as I have now declared.

4. Thirdly, I do also make no question, but that, as the world containing
both Christians and infidels, and therefore consisting of spiritual and
temporal power, may be called one complete, and total body or kingdom,
whereof God only is the chief head and King, although in the same total body
or kingdom, but not of the same total body or Kingdom, there be many supreme
visible heads and Governors, and consequently being supreme, they do not
depend one of the other, in so much that neither the temporal power of
Infidel Princes is subject to the spiritual power of the Pope, nor the
spiritual power of the Pope is subject to the temporal power of Infidel
Princes, but both of them are subject immediately to God alone the invisible
head and King of them both, in regard of whom they make one total body or
kingdom, although the temporal power alone being compared to the uisible
heads on earth, does actually make diverse total and complete earthly
kingdoms: So also I make no question, but that the whole Christian world,
consisting of temporal and spiritual power, being compared to Christ the
invisible head thereof, who, at least wise as he is God, is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords both temporal and spiritual, does make one total body,
Kingdom, or Commonwealth, containing in it both the earthly kingdoms of
Christians, and the spiritual kingdom of Christ; neither of this can there in
my judgment be made any question.

5 But the question betwixt me and Card: Bellarmine is, whether the temporal
and spiritual power among Christians, or the Christian world consisting of
both powers, not as they are referred to Christ, who, at least wise as he is
God, is the invisible head of both powers (I say at least wise as he is God,
for that it is a controversy betwixt the Divines and Canonists, whether Christ
as man be only a spiritual, or also a temporal King) but as they have
relation to their visible heads here on earth, do make one total and complete
body, or commonwealth, consisting of temporal and spiritual power, whereof
the Pope is the supreme visible head, and Christian Kings are not supreme, but
depending on him not only in spiritualls, but also in temporalls; or whether
the temporal and spiritual power among Christians do truly, properly, and
formally make two entire and complete bodies, Kingdoms, or Commonwealths, to
wit, the earthly kingdoms of this Christian world, consisting only of temporal
power, whereof temporal Princes are the supreme visible heads, and therefore
in temporalls subject to no other visible head here on earth, and the
spiritual kingdom and mystical body of Christ, consisting only of spiritual
power, whereof the Pope only is the supreme visible head, Prince, and Pastor,
and consequently in spiritualls subject to no other visible head or Superior
on earth. This is the true state of the question.

6 Concerning which question there is a great controversy betwixt the
Canonists, and Divines. For the Canonists supposing Christ our Savior to be,
not only a spiritual, but also a temporal King, and to have directly and
properly both temporal and spiritual power, over the whole world, and that
he gave this power to his General Vicar here on earth S. Peter and his
Successors, do consequently affirm, that the whole world, but especially
which is Christian, consisting of spiritual and temporal power does make one
entire or total body, whereof the Pope, being by the institution of Christ not
only a spiritual, but also a temporal Monarch, is the supreme visible head,
to whom all Princes, especially who are Christians, are subject not only in
spiritualls, but also in temporalls. But contrariwise the Divines, who do
hold, that Christ as man, was not a temporal, but only a spiritual King, and
although he had directly both temporal and spiritual power, yet that he gave
to S. Peter and his Successors only the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
not of earthly kingdoms, and only spiritual not temporal authority, are
consequently bound to maintain that the temporal and spiritual power, as
they are referred to the visible heads here on earth, do not truly, properly,
and formally make one total and entire body, or kingdom, whereof the Pope is
the supreme visible head, but two total and entire bodies or kingdoms but
united in subject, as I declared before, to wit, earthly kingdoms, consisting
only of temporal authority, whereof temporal Princes only are the supreme
visible heads, and the spiritual kingdom, the mystical body, or the Church
of Christ, consisting only of spiritual power, whereof the Pope is the supreme
visible head, Prince, and Pastor.

7 Now what is the opinion of Card: Bellarmine touching this point, for that he
speaks so contrary to his own principles, truly I can not tell. For
although he adhereth to the Divines, and impugneth the Canonists, in that they
hold the Pope to be not only a spiritual, but also a temporal Monarch of the
world, and to have directly power in temporalls, yet contrary to this his
doctrine, as you shall see in the next chapter, he does in express words,
whatsoever his meaning is, affirm, that the temporal and spiritual power do
make one total and entire body, Family, City, Kingdom, or Commonwealth,
whereof the Pope is the supreme visible head: yea he is so confident in this
his assertion, that he fears not to auerre, in his Schulckenius cap. 5. page
195.
that it is against the Catholic faith to say, that the Ecclesiastical and
civil power are not parts of one and the same Commonwealth, but that they
make altogether two commonwealths, unless this distinction and explication be
added, to wit, that the Ecclesiastical and civil power do make one total
commonwealth (which Cap. 7. p. 287. and page 340.
afterward he calls, the family, city, Kingdom, mystical body, and
Church of Christ) and two partial, which are indeed distinct by acts, offices,
dignities, and ends, but connected between themselves, and one subordained to
the other. But how weakly and contrary to his own principles Card:
Bellarmine proves this union and subordination of the temporal and spiritual
power, you shall forthwith perceive.

Chap. 2.
Wherein the argument of Card. Bellarmine taken from the authority of S. Paul
Romans 12. we being many are one body in Christ, is examined.

1. ANd to begin first with the union; Card. Bellarmine brings two arguments
to prove, that the civil and spiritual power do make one body or
commonwealth among Christians. The first is taken from the authority of S.
Paul Rom: 12. and 1 Cor: 12. where he affirms, that we being many are one
body in Christ: from whence Card: Bellarmine concludes, Lib. 5. de Romans Pont:
cap. 7.
that Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes do not make two commonwealths,
but one, to wit, the Church.

2 To this argument I answered in my Number: 83. 89. 165.
Apology, that the meaning of S. Paul in those places is, that all Christians,
both Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes, as they are by Baptism regenerate
in Christ, do truly, properly, and formally make one body, one house, one
city, one community or commonwealth, to wit, the spiritual kingdom, the
mystical body, or the Church of Christ, which Card. Bellarmine defines Lib.
3. de Ecclesia cap 2.
to be, a company of men united together by the profession of the same
Christian faith and Communion of the same Sacraments under the government of
lawful Pastors, and especially of one Roman Bishop Christ his Vicar in
earth. But S. Paul does not say, that the temporal and spiritual power do
make one only body, community or commonwealth, and not also two, or that
Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes, not considered as Christians or
regenerate in Christ by baptism, but as by their natural birth or civil
conversation they are subject to temporal Princes, which subjection Baptism
does not take away, do not also truly, properly and formally make also
another politic body, another city, another community or commonwealth, to
wit, the earthly Kingdoms of the Christian world.

3. Wherefore it is not true, that Kings and Bishops, Clearkes and Laikes
considered diverse ways do not make diverse kingdoms or commonwealths, but
one only, as Card. Bellarmine concludes out of S. Paul? for as by Baptism
they are regenerate in Christ, and subject in spirituals to Christ his
vicegerent in earth, they make one body, or commonwealth, which is the
spiritual kingdom and Church of Christ, and this only does signify S. Paul
by those words, we being many are one body in Christ, but S. Paul does not
deny, that all Christians, as by their natural birth or civil conversation
they are subject to Secular Princes in temporal causes, which subjection
Baptism does not take away, do also truly, properly and formally make
another body or commonwealth, which are the earthly kingdoms of the Christian
world. Clergy men, says Card. Bellarmine himself, Lib. de Clericis cap. 28.
besides that they are Clergy men; are also citizens and certain parts of
the civil commonwealth, and again, Ibid. cap. 30.
if one, says he, consider the company of Laymen, not as they are Christians,
but as they are Citizens, or after any other manner, that company cannot be
called the Church, and consequently they must be another commonwealth, and
therefore the civil and Ecclesiastical power, or Clerks or Laikes, in whom
the Ecclesiastical and civil power do reside, being considered diverse
ways, do not truly, properly and formally make one only body, but two
distinct and several bodies or commonwealths, although materially and
accidentally united in that manner as I declared before, Cap. 1. nu. 3.
and presently will declare more at large.

4. And whereas Card. Bellarmine affirms, that although the temporal and
spiritual power do make two partial commonwealths, yet they do also make
one entire and total commonwealth, which is the Church of Christ, whereof the
Pope is the supreme visible head, and to affirm the contrary, is, says he,
against the Catholic faith, he does herein both speak contrary to his own
principles, and to that which he knows to be the Catholic faith, and he
must also of necessity fall into the Canonists opinion, which he before Lib.
5. de To. Pont. a cap. 2.
pretended to confute concerning the Popes spiritual and temporal Monarchy
over the whole Christian world. For if the Church of Christ be one total body
or commonwealth compounded of Ecclesiastical and civil power, as a man is
compounded of soul and body (for this is that similitude which so much
pleases Card. Bellarmine, and is therefore so often inculcated by him) it must
necessarily follow, that the Pope as Pope, in whom, according to his other
grounds, all the power of the Church does reside, must have truly, properly,
and formally both temporal and Ecclesiastical power, as a man who is
compounded of soul and body, has truly, properly and formally in him both
the soul and body, and all the powers and faculties of them both: And what
else is this, I pray you, then to maintain with the Canonists, that the Pope
as Pope is both a temporal and spiritual Monarch, and that he has truly,
properly and formally both civil and spiritual authority: And yet Card.
Bellarmine in other places does expressly affirm, that the Pope as Pope has
only spiritual and not temporal power.

5 The Divines, says he, In his book against D. Barclay ca. 12. page 137.
do give to the Pope temporal and spiritual power only in the Dominions of
the Church, which power in the patrimony of S. Peter Pope Innocent in cap. per
venerabilem does call a full power; over other Christian Provinces they do
give to the Pope only a spiritual power, which of it self and properly does
regard spiritual things, but temporal things it does regard as they are
subordained to spiritual. And therefore when we speak properly, we say that
the Pope has power in temporals, but not that he has temporal power, as he
is Pope. Now how these two can stand together, that the spiritual and
temporal power among Christians do make one entire and total body, whereof
the Pope is the supreme visible head, as the body and soul do make one man,
and yet that the Pope, as Pope, shall have no temporal power, which in it
self is temporal, but only spiritual, athough in some cases extended to
temporal things, seeing that these two powers do truly compose the Church of
Christ, and consequently both of them are truly and really in the Church which
they compound, and so likewise in the Pope, in whom all the power of the Church
does reside, I remit to the judgment of any sensible man.

5. Besides what a more flat contradiction can there be, then this, to say,
that the civil and spiritual power among Christians do compound indeed two
partial, but one entire and total commonwealth, which is the Church of
Christ, or Christian commonwealth, as he here affirms, In his Schulckenius
cap. 5. page 195.
and withal, that the Church of Christ or the Christian commonwealth is
compounded only of spiritual authority, as a little beneath he affirms in
these words: In his Schulckenius cap 5. p. 203.
That which my Adversary Widdrington says, that the mystical body, Church,
or Christian commonwealth is compounded of spiritual authority alone, is true
in this sense, that to compound the Christian commonwealth there is not
necessary a power, which is formally civil, but yet there is necessary a
power, which is so formally spiritual, that it is also vertually civil etc.
For how can the Church of Christ be compounded of civil and spiritual power,
which are formally two distinct powers, and yet the Church not have power which
is formally civil, but only spiritual? Nevertheless I do not intend to
deny, that the spiritual or Ecclesiastical power among Christians may in
this sense be called vertually civil or temporal, because it may for the
spiritual good command, and compel spiritually temporal Princes to use their
temporal power, for this were only to contend about words, but that the
Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is head, is truly, properly and formally
compounded of civil and spiritualll power, this I say is both untrue, and also
flat contrary to Card. Bellarmines own grounds; but whether the spiritual
power of the church may be called vertually civil or temporal, for that it may
also constrain and punish temporal Princes temporally, or use temporal and
civil authority, in case the temporal Prince for the spiritual good will
not use it, this is the maine question betwixt me and Card. Bellarmine.

7. To conclude therefore, this answer I do freely grant: that Kings and
Bishops, Clearks and Laics, as by baptism they are regenerate in Christ, do
truly, properly, and formally, make one entire and total body, which is the
spiritual kingdom, and Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is the supreme
visible head: but I utterly deny, that this spiritual kingdom, or Church of
Christ is compounded of spiritual and temporal, but only of spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical power: or that Clearks and Laics, as they are citizens, or by
their natural birth are subject in temporal affairs to temporal Princes do
compound this Church of Christ, but only the earthly kingdoms of the
Christian world, which are only compounded of civil and temporal authority.
In which Christian world, or Christian commonwealth, (taking them for an
aggregatum per accidens, including both the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
whereof the Pope is head, and also earthly kingdoms, whereof Christian Princes
are the only visible heads, for the Church of Christ is seldom times taken in
this sense) there is but one total or entire Catholic Church: yet there be
many entire temporal kingdoms or commonwealths, as of English, French,
Spanish, which have their several Princes, Laws, and governments, and have no
other communion then in friendship and amity: Yea, and the Catholic Church is
one total body, or commonwealth in Christian and Infidel kingdoms. And also
in one particular Christian kingdom there be two distinct total bodies, or
commonwealths, to wit, the temporal, consisting of civil power, and the
Ecclesiastical, consisting of spiritual: wherein as there be two distinct
communions, the one spiritual in things belonging to grace, and the other
temporal in things belonging to nature. So also their be two excommunications,
the one in spirituals; wherein those that be excommunicated by the Church, do
not participate, and the other in temporalls; whereof those, who be
excommunicated, or made out-lawes by temporal Princes, are not partakers; in
so much that they, who are deprived of one of these communions, are not thereby
deprived of the other, for an outlaw may be a member of the Church, and be
partaker of spiritual communion: and he, who by Excommunication is deprived of
Ecclesiastical communion, may be a member of the civil commonwealth, as
Heathens and Publicans were, and not therefore to be excluded from civil
society and conversation.

8. Wherefore although the temporal and spiritual power among Christians, as
they are referred to the visible heads thereof, do truly, properly, and
formally make diverse total bodies, or commonwealths, which nevertheless
ought both to conspire in league and friendship, to bring both Princes and
subjects to life everlasting: yet they are not like to two confederate Cities
or Kingdoms, which are only united in league and amity, and have no civil
communion one with the other, neither is the same man a citizen of both Cities,
or a subject of both Kingdoms; but the temporal and spiritual power are so
united among Christians, that the same man, who by civil conversation, or
natural birth is a citizen, part, and member of the temporal City, Kingdom,
or Commonwealth, and consequently subject to her Laws, is also by baptism or
spiritual regeneration made a citizen, part, or member of the spiritual
City, Kingdom, or Commonwealth, which is the Church of Christ, and
consequently is also subject to her Laws. So that although the union, and
communion of earthly Kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom of Christ be
greater among Christians, then of two confederate Cities or temporal
kingdoms, yet this union and communion being only material, accidental, and
in subject (as Music and Physic are united in one man, by reason whereof
the same man is both a Musician and a Physician, and consequently subject to
the precepts and directions of either art) is not sufficient to cause them to
make truly properly, and formally one total body, kingdom, or commonwealth,
whereof the Pope is head: as neither the union of two accidents in one subject
is sufficient to cause them to make truly, properly, and formally, one entire
and total accidental co^pound. Nevertheless I do not deny, as I observed
before but that the temporal and spiritual power, earthly kingdoms, and the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, as they are referred to Christ: who, at leastwise
as God, is the head of them both, do make one total body, whereof Christ
only is the head, which may be called the Christian world, consisting of
civil and spiritual power: but in this manner neither the Pope nor temporal
Princes are the head, but only parts and members of this total body, as
beneath Cap. 1. nu. 4.
I will declare more at large.

Chap. 3.
Wherein the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzen, comparing the temporal and
spiritual power to the body and soul in man, is declared.

1. THe second argument, which Card. Bellarmine brings to prove, that the
civil and spiritual power among Christians do make one total body, or
commonwealth, is taken from the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzene, who
compares the spiritual and temporal power among Christians to the soul and
body of man. From which similitude Card. Bellarmine argues in this manner Lib.
5. de Romans Pont. c. 6.
. These two powers in the Church, says he, are like to the spirit and body in
a man. For the body and the spirit are as it were two commonwealths, which may
be found divided and united. The body is found without the spirit in beasts,
the spirit is found without the body in Angels, the body and spirit are both
united in man, and do make one person. So likewise, the civil and spiritual
power are sometimes found divided, as long since in the Apostles time, sometimes
united as now, and when they are united they make one body, or common wealth.

2. To this argument I answered in my Apology number. 139. 140.
, that from the words of S. Gregory Nazianzene only these two things can be
gathered. The first, that the spiritual power is more worthy, and more noble
then the temporal, and that therefore the temporal must in worthiness yield
and give place to the spiritual. The second is, that Christian Princes,
although in temporalls, and in things belonging to civil government they are
supreme on earth, and therefore subject to none, yet in that they are
Christians, they are subject in spirituals, and in things belonging to
Christian Religion to the command of spiritual Pastors of the flock of
Christ. For these be the express words, which he used to the Christian
President: For the law of Christ does make you also subject to my power and
authority, for we also have authority to command, I add also, a more noble,
and more perfect, unless it be meet, that the spirit do submit her power to
the flesh, and heavenly things do give place to earthly. From which words this
only can be inferred, that the spiritual power is more noble, then the
temporal, and that all Christian Princes and Magistrates, as they are the
sheep of Christ, are in spiritual things subject to the spiritual Pastors
of the Church, which all Catholics will freely grant. But that the temporal
and spiritual power among Christians, as they are referred to the supreme
visible heads here on earth, do make one total body or common wealth, as the
soul and body do make one man, or that the temporal power among Christians,
as it is temporal (for this much does signify the temporal and spiritual
power taking them in abstracto) or which is all one, that temporal Princes are
in mere temporal causes subject to spiritual Pastors, cannot with any show
of probability be gathered out of those words of S. Gregory Nazianzene.

3. Wherefore the union of the temporal and spiritual power among Christians
is nothing like to the union of the body and soul in man, for that the body is
a substantial matter, and the soul a substantial form, and therefore being
united they make one substantial compound, which is called man; who therefore
has in him actually, properly, and formally both body and soul, as every
compound has in him the parts, whereof it is compounded, but the civil and
spiritual power are not among Christians united, as two parts, compounding
really and actually one total body, which is the Church of Christ, whereof the
Pope is head, for that, according to Card. Bellarmines own doctrine, the
Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is head, is compounded only of spiritual
power, and not of civil power, as civil is distinguished from spiritual, but
civil and spiritual power, civil power and spiritual subjection, civil
subjection and spiritual subjection, (to omit now spiritual power and civil
subjection) are only united among Christians, as two accidents, for example,
Music and Phisike, are united in one man, which union, being only accidental,
and in subject, is not sufficient to cause the temporal and spiritual power
to make truly, properly and formally one body, whereof the Pope is bead, but
only to make the same man, either to have in him both temporal and spiritual
power, or temporal power, and spiritual subjection, or both temporal
subjection and spiritual subjection, (to omit now spiritual power and
temporal subjection) and consequently, the same man to be guided, directed,
and governed in temporal things by the laws, precepts and directions of the
temporal power, and in spiritual things by the laws, precepts, and
directions of the spiritual power: As the union of Music and Phisike in one
man, although it be only material, accidental, and in subject, yet it makes
the same man to be both a Musician, and a Physician, and as he is a Musician,
to be guided and directed by the laws and precepts of Music, and as a
Physician by the rules and precepts of phisike, but it does not make Music to
be guided and directed by Physike, or a Musicion, as he is a Musician, to be
guided and directed by a Physician, as he is a Physician: So likewise the
aforesaid union of temporal and spiritual power, of temporal power and
spiritual subjection etc. in one man, does not make the temporal power to be
subject to the spiritual, or a temporal Prince, as he is a temporal Prince,
or which is all one, in temporal causes, to be guided, directed, and governed
by the spiritual power, as it is spiritual: But of this similitude of the
soul and body we shall have occasion to treat again beneath Cap. 8.
.

4. Pardon me, good Reader, that sometimes I repeat the same things somewhat
often; it is not to make my book the bigger, and to fill it up with idle
repetitions of the same things, as my Adversaries, to disgrace me, are pleased
to lay to my charge, not considering that they themselves do often times commit
the like, but it is only to clear thy understanding, and to make thee
thoroughly comprehend the difficulty, and in what manner the temporal and
spiritual power are united and subordained among Christians, considering that
my Adversaries, to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, to dispose of all
temporalls, and to punish temporally by way of constraint, do so often
inculcate this union and subordination, as a principal ground, whereon the
Popes power in temporalls does depend. And thus you have seen, how weakly
Card. Bellarmine, and disagreeably to his own principles, has labored to
prove, that the temporal and spiritual power among Christians do make one
total body, or common wealth, whereof the Pope is head: now you shall see, how
weakly also, and not conformably to his own doctrine, he endeavors to
prove, that the temporal power among Christians is subject and subordained to
the spiritual.

Chap. 4.
Wherein the true state of the question, concerning the subjection and
subordination of the temporal power among Christians to the spiritual is
propounded, and the different opinions of Catholics touching this point are
rehearsed.

1. FIrst therefore, that you may perceive the true state of the question, and
wherein I do agree with Card: Bellarmine, and wherein we differ, I do agree
with him in this, that Christian Princes, in whom the supreme temporal power
does reside, being the sheep of Christ, no less then inferior persons, are
subject to the supreme visible Pastor of the Church of Christ: but the
question is, in what things, and also in what manner they are subject.
Secondly, we also agree in this, that Christian Princes are in spiritual
things, or which do belong to Christian faith and Religion, subject not only
to the directive, or commanding power, but also in spiritual punishments to
the coerciue or punishing power of spiritual Pastors, in such sort, that
Christian Princes are not only bound to obey the command of their spiritual
Pastors, in things which do concern Christian faith and religion, but also,
if they be disobedient, they may with spiritual punishments he punished and
compelled thereunto. Thirdly, we do also agree in this, that Christian Princes
are bound to obey the commanding power of spiritual Pastors, not only in
those things, which of their own nature are Ecclesiastical or spiritual, but
also in things temporal, when by accident they become spiritual; in so much
that a spiritual Pastor has authority to command a temporal Prince to use
or not use his temporal power, when it is necessary or hurtful to Catholic
faith and religion, but this is nothing else, then that temporal Princes in
things spiritual (for whether they be per se, and of their own nature, or
only by accident spiritual, it little imports) are subject to the
commanding power of spiritual Pastors, as likewise all temporal causes and
crimes, whether of their own nature, or only by accident they become
temporal, are subject to the commanding and coerciue power of temporal
Princes.

2 But the controversy betwixt me and Card: Bellarmine is concerning two
things; the first is, concerning the commanding power, to wit, whether
temporal Princes are subject to the commanding power of spiritual Pastors,
not only in things spiritual, and in temporal, when they become spiritual,
but also in mere temporal things; for this is properly temporal power
(taking temporal power in abstracto) to be subject to the spiritual For as a
Musician can not truly be said to be subject, as he is a Musician, and in all
things belonging to Music, to a Physician as he is a Physician, for that
Music is not per se, and of it own nature referred to Physic, and if
Music were per se, and of it own nature subject to Physic, a Musician, as
he is a Musician, and in all things belonging to Music, should be subject to
a Physician, as he is a Physician: for which cause a Shipwright, as he is a
Shipwright, has intrinsecall reference to a Nauigator, for that the Art of
making ships is per se, and of it own nature ordained for navigations; So also
if the temporal power among Christians be per se, and of it own nature
subject to the spiritual power, it must follow, that temporal Princes, who
are Christians, are, as they are temporal Princes, and in all things belonging
to temporal power, subject to spiritual Pastors, as they are spiritual
Pastors: And if temporal Princes, who be Christians, are not subject, as they
are temporal Princes, to spiritual Pastors, as they are spiritual Pastors,
the temporal power among Christians is not per se, and of it own nature
subject to the spiritual power.

3 The second thing, which is in controversy betwixt me, and Card. Bellarmine,
is concerning the coerciue power of spiritual Pastors, to wit, whether
temporal Princes are subject to the coerciue power of spiritual Pastors in
such sort, that spiritual Pastors, (especially the Pope, who is the supreme
Pastor of all Christians) have by the institution of Christ authority, to
deprive temporal Princes of their Kingdoms, to dispose of all their
temporalls, and to punish them temporally, or with all kind of temporal
punishments, in case they will not obey their just command. And this is the
maine point, and principal scope, at which both the Canonists, who hold that
the Pope has directly power in temporals in habit, although the use they have
committed to temporal Princes, and also the Divines, who hold that he has
only indirectly, that is, in order to spiritual good, power in temporalls,
do chiefly aim. Now concerning these two points, there be three different
opinions of Catholics.

4 The first opinion is of the Canonists, who holding, that the Church of
Christ, whereof the Pope is the supreme visible head, does consist both of
temporal and spiritual power, do consequently hold, that all Christian
Princes, not only as they are Christians, but also as they are temporal
Princes, are in all temporal causes subject to the commanding power, and in
all temporal punishments subject also to the coerciue power of the Pope, whom
they make the supreme, both temporal and spiritual Monarch of the world, and
to have directly both temporal and spiritual power, although the use,
exercise, and execution of his temporal power, he has out of the territories
of the Church, committed to Secular Princes, as to his Vice-Royes, Vicegerents,
or Deputies: and this doctrine some Lawyers held to be so certain, that they
were not afraid to condemn the contrary as heretical, for which they are
worthily taxed by Coverruvias In Regula, peccatu^. 2. part. Relect.. 9. number. 7.
of great temeritie; But with this opinion, for that it is commonly rejected by
all Divines, and confuted also by Card: Bellarmine himself Lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. a cap. 2.
, I will not at this time intermeddle.

5 The second opinion is of many Schoole-Diuines especially of these later
times, who although they seem greatly to mislike the Canonists opinion, in
that the Canonists hold the Pope, as Pope, to have directly, not only
spiritual, but also temporal power, and to be both a temporal Monarch, and
also a spiritual Prince and Pastor of the whole Christian world, yet in
effect they do give as full and ample authority to the Pope over Christian
Princes, as the Canonists do; for whatsoever the Canonists affirm, that the
Pope can directly effect by his temporal power, the same do the Divines
affirm, that he can effect indirectly, and in order to spiritual good by his
spiritual power: And therefore, although they will not grant, that the Pope
has formally temporal power, but only spiritual, yet they grant, that this
spiritual power of the Pope is virtually, and in effect temporal; and that
therefore the Pope by his spiritual power can in order to spiritual good
deprive temporal Princes of their kingdoms, dispose of all their temporalls,
punish them with all kind of temporal punishments, and finally whatsoever
temporal Princes can by their temporal power do for the temporal good, they
affirm that the Pope by his spiritual power can do for the spiritual good.
Yea some of them do so extend this spiritual good and spiritual harm,
taking spiritual harm, not only for spiritual crimes, as heresy, Apostacy,
and such like, but also for all temporal crimes, as are drunkenness,
fornication, and the like, that they give a more ample power to the Pope, to
deprive Princes of their kingdoms, then by temporal laws is usually granted
to temporal Princes to deprive their subjects of their lands, who for
whoredom, drunkenness, and many other temporal crimes, can not usually by
the laws of any Christian kingdom be deprived of their lands and possessions.

6. The third opinion is of many other learned Catholics both Divines and
Lawyers whom I cited before, Part. 1. per totum.
who although they agree with the second opinion in this, that the Pope has
power to command temporal Princes in spirituals, but not in mere temporals,
and to punish them with spiritual punishments, when they refuse to obey his
just command, yet that the Pope has any coerciue power (call it spiritual or
temporal, for in effect it is truly temporal) to inflict temporal
punishments, to dispose of temporals for the spiritual good, or to deprive
temporal Princes of their temporal dominions, they utterly deny, affirming,
that only Excommunication, or some such like spiritual punishment, is the
last, to which the Popes coerciue power can extend: And this their doctrine,
which Card. Bellarmine, and some few others of his Society, have presumed to
condeme as altogether improbable, yea and wholly repugnant to Catholic faith,
I have taken upon me to maintain, as neither repugnant to Catholic faith or
religion, nor prejudicial to eternal salvation, and that therefore it may be
defended by any Catholic without any note of heresy, error or temerity.

7. These be the different opinions of Catholics concerning the subjection of
the temporal power to the spiritual, whereby you see, that although all
Catholics do grant, that temporal Princes, who are sometimes called temporal
powers, are subject to the spiritual Pastor in things spiritual, and in
temporal when they become spiritual, yet all do not grant, that the
temporal power it self, even among Christians, is per se, and of it own
nature subject to the spiritual, nor that the Pope, as Pope, has any coerciue
power to constrain and punish with temporal punishments, but only with
spiritual; Neither does it follow, that because Christian Princes are subject
to the Pope, therefore they are subject in all things, and in all manner of
subjection, but only in that sort, as Christ has given him power both to
command and punish: As children are subject to their Parents, servants to their
Masters, wives to their husbands, yet they are not bound to obey them, but in
those things, wherein they have power to command, nor to be punished by them,
but in that sort, as the temporal commonwealth, whereof they are members,
has expressly or covertly given them leave to punish; and the reason is, for
that they are not Superiors in an absolute and indefinite, but only in a
limited and determinate manner.

8. Now what opinion Card. Bellarmine does follow, whether of the Divines, or
of the Canonists, truly I cannot as yet well understand. For although he seem
to disallow the Canonists doctrine, which at large he confuteth in his
controversies, yet to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, and to dispose
of temporals in order to spiritual good, he lays such grounds, concerning
the union and subordination of the temporal and spiritual power among
Christians, which do clearly confirm the Canonists doctrine. For concerning
the union of these two powers, he affirms, as you have seen, that the
temporal and spiritual power, the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdoms of
this world, when they are Christian, do make one total body, which is the
Christian commonwealth and Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is head; from
whence it necessarily follows, that the Pope, in whom all the power of the
Church does reside, must have truly, properly and formally both civil and
spiritual power, which is the Canonists opinion, and not only spiritual
power, which is not formally, but only vertually civil, which the Divines,
and also Card. Bellarmine in places do affirm. And now concerning the
subjection and subordination of these two powers, he affirms, that the
temporal power among Christians, not only as it is Christian, but also as it
is temporal, is subject to the Ecclesiastical, as it is Ecclesiastical, or
which is all one, that the temporal power it self among Christians is per se,
and of it own nature subject to the spiritual: from whence it clearly
follows as before I showed by the examples of Music and Physike, Christian
Princes not only in spirituals and in temporals, when they become spirituals,
which is in order to spiritual good, but also in mere temporal causes, are
subject to spiritual Pastors, which is the Canonists opinion, and which Card.
Bellarmine in other places does disprooue.

9. But how unsoundly Card. Bellarmine, and not conformably to his own grounds
laboreth to prove, that the temporal power it self among Christians, as it is
temporal, is subject to the spiritual, as it is spiritual, you shall anon
perceive. For six principal arguments I do find in Card. Bellarmine, by
which he endeavors to convince, that the temporal power it self among
Christians, as it is temporal, is subject and subordained to the spiritual,
as it is spiritual, or, which I take for all one, that the temporal power
among Christians is per se, and of it own nature, supposing the institution of
Christ, subject and subordained to the spiritual; which arguments of Card.
Bellarmine I think it fit to examine in this place, together with the Replies,
which he either in his book against D. Barclay, or in his Schulckenius against
me has brought to confirm the same, that thereby the Reader may fully
understand, in what manner the temporal power is subject to the spiritual,
and how strong or weak a proof is the subjection or subordination of these
two powers, which is by Mr. Fitzherbert supposed to be so inuinsible a ground,
to conclude from thence, that the Pope, as Pope, has power, in order to
spiritual good, to dispose of all temporalls, to depose temporal Princes, and
to punish by way of coercion with all kind of temporal punishments.

Chap. 5.
Wherein is examined Card. Bellarmines first argument taken from the ends of
the temporal and spiritual power.

1. THe first argument, which Card. Bellarmine affirms Lib. 5. de Rom Pont.
c. 7.
to demonstrate, that the temporal power among Christians, not only as it is
Christian, but also as it is civil, or temporal, is subject to the
Ecclesiastical, as it is Ecclesiastical, is taken from the ends of both the
powers. For a temporal end, says he, is subordained to a spiritual end, as
it is manifest, because temporal felicity is not absolutely the last end, and
therefore it ought to be referred to eternal felicity: but it is apparent
out of Aristotle, 1 Ethic. cap. 1. that faculties, or powers are so
subordained, as their ends are subordained.

2. To this argument I answered in my Apology Number. 162. and seq.
, that not every temporal end is per se, and of it own nature ordained, or
subordained to a spiritual end (speaking of create ends, and not of God
almighty, who is the beginning and end of all things) but it is only by
accident, or accidentally by man, who works for an end, ordained to a
spiritual end. And therefore although temporal good, or felicity be not
absolutely the last end of man, yet it is the last end of the temporal power
it self, which is in man. For every power, as it is a power, has for her last
end, her act or work, as every science has of it own nature for her last end
the knowledge of her object, and every art the effecting of her work, (as the
last end of natural philosophy is to know the secrets of nature, and of
Phisike to cure and preserve the body from diseases) although man himself, in
whom that power, art, or science does reside, does intend a farther end.
Whereupon S. Austin does well affirm, that the will to see has no other end
then seeing: The will, says he, Lib. 11. de Trin. cap. 6.
to see has seeing for her end, and the will to see this thing has for her
end the seeing of this thing: The will therefore to see a skarre does desire
her end, that is, the seeing of a skarre, and no further does appertain to
her. Wherefore, as the Philosophers do distinguish betwixt the last end of any
art or work, and the last end of the artificer, or worker, so we also ought to
distinguish betwixt the last end of the power it self, and of him, in whom the
power does reside. It is called the last end of the work, for that the work
is in that lastly ended, and not the last end of the worker, for that the
worker does not refer all that is his to that end, as a thing to be desired
and loved above all things.

3. I grant therefore that the end of a Christian Prince, who has temporal
power, is spiritual and eternal felicity, to which Christians ought to refer
all their actions, and the use not only of the Ecclesiastical, but also of the
civil power, but withal I affirm, that the last end, which the civil power
has per se, and of it own nature, is only temporal peace and quietness, in
the getting and conseruing whereof of it own nature it does lastly rest. And
therefore for this reason it is not necessary, that the civil power it self
be per se, and of it own nature subordained to the Ecclesiastical, but only
accidentally and by the intention of him, who refers temporal peace to
eternal felicity in that manner as I have declared. To that assertion of
Aristotle, powers are so subordained as their ends are subordained (although in
that place he rather says, that ^^ds are subordained, as powers are
subordained) I answered, that it is to be understood of those ends, which
powers have of their own nature, and not of the ends of the men, in whom the
powers do reside. Thus I answered in my Apology.

4. Now you shall see how insufficiently Card. Bellarmine in his Schulckenius
replyeth to this answer. I answer says he, Page 329. ad number. 162.
that not every temporal or corporal end is subordained per se, and of it
own nature to a spiritual end, my Adversary Widdrington does say, but he
does not prove. But first, who knows not, that it does not appertain to the
Answerer to prove, for to this the opponent only is tied, and for the Answearer
it suffices by granting, denying, or distinguishing for him to answer.

5. Secondly, I did not conceive, that this assertion, being so clear and
manifest of it self, needed any proof at all, and therefore I little thought,
that any learned man would ever deny the same: for that, according to the
known principles of Philosophy and Divinity, no natural thing can
intrinsically, and of it own nature be referred to a thing, which is
supernatural and above the course of nature; and therefore betwixt natural
and supernatural things, there can be no natural subordination. Now that
temporal peace in a temporal commonwealth is a natural thing, and eternal
felicity, which consists in the clear vision and fruition of almighty God,
is supernatural, and goes beyond the bounds, limits, and order of nature, no
man can make any doubt; and therefore temporal peace cannot of it own nature
be referred to eternal felicity; but only by the will and intention of man,
who by the help of supernatural light and grace does refer it, direct it,
and eleuate it to that supernatural end.

6. And for this cause also it is very clear, that temporal power cannot of
it own nature be referred to true spiritual and Ecclesiastical power, for
that it is supernatural, and given only by God, as he is the Author, not of
nature, but of supernatural grace. Yea out of Card. Bellarmines own grounds
it may be clearly convinced, that the temporal power among Christians is not
of it own nature subject, and subordained to the spiritual power, and
consequently, that temporal peace, which is the end of temporal power, is not
of it own nature referred or ordained to eternal felicity, which is the last
create end of the spiritual power, for that according to Aristotle Lib. 1.
Ethic. cap. 1.
, ends are so subordained, as their powers are subordained. His first ground
is, for that in his Controversies he affirms Lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 6.
, that in Infidels there is true civil power without any order, or relation to
any true spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, and consequently in Infidels the
civil power is not subject or subordained to the spiritual, for where there
is no order, or relation, there can be no subjection, or subordination, for
that subjection and subordidation does necessarily imply an order, relation, or
reference to that, to which any thing is subordained.

7. Seeing therefore that Christian Religion does not take away true civil
power, as Card. Bellarmine himself also in another place affirms Lib. 2. de
Romans Pont. cap. 29.
, neither is the true nature, or any intrinsecall property of the civil power
changed or altered, for that it is in a Christian, or an Infidel, in this
subject, or in that, it necessarily follows, that if true civil power be
not of it own nature subject, or subordained in Infidels to true spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical power, it is not also in Christians per se, and of it own nature
subject or subordained to true spiritual or Ecclesiastical power. This only
alteration has civil power for being in this subject, or in that, in
Infidels, or in Christians, that Christians ought, according to the true
grounds of Christian Religion, refer it by the aid of true supernatural
faith to a true supernatural end, to which Infidels, who want true
supernatural faith, cannot refer it: but this alteration is extrinsecall or
accidental, not intrinsecall or essential, neither does it proceed from the
nature of the civil power it self, but from the will and intention of him, in
whom true civil power does reside. As likewise the nature or intrinsecall
properties of other accidents, as of Music, Physic, and such like, are not
altered, or changed by the changing or altering of their subjects, and for that
they are in Christians, or in Infidels, although a Christian Musician will
refer and ordain his Music to the true worship of God, and an Infidel to the
honor of his Idol.

8. The second ground, which Card. Bellarmine lays to prove, that the
temporal power among Christians is not per se, and of it own nature subject
to the spiritual power, is, for that in his Schulckenius he affirms Page
276. ad nu. 140.
, That among the Heathen Romans, the civil power was subject to the spiritual
power of a false religion: and a little beneath, if the civil power, says he,
be joined with a false Ecclesiastical power, that is of a false Religion, as
it was in the Heathen Roman Commonwealth, then it is actually subordained to
a false Ecclesiastical power, and if it be joined with a true Ecclesiastical
power, as in the Christian and Catholic Church, then it is actually
subordained to a true Ecclesiastical power. Now what Philosopher, or Divine
will affirm that a true civil power is per se, and of it own nature actually
ordained, subordained, or referred to a false Ecclesiastical power, that is of
a false Religion, or to the worshipping of false Gods. Therefore this
subjection, subordination, or relation of true civil power to the spiritual,
proceeds from the intention of him, in whom the civil power does reside, who
according to his faith and religion (be it true or false) refers his true
civil power to a true or false Religion, to a true or false worshipping of
God, and not from the nature, or any intrinsecal property of the true civil
power it self which, as it is the same in Infidels and Christians, or in
whatsoever subject it be so also of it own nature has the same end as well in
Infidels as in Christians, to wit, temporal peace, to which of it own nature
it is always referred. And therefore I do not only say: but also I do
clearly prove, and that out of Card. Bellarmines own grounds, to which
nevertheless I being only an answerer, and not an opponent, was not tied, that
neither the civil power, being only a natural power, nor the end of civil
power, which is temporal peace, being only a natural end, is per se, and of
it own nature subject, or subordained to a true supernatural power or end,
but only by the intension of him, in whom the civil power does reside.

9. Now you shall see how well D. Schulckenius proves the contrary. But we
prove the contrary, says he, Page 329. ad nu. 162.
because the end of the spiritual commonwealth is everlasting salvation,
which is the last end; the end of the temporal commonwealth is the peace of
the City, or Kingdom, which is not the last end, but a mediate end. But all
ends are subordained per se, and of their own nature to the last end, and in
virtue of it they do move, as all efficient causes are subordained per se,
and of their own nature to the first efficient cause, and in virtue of it they
work whatsoever they do work. See S. Thomas 1^. 2^. q. 1. ar. 6.

10. But to this argument I answered before, that the last create end of the
spiritual commonwealth, which is a company of men united by Baptism, in
that manner as I declared before, is eternal salvation, to which they ought to
refer all their powers both temporal and spiritual, and all their actions
both in general and particular: but I denied, that the last end of the
temporal power it self, although it be conjoined in one and the self same
subject with true spiritual power, is eternal salvation, but only temporal
peace in the commonwealth, to which of it own nature it is only referred, as
to her last end, although by the intention of him, in whom true civil and
spiritual power does reside, it ought to be referred to eternal salvation,
as to the last end of a Christian man, but not as to the last end, which the
temporal power it self has per se, and of it own nature. Neither has D.
Schulckenius proved the contrary, but rather in his Reply to my answer he in
express words confirms what I have said. For in his answer to the
authority, which I brought out of S. Augustine, he affirms, That the last
end of one particular will, power, or science is their act or operation, and
therefore it cannot of it own nature be referred to eternal salvation, as to
the last end, unless D. Schulckenius will admit, that the same particular
power has of it own nature two last ends, or a later end then the last, which
implies a manifest contradiction; but it must only be referred extrinsecally
to eternal salvation by the intention of him, in whom the particular power
does reside.

11 True it is, That all create ends are subordained per se, and of their
nature to that end, which is simply and absolutely the last end, and do move
in virtue thereof, as all efficient causes are subordained per se, and of their
own nature to that, which is simply and absolutely the first efficient cause,
and in virtue thereof they do work whatsoever they do work: But this
efficient and final cause of all created things is not the eternal salvation
of men, but God a mighty, who is Alpha and Omega, principium and finis, the
beginning and end of all created things, both natural and supernatural, both
unreasonable and reasonable, of accidents and substances, of all powers and of
all things wherein powers do reside, and who is glorified not only by the
eternal salvation, but also by the eternal damnation of men. God alone is
simply and absolutely the last end of all created things, to whom all natural
things are of their own nature lastly referred, as to the first Author and
last end of nature, and supernatural things, as to the first Author and last
end of grace and glory: Neither can natural things of their own nature be
referred to any supernatural create end, as is eternal salvation, but only
by the will and intention of him: who by the help of supernatural grace shall
refer and eleuate them above their nature to a supernatural end. Neither
does S. Thomas in that place affirm the contrary, but rather most clearly
confirms, what I have said: for there he only disputes, how every man by his
will, intention, and desire, refers all good things, which he desires to
the last end.

12. Mark now, I beseech you, D. Schulckenius his second proof, which is no
whit better then the former. Moreover is not the body, says he Page 330.
, per se, or of it own nature for the soul? why then are not corporal
things, per se, or of their own nature for spiritual things? And whereas my
Adversary Widdrington seems to say, that every temporal end is per
accidens, or accidentally referred to a spiritual end: as by man, who works
for an end, it is ordained to a spiritual end, it is altogether false. For
oftentimes wicked men do ordain spiritual things to temporal, of whom the
Apostle says, whose God is their belly: and by this a temporal end is per se,
and of it own nature always ordained to a spiritual end, but by accident and
against nature by the wickedness of humane intention sometimes a spiritual
end is ordained to a temporal.

13. The reason why the body is per se, and of it own nature for the soul or
spirit, and yet the temporal power, or the end thereof, is not per se, and of
it own nature referred to the spiritual power, or the end thereof, I did
declare in my Apology Number: 140.
, which D. Schulckenius also did relate a little before, Page 275.
because the body and soul do compound one substantial thing consisting of
two essential parts, whereof the body is the matter, as the Philosophers do
call it, and the soul the form; and this is the reason, why the body is per
se, and of it own nature, for the soul and subject are subordained to it; for
that all Philosophers do grant, that every matter is per se, and of it own
nature for the substantial form, wherewith it makes one essential compound;
but the temporal and spiritual powers do not make one total body or
commonwealth, whereof the temporal power is instead of the matter, and the
spiritual insteede of the form. And therefore D. Schulckenius had small
reason to make that interrogation, seeing that he himself did a little before
set down this my reason, which does fully satisfy the aforesaid demand.

14 Neither did I say, as D. Schulckenius here affirms me to say, although a
little before, as you have seen Number. 4.
, he related my words otherwise, that every temporal end is per accidens, or
accidentally referred to a spiritual end, but I only affirmed, that not every
temporal end, and in particular temporal peace among Christians, which is the
last end of the civil power it self, is not per se, and of it own nature
ordained to eternal salvation, which is the last end of the spiritual power,
but only per accidens, or accidentally, as by the will and intention of a
Christian man, it is ordained to eternal salvation, which is a supernatural
end, and therefore not proportionate to the nature of any civil or natural
power. And although I had said, that every temporal end is per accidens
referred to a spiritual end, yet D: Schulckenius could not but perceive by the
whole scope of my words, that my meaning was to say, that every temporal end,
which is referred to a spiritual end, is not per se, and of it own nature
referred to that spiritual end, but per accidens, and extrinsecally by the
will and intention of man, who refers it to that spiritual end, for no man
can be so ignorant as to imagine, that Christians do always refer and
ordain all temporal ends to the eternal salvation of their souls.

15 True it is, that all natural things belonging to man are of such a nature,
as that by the intention of man they may be ordained to good or bad ends, and
temporal peace, which is a natural end, may by the will of man, being aided
with supernatural grace, be referred and elevated to eternal felicity, which
is a supernatural end; and this is agreeable to reason, and to the nature of
man, as he is a reasonable creature, or led by reason, to ordain, refer, and
eleuate all natural things, which are in his power, when by the help of grace
he is able so to do, to true supernatural ends, and to eternal felicity,
for which he was created, and to do otherwise were against reason, and
against the nature of man, as he is endued with reason: But that natural
powers, or ends, should be per se, and of their own nature actually referred,
and elevated to supernatural powers or ends, much less supernatural powers
or ends, should be referred and depressed to natural powers or vicious ends,
but only by the good or wicked intention of a man, in whose power it is to
ordain a good thing to a bad end, a natural power to a supernatural, and
contrariwise, this truly I think no man of any learning can conceive, and
before I have clearly proved, that it is altogether false.

16 Lastly, to those words, which I alleged out of S. Austin, and to the rest
which follow in my Answer, D. Shulckenius replyeth in this manner: I answer
first, says he Page 332.
, It is true, that the last end of one particular will, power, or science is
their act, but it is not true, that the last end of one particular will, power,
or science is not referred per se and of their own nature to that end, which
is simply the last end, but only by accident by the intention of him, who has
that will, power, or science. And this not only S. Thomas in the place cited
does teach, but also S. Austin in the place alleged by Widdrington, to wit,
lib. 11. de Trinit. cap. 6. All these, says S. Austin, and such like wills
have first their ends, which are referred to the end of that will, whereby we
are willing to live happily. Thus S. Austin, who, when he subioyneth, the will
therefore to see a skar does desire her end, to wit, the seeing of a skar, and
farther does not appertain to her, he signifies indeed, that the seeing of a
skar is the last end of the will to see a skar, but he does not deny, that the
seeing of a skar is per se, and of it own nature referred to a higher end of a
higher will, and that to an other, until we come to that end, which is simply
the last end. For all good ends are of their own nature referred to that end,
which is simply the last end, and as ends are of their own nature subordained
one to an other, so also it is necessary, that wills, powers, or sciences be
subordained. As for example, (to persist in S. Austins example) a man has many
wills, one to see a skar, an other, by seeing the skar to find the wound; the
third, by finding the wound, to convince and correct him, who did inflict the
wound; the fourth, by correcting him to heal the wound of his soul; the fifth,
by this act of charity to merit life everlasting; it is certain, that every
one of these wills have their proper end, neither any thing farther does
appertain to them, but it is also certain, that the end of the first will is
referred to the end of the second will, and the first will it self subordained
to the second, and so in order. Thus D. Schulckenius.

17 But truly in my opinion D. Schulckenius does in this Reply both plainly
contradict himself, and also clearly confirm my Answer. And first no man can
make any doubt, but that all wills, powers, sciences, ends, and things
whatsoever are per se, and of their own nature referred to that, which is
simply the last end; but that, which is simply the last end of all things, is
not the eternal felicity of any creature, but God almighty, who alone is
simply the efficient and final cause of all things, and made all things, both
heaven and hell, for himself, Proverb. 16. and who is glorified not only in
the eternal salvation, but also in the eternal damnation both of Men and
Angels: And this D. Schulckenius can not deny, and he might have seen the
same confirmed by S. Thomas in the same question cited by him ar. 8. but more
expressly 1a, part. q. 44. ar. 4. where he proves, that because God almighty
is the first efficient cause of all things, he must of necessity be also the
last end of all things: and by S. Austin also in infinite places.

18. Secondly, whereas D. Schulckenius affirms, that the last end of one
particular will, power, or science is their act, and withal, that this last
end is per se, and of it own nature referred to a further create end, (whereof
only he speaks) and consequently that particular will or power must also be
referred to that farther end, and so it must be referred to a farther end then
to the last, he clearly contradicts himself. For how can any act be per se,
and of it own nature be the last end of one particular will, power or science,
and yet this last end be per se, and of it own nature referred to a farther
end, seeing that according to the approved grounds of philosophy, which kind
of arguing the Logicians call Sorites, or a primo ad vltimum, an argument from
the first to the last, every particular will, power or science, which is per
se, and of it own nature referred to any particular end, is also referred to
all those ends, to which that particular end is per se, and of it own nature
referred? As for example, if any particular will be per se, and of it own
nature referred to the seeing of a skar, and the seeing of a skarre be per se,
and of it own nature referred to the finding out of the wound, and the finding
out of the wound be per se, and of it own nature referred to the correcting of
him who did inflict the wound etc. then a primo ad vltimum, from the first to
the last, the will to see a skarre must per se, and and of it own nature be
referred to the correcting of him, who did inflict the wound etc. Wherefore if
the seeing of a skarre be the last end of the will to see a skarre, as D.
Schulckenius here affirms, it cannot per se, and of it own nature be
referred to a farther end, unless he will grant, that the same will shall
have per se a farther end, then the last, which is a flat contradiction; but if
it be referred to a farther end, it is only by accident, and extrinsecally by
the intention of the seer, who refers the seeing of a skarre to a farther
end, then it has of it own nature. Neither does S. Thomas, or S. Austin
affirm the contrary, but confirm what I have said.

19. For although S. Austin does affirm, that all these and such like wills
have their proper ends, which are referred to the end of that will, whereby we
desire to live happily, and to come to that life, which is not referred to any
other thing, but it does of it self satisfy the Lover, yet he does not say,
that these proper ends, are per se, and of their own nature referred to
everlasting happiness, but he does rather in express words say, that they are
by some particular will, or intention of man referred to everlasting
happiness. And therefore he concludes, that all wills are well connected
together, if that will be good, whereunto all the rest be referred, but if that
be bad, all the other wills are bad. So that S. Austin cannot be so understood,
that all those wills are per se, and of their own nature referred to a good, or
to a bad will, for that a will, which of it own nature is good can not of it
own nature be referred to a bad will, or to a bad end. And therefore when S.
Austin says, that the will to see a skarre has for her proper end the seeing
of a skarre, and no farther appertains to her, he understands of the last
end, which the will to see a skar has per se, and of it own nature, and when
he says, that it may be referred to a farther end, good or bad, he
understands of a farther end, not which it has of it own nature, but which
it has by some other will or intention, which may be good or bad, according as
it refers all the other wills to a good or bad end.

20. Moreover those examples, which D. Schulckenius brings in the end of his
Reply, do most clearly confirm my answer, and confute his own Reply. For if
a man have many wills, one to see a skarre, another by seeing the skar to prove
the wound, the third by proving the wound to correct him who inflicted the
wound and so forth, it is certain, that the seeing of the skarre is not per
se, and of it own nature referred and ordained to prove the wound, and to
correct him, who did inflict the wound, but only by the will and intention of
the seer, who refers it to those ends, in whose choice it is to refer the
seeing of a skar to other ends: neither is their any natural or necessary
connection betwixt the seeing of the skar, the proouing of the wound, and the
correcting of him, who did inflict it: for that a skar may be seen for many
other ends, and not at all for those. Besides, it is repugnant to the course of
nature, that the seeing of a skar, which is a natural thing, should be per se,
and of it own nature referred and ordained to the everlasting happiness of
man, which is a thing above nature, and beyond the course of natural things,
and therefore it is only by accident, and extrinsecally by the intention and
will of man referred and ordained to that supernatural end. And thus you see,
that I have not only clearly answered to this first argument of Card.
Bellarmine, which had been sufficient for me, who took upon me only to
answer, and not to prove, but also have clearly proved, that although
eternal felicity, be the last create end of man, yet temporal peace, and not
eternal felicity is the last create end, to which temporal power even among
Christians is per se, and of it own nature referred.

21. Nevertheless, I will go a little farther with Card. Bellarmine, and grant
him for Disputation sake, which hitherto he has not in my judgment so much as
probably proved, that thereby the weakness also of this his first pretended
demonstration may the more easily appear; to wit, that not only the
Ecclesiastical, but also the civil power among Christians is per se; and of
it own nature, and not only by the will and intention of Christian men
referred to the true eternal salvation of man, as to the last end not only of
man, but of the civil power it self, yet it can not therefore from hence by
any necessary consequence be inferred, that the civil power among Christians
is per se; and of it own nature subject and subordained to the spiritual
power, or that the end of the civil power is subordained to the end of the
spiritual power, but at the most, that both of them have one and the self
same last end, to wit, the eternal felicity of man, to which the spiritual
power leads Christian men by spiritual means, to wit, by spiritual
directions, laws, and punishments, and the civil power by civil means,
directions, laws, and punishments: And therefore there is no subordination of
ends, betwixt the ends of the spiritual and temporal power, and consequently
no subordination of powers, but they have both one last end, to wit,
everlasting happiness, although diverse ways, or means to attain thereunto,
not much unlike diverse lines in a circle, which do end all in one center, and
yet one line is not subordained to another, although all of them ^e tend by
diverse ways to the same center. And therefore by this first argument Card.
Bellarmine has not sufficiently proved, that the civil power among Christians
is per se, and of it own nature subordained to the spiritual, or the proper
end of the civil power, which is her act tending to te^porall peace,
subordained to the proper end of the spiritual power, which is also her act
tending lastly to everlasting happiness; although I should grant him, that
both of them have per se, and of their own nature one and the self same last
end, which is the eternal salvation of man, in whom those powers do reside.
And therefore D. Schulckenius perceiving belike the sufficiency of my answer,
and the weakness of his own Reply, flies to a second Reply, which
nevertheless is as insufficient as the former.

22. But although we should grant, says he Page 333.
, to Widdrington, that the end of the civil power is not referred per se, and
of it own nature to the end of the spiritual, but only by the intention of
the Prince, in whom the civil power does reside, yet the argument which Card.
Bellarmine brought from the subjection of the temporal power to the
spiritual, to prove that the spiritual Prince could not only command
temporal Princes, but also dispose of temporalls in order to spiritual good,
would be most strong and good. For a Christian temporal Prince ought to
refer the public peace, which is the end of civil power, to the eternal
peace and felicity of himself and of his people, which is the end of the
spiritual power. And therefore he ought to subject and subordaine the end of
his power to the end of the power of the spiritual Prince. But as he ought to
subject and subordaine end to end, so also power to power. Wherefore he ought
not to take it in ill part, if he be truly a Christian Prince, that the Pope by
his spiritual power direct, and correct the civil power, and that so the
sword be under the sword, and in the Christian common wealth there be order,
peace, and quietness, whiles Superiors do rule inferiors, and inferiors be
subject to Superiors.

23. But in this Reply there lie hidden some cunning equivocations, and the
most that it proves, as oftentimes heretofore I have signified, is, that the
temporal power or sword, or rather temporal Princes who have temporal power,
and bear the temporal sword, are in spiritual causes) whether of their own
nature, or by some accidental circumstance they become spiritual) to the
spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, by which they are to be directed and
corrected, not in mere temporals, but only in spirituals, not by temporal
laws, or with temporal punishments, which do belong only to the temporal
power, but only by Ecclesiastical laws or directions, and with
Ecclesiastical or spiritual punishments or corrections, which only do
appertain to the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power.

24. True it is, that eternal salvation is the last create end not only of the
spiritual, but also of the temporal power among Christians, seeing that all
Christian Princes are bound by the law of Christ to refer their temporal
power, and the use thereof, not only to temporal peace in the common weath,
which is the last end, which temporal power has per se, and of it own
nature, but also to the eternal peace and felicity of themselves, and of their
people; And therefore there is here no subordination of ends betwixt the
temporal power and the spiritual, and consequently in this respect no
subordination of powers, as D. Schulckenius does here from thence infer, but
as well the civil power among Christians, as the spiritual, have one and the
self same last end (whether it be intrinsecall to one power, and extrinsecall
to the other, or intrinsecall to both as I declared before) to which the
temporal power by temporal laws, directions, and corrections, and the
spiritual power by spiritual laws, directions, and corrections or
punishments are by the law of Christ bound to direct, and lead all Christians.

25. Whereupon S. Thomas, or whosoever be the Author of that book de
Regimine Principum does well affirm, Lib. 1 c. 14.
that the end which a King ought principally to intend in himself, and in his
subjects, is eternal happiness, which does consist in the seeing of God, and
because this seeing of God is the most perfect good of all, it ought to move
exceedingly a King and every Lord, that their subjects may attain to this end.
Therefore, when Kings, says S. Austin, Tom. 2. epist. 50.
in the time of the Apostles did not serve our Lord, then impieties could not
be forbidden by laws, but rather exercised. But afterward, when that began to
be fulfilled which is written, Psalm. 71.
And all the Kings of the earth shall adore him, all nations shall serve him,
What sober minded man can say to Kings, Do not you regard by whom the Church
of your Lord is defended or impugned in your kingdom, that it does not
appertain to you, who will be religious or sacrilegious in your kingdom, to
whom it can not be said, that it does not appertain to you, who will be
chaste, or wanton in your kingdom.

27. Wherefore if a Christian Prince should by his laws, or otherwise,
withdraw his subjects from the attaining to eternal salvation, should impugn
not defend the Church, command not forbid impieties, he should greatly offend
God and the Church, and ought not to take it in ill part, that he should be
therefore corrected by the chief Pastor of the Church, to whom he is subject
in spiritualls, with Ecclesiastical and spiritual punishments, which only do
belong to the spiritual power. But if the Pastor of the Church should take
upon him to correct such a Prince by way of coercion and constraint with
temporal punishments, which kind of correction does pass the limits of his
spiritual power, then the Prince may justly take it in ill part, for this were
to usurp temporal Jurisdiction, which is proper only to a temporal Prince,
and not to observe due order, but to make a confusion betwixt sword and sword,
betwixt the spiritual and temporal power, which temporal power is only in
spiritual corrections, and not in temporal punishments subject to the
constraint of the temporal power.

28 And therefore well said our most learned Countryman Alexander of Hales 3.
part. q. 40. memb. 5. q. 4.
cited by me before, that the subjection of Kings and Emperors to the Pope is
in spiritual not corporal punishment, according as it is said 2a. q. 7. that
it belongs to Kings to exercise corporal punishment, and to Priests to use
spiritual correction. Whereupon S. Ambrose did excommunicate the Emperor
Arcadius, and did forbid him to enter into the Church. For as an earthly Judge
not without cause bears the sword, as it is said Rom: 13. so Priests do not
without cause receive the keys of the Church; he bears the sword to the
punishment of malefactors and commendation of the good, these have keys to the
excluding of excommunicated persons, and reconciling of them who are penitent.
Expound therefore; A King is to be punished only by God, that is, with
material punishment, and again, A King has no man to judge his doings, that
is, to inflict corporal punishment* and a little beneath, A King, says
Alexander, does excel, 1. Pet: 2. true it is in his order, to wit, to inflict
corporal punishment, with which punishment, if he offend, he has none to
punish him but only God* what can be spoken more plainly.

29 And by this you easily see the weakness of D. Schulckenius his argument, and
how cunningly with general and ambiguous words he would delude his Reader. A
temporal Prince, says he, ought to refer public peace to the eternal peace
and fol^estie of him self and of his people, which is the end of the
spiritual power. And what then? And as he ought to subject temporal peace to
eternal peace, so he ought to subject his temporal power to the spiritual
power. But how, in what manner, in what causes, in what punishments temporal
power ought to be subject to spiritual power D. Schulc. cunningly concealeth.
Temporal power to be subject to spiritual, if we will speak properly, and
in abstracto, does signify, that a temporal Prince is in all temporal
affairs subject to the spiritual power of spiritual Pastors. And if by those
general words D. Schulckenius means this, he falls into the Canonists
opinion, whose doctrine in this point learned Victoria in Relect. 1. de potest.
Eccles. number. 2. and 3.
is not afraid to condemn as manifestly false, and who being poor themselves
in learning and riches to flatter the Pope gave him this direct power and
dominion in temporalls. For the truth is, that temporal Princes in temporal
affairs are not subject to any besides God alone, which is the received
doctrine of the ancient Fathers. The sense therefore of that proposition must
be, that temporal Princes are in spiritualls, but not in temporalls subject to
the spiritual power of the Pope. But what then? wherefore he ought not to take
it in ill part, if he be truly a Christian Prince, that the Pope by his
spiritual power direct, and correct the civil power etc. Still you see he
speaks ambiguously, and in general words, the sense whereof if he had
declared, you would presently have perceived the weakness of his argument: for
if he mean, that therefore a temporal Prince ought to be directed in
spiritualls, and in things belonging to Christian Religion, and corrected with
spiritual punishments by the Pope, this I easily grant him, and so he proves
nothing against me, but if he mean, that therefore a temporal Prince ought
to be directed by the Pope in temporalls, and corrected by him with temporal
punishments, this consequence I utterly deny, for this were to confound all
good order, and to usurp temporal Jurisdiction, as I declared before. And
thus much concerning Card: Bellarmines first argument, my answer, and D.
Schulckenius his Reply to the same.

Chap. 6.
Wherein is examined the second argugument taken from the union of Kings, and
Bishops, Clerks and Laikes in one Church.

1. THe second argument, which Card: Bellarmine brings Lib. 5. de Romans Pont.
cap. 7.
to prove, that the civil power among Christians not only as it is Christian,
but also as it is civil, is subject to the Ecclesiastical, as it is
Ecclesiastical, is this: Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes do not make
two commonwealths but one, to wit, one Church. Rom: 12. and 1. Cor. 12. but in
every body the members are connected, and one depends on the other, but it
can not rightly be said, that spiritual things do depend upon temporal,
therefore temporal things do depend upon spiritual, and are subject to them.

2 To the Mayor proposition of this argument I answered before Cap. 2.
, that Kings and Bishops, Clearkes and Laikes, being diverse ways considered,
do make two total, and not only one total body or commonwealth. For as
they are referred to the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power of the chief
visible Pastor, to whom all Christians are subject in spirituals, they make
one total body or commonwealth, to wit, the Catholic Church, which is the
spiritual Kingdom and mystical body of Christ, but as they are referred to
the civil power of temporal Princes, to whom all inferior Clerks and Laikes
are subject in temporals, as all members are subject to the head, they make
another body or commonwealth, to wit, earthly kingdoms, as before I declared
more at large. And this is sufficient to show the weakness of this second
argument, the Mayor proposition thereof being clearly false.

3. But to declare more fully the insufficiency thereof, and to show most
plainly, that not only his Mayor proposition, as I have proved before, but
also his Minor is apparently false, I answer secondly with D. Barclay to his
Minor, that although in every body the members are united and connected either
immediately, or mediately to the head, upon whom they all depend, yet that in
every body all the members do depend one upon the other, there is no man so
ignorant that will affirm: for neither one foot does depend upon the other,
nor one arm upon the other, nor one shoulder upon the other, but they are
connected to some third either immediately by themselves, or to other members,
to which they adhere. May it not, I pray you, by the same manner of arguing,
and by the very same argument be concluded thus: The arms or every man are
members of one body, but in every body the members are connected, and
depending one upon the other, but it cannot rightly be said that the right
arm does depend upon the left, therefore the left arm of every man does
depend upon the right, and is subject unto it. Who would not skorn such foolish
arguments?

4. To this answer Card. Bellarmine In Tract. contra B^rcl. cap. 14.
replieth in this manner. That which I said, that the members of the same body
are connected, and that one does depend upon another, I understood of members
of a diverse kind, as is a finger, a hand, an arm, a shoulder and a head, and
not of members of the same kind, as are two hands, two feet, two eyes, two
ears. For the civil and Ecclesiastical power, whereof we speak, are of a
diverse kind, as it is manifest, and words are to be understood according to
the matter, which is treated of, otherwise there could not be any
demonstration so certain, against which there could not be brought some
cavil. Therefore Kingly power, which is principal in his kind, if it
compound one body with the Ecclesiastical power, which also in his kind is
principal, must of necessity be either subject, or superior, least that in
one body there be two heads; and seeing that it is manifest enough, that the
Pope is head of the Church in steed of Christ, it does plainly follow, that a
King must either be no member of this body, or else he must be subject to
the Pope, and in the same manner the civil power, which does chiefly reside
in the King, must either be subject to the spiritual, which does chiefly
reside in the Pope, or else it must remain out of the Church; in that manner
as a finger cannot be in the body, which does not depend upon the hand, nor a
hand, which does not depend upon the arm, nor an arm, which does not depend
upon the shoulder, nor a shoulder, which does not depend upon the head.

5. But that, which Barclay says a little after, that the spiritual and
civil power are as two shoulders in a body, whereof neither is subject to the
other, but both of them are subject to one head, which is Christ, is not only
false, because those powers are not of the same kind; that they may be
compared to two shoulders, but also it appertains to the heresy of this time.
For what do the heretics of this time more endeavor to persuade the people,
then that the Pope is not the visible head of the body of the Church, unto whom
all Christians, if they will be saved, must be subject? But this Barclay of
his own accord does grant them, who nevertheless in all his book does make
himself a Catholic: Therefore the spiritual and civil power are not well
compared to two shoulders, but they ought either to be compared to the spirit
and flesh, as did S. Gregory Nazianzene in the place often cited compare them,
or else to the shoulder and head, to wit, principal members, whereof
nevertheless the one, although of it self very strong and potent, ought to
be directed and governed by the other, which is superior.

6 But this Reply of Card: Bellarmine, although at the first sight may seem
especially to the unlearned to have in it some show of probability, yet to the
judicious Reader, who will be pleased to examine it more exactly, it will
clearly appear, to be in very deed very unsound and fallacious, to D.
Barclay very injurious, to Catholic religion very scandalous, and in very
truth to have in it no probability at all, Cap. 14.. 2o.
as Mr. John Barclay in his answer to Card. Bellarmine has most clearly
convinced. And first, whereas Card. Bellarmine affirms, that when he said,
that members of the same body are depending one upon the other, he understood
of member^ of a diverse kind, as is a finger, a hand, an arm, a shoulder, a
head, and not of members of the same kind, as are two hands, two feet etc. Mr.
Barclay replyeth, that it is untrue, that members of a diverse kind are
depending one upon the other, as the hand does not depend upon the foot, the
liver upon the lights, the spleen upon the shoulders, etc.

7 And as for those examples, which Card. Bellarmine does bring, he uses
therein great deceit, for neither does the finger for that cause depend upon
the hand, nor the hand upon the arm, nor the arm upon the shoulder, for that
they are members of one body, but for that by order of nature the finger cannot
consist, or be of it self without the hand, nor the hand without the arm,
nor the arm without the shoulder; Nevertheless many members of the same body
also of a diverse kind can well consist one without the other, as the eye
without the ear, the shoulder without the foot, the nose without the eye etc
as likewise these two members, whereof we now treat of the Christian
commonwealth, not only may, but also did actually, as Card. Bellarmine
himself confesses, Lib. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 6.
in the AApostles time consist one without the other. And if this proposition
of Card. Bellarmine be true, that the members of one body, if they be of a
diverse kind must depend one upon the other, he must acknowledge, that in one
kingdom the Musician must depend upon the Physician, or the Physician upon the
Musician, the Shoemaker upon the Tailor, or the Tailor upon the Shoemaker,
the Lord Chamberlain upon the Lord Treasurer, or the Lord Treasurer upon the
Lord Chamberlain, to omit infinite other such like trades and dignitie^, all
which are members of the same body or Kingdom, whereas it is too too
manifest, that they are not subject, or depend one upon the other, but either
immediately upon the King, or upon those Magistrates, whom the King shall
appoint.

8. Secondly, whereas Card. Bellarmine affirms, that it is manifest enough,
that the Pope is head of the Church in place of Christ, from whence it does
clearly follow, that a King must either be no member of this body, or else he
must be subject to the Pope, Mr. Barclay replyeth, that Card. Bellarmine does
cunningly equivocate in that word, [Church]. For the Pope indeed is head of the
Church, that is of Ecclesiastical things, or of Christians, as they are
Christians, in so much that a King cannot be a member of the Church being taken
in this manner, but he must be subject to the Pope. But if by the Church he
understand both powers, civil and Ecclesiastical, which are among Christians,
both Laymen and Cleargiemen, who are joined by one link of faith, he i^
altogether deceived. For the Pope is not the head of civil things: and
therefore in vain does Card. Bellarmine affirm, that Kingly power must of
necessity be either subject or superior, least that there be two heads in
one body. For taking the Church in that sense, as it comprehends civil and
spiritual power, the Church has Christ only for the head, and the Pope and
Kings for chief members, who also in an other respect are ministerial heads
under Christ, the King of civil government, and the Pope of spiritual.
Besides, Card. Bellarmine does now change his medium, as the Logicians call it:
His argument, which he took upon him to defend, was this: They are members of
one body, therefore one depends upon the other; now his argument proceeds
thus; Members do depend upon the head, the Pope is head of the Church,
therefore Kings, who are members of the Church, do depend upon the Pope, which
are two distinct arguments, yet both of them fallacious, and insufficient to
prove, that the temporal power it self, or which is all one, that temporal
Kings in temporal causes are subject to the Pope, as you have seen before.

9. Thirdly, whereas Card. Bellarmine affirms, that the assertion of D.
Barclay comparing these two powers to two shoulders of the Church, which are
connected to one head, who is Christ, does appertain to the heresy of this
time, which affirms, that the Pope is not the visible head of the Church, and
that D. Barclay does of his own accord grant thus much, M. John Barclay
answers, that Card. Bellarmine does in this both slander D. Barclay, and also
makes the Church and Pope odious to Princes. For what Protestant reading this
may not with very good reason conclude, that Catholics, according to Card.
Bellarmines doctrine, when they say, that the Pope is the visible head of the
Church, and that this is a point of Catholike-faith, do understand, that he is
head and Governor not only in Ecclesiastical, but also in civil causes?
what wise men of this world will not relate these sayings to Princes? and what
Prince can without indignation here them. Neither did D. Barclay ever make any
doubt, but that the Pope Christ's Vicar in earth was head in Ecclesiastical
causes, neither did Catholic faith ever teach, that he was head in civil
causes. Only Christ is head of Popes and Kings, the chief head I say of the
Church. Whereupon S. Austin does affirm, In sermon. de remiss pec. and refertur
1. q. 1. can. Vt eui denter.
that an excommunicated person is out of the Church, and out of the body,
whereof Christ is the head.

10. And therefore that similitude between the soul and body compounding one
man, and the spiritual and civil power compounding one Church, or rather one
Christian common wealth, or Christian world, is no fit similitude, and it is
wrongfully ascribed to S. Gregory Nazianzene by Card. Bellarmine, as I showed
before Cap. 3.
, for that the soul is as the form, and the body as the matter, compounding
one essential thing, which is man, but the civil power is not as the matter,
nor the spiritual as the form compounding one essential body, which is the
Church of Christ: but if we will have them to compound one total body, which
is the Church, taking the Church for the Christian world consisting both of the
temporal and spiritual power, which are in Christians, whereof Christ or God,
and not the Pope is the head, they are only integrall, to use the terms of
Philosophers, and not essential parts, neither do they compound one
essential; but only one integrall compound, in which kind of compound it is
not necessary, that one part does depend upon the other, as has been now
convinced; but all must of necessity depend upon the head, although in an
essential compound one part must of necessity depend upon the other, for that
in such a compound one part must be as the matter and the other as the form,
as I declared before.

11. Wherefore the spiritual and civil power in the Church, taking the Church
for the Christian world containing in it both powers, or which is all one, for
the company of all Christians, in whom are both powers, or both subiections,
are not like to the soul and body, which are essential parts of man: but they
are as two shoulders, or two sides, which are only integrall parts of man's
body: both which powers, although each of them in their kind be a visible
head, the one of temporals, the other of spirituals, and in that respect do
formally make two total bodies, to wit, earthly kingdoms, whereof temporal
Princes are the head, and the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, whereof
the Pope is the chief visible head, yet they are connected to one celestial
and invisible head which is Christ, in which respect they make one total body,
whereof Christ only and not the Pope is head, which may be called the
Christian world, consisting of earthly kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom,
or Church of Christ.

12. Neither is it true, that these two powers be of so diverse a kind, that
they cannot be well compared to two shoulders, for both of them are powers, and
in that respect of the same kind, and as powers they are compared to two
shoulders. And why may they not be aptly compared to two shoulders, seeing
that there is nothing more strong and more near to the head in the Christian
commonwealth? Neither is it material, that one is a more strong shoulder then
the other; for in man's body the right arm is stronger then the left, and yet
one is not more an arm then the other. May not, I pray you, two pillars of a
diverse kind, one of brass, the other of marble, be aptly compared one with
the other, in that both of them are pillars. The temporal and the civil
power, or Kings as Kings, and having temporal authority, and Bishops as
Bishops, and having spiritual power, are as two visible pillars which do
sustain the edifice of the Christian world, or commonwealth, the one in
temporalls, the other in spirituals, they are as two shoulders, which as in
man's body are next under the head, and all the other inferior members do
depend upon them; so also they are next under God the head of both, and all
other inferior members of the Christian world do depend upon them; nay being
compared to the inferior members of the Christian world, they are also as two
visible and ministerial heads; from whence, as from the head of man's body,
which is the root, beginning, and foundation of all sense and motion in all
the inferior parts, all spiritual and temporal directions, Laws, and
punishments do proceed.

13. And truly if D. Barclay must be taxed of heresy, for comparing the
temporal and spiritual power in the Church, or Christian world (for now the
Church and Christian world which consists of both powers, is taken for all
one) to two shoulders, and for affirming, that Christ only is the chief
celestial and invisible head of both these powers, and that Kings and Popes are
two ministerial heads thereof (although both of them are also principal in
their own kind, and in the nature of a visible head) then must Hugo de S.
Victore be taxed of heresy, when he compares Lib. 2. de Sa^ram. p. 2. ca. 3.
these two powers to two sides, affirming, that Laymen, who have care of
earthly things are the left side of this body, and Clergy men, who do minister
spiritual things are the right, and that earthly power has the King for the
head, and the spiritual has the Pope for head: Lo here two sides (and
consequently two shoulders) and two visible heads, whereof Christ is the
principal and invisible head.

14. Then must Thomas Waldensis our learned Countryman be taxed of heresy,
when after he had related the aforesaid words of Hugo, he concludes thus
Lib. 2. doctr. fid. art. 3. ca. 78
: Behold two powers, and two heads of power: and beneath Likewise, says he,
neither Kingly power, which by the ring of faith or fidelity is espoused to
the kingdom, is reduced to any man authoritatiuely above the King besides
Christ: and therefore the Pope is not head of the King, or Kingdom in
temporalls. Then must S. Fulgentius be taxed of heresy, when he affirms In
lib. de veritate praedest. and gratiae.
, that in the Church none is more principal then a Bishop, and in the
Christian world none more eminent then the Emperor. Then must S. Ignatius be
taxed of heresy, when he affirms In Epist. ad Smyrnenses.
, That no man is more excellent then a King, nor any man is like to him in all
created things, neither any one is greater then a Bishop in the Church. Then
must S. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius be taxed of heresy, when
they affirm Ad Romans 13.
, That whosoever he be, whether he be a Monk, a Priest, or an Apostle, he is
according to S. Paul subject to temporal Princes; as likewise Pope Pelagius
the first, who affirms Apud. Bininum tom. 2. Council. page 633
, That Popes also according to the command of holy Scriptures were subject to
Kings.

15. Then must the ancient Gloss of the Canon Law In cap. Adrianus did. 63.
, related and approved by Cardinal Cusanus Lib. 3. de Concord. Cath. cap. 3.
, (which Gloss Card. Bellarmine In Tract. co^tr. Barcl. ca. 13. 16
, with small respect to antiquity, does shamefully call a doting old woman, and
which perchance is abolished for overmuch old age) be taxed of heresy,
affirming, That as the Pope is Father of the Emperor in spirituall^; so the
Emperor is the Popes Father in temporalls. Then must Pope Innocent the fourth
be taxed of heresy, when he affirms Super ca. Nouerit de sent excom.
, That the Emperor is Superior to all both Churchmen and Laymen in
temporalls. Then must Hugo Cardinal related by Lupoldus of Babenberg be taxed
of heresy, when he affirms De iure regni and Imperij cap. 9. in principio.
, That the Emperor has power in temporalls from God alone, and that in them
he is not subject to the Pope. Then must Ioannes Driedo be taxed of heresy,
when he affirms Lib. 2. de libert. Christiana cap. 2.
, That the Pope, and the Emperor are not in the Church as two subordinate
Judges, so that one receives his jurisdiction from the other: but they are as
two Governors, who are the Ministers of one God deputed to diverse offices, so
that the Emperor is chief over Secular causes, and persons for the peaceable
living in this world, and the Pope over spiritualls for the advantage of
Christian faith and charity. Then must many of the ancient Fathers be taxed of
heresy, when they affirm, Expounding those words of the 50. Psalm. Tibi soli
peccaui.
that Kings and Emperors are next under God, and inferior to God alone; as
likewise infinite other Catholic writers, who with Hector Pintus do affirm,
In cap: 45. Ezech.
that Kings in temporalls have no Superior, although in spiritualls they are
subject to Priests.

16 But to these and such like pitiful shifts and extremities are sometimes
driven men otherwise very learned, when they are not afraid by clamours,
slanders, and threatenings, rather then by force of reason, to thrust upon the
Christian world their own uncertain opinions for infallible grounds of the
Catholic faith, and rather then they will seem to have been too rash in their
Censures, or not so sound in their judgments, they care not, although with
palpable sophismes, so that they may in regard of their authority any way
blind the eyes of the unlearned Reader with their cunning and ambiguous
speeches, to maintain what they have once begun, and with no small scandal to
Catholic religion, and great hurt to their own souls, and which also in the
end will turn to their own discredit, to impeach those Catholics of
disobedience, heresy, or error, who shall impugn their new pretended faith
and doctrine, as being no point of the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
faith, nor grounded upon any one certain authority or argument taken either
from the testimony of holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, decrees of Counsels,
practice of the primitive Church, or any one Theological reason, whereupon any
one of the most learned of them all dare rely.

17 For which cause they are so often enforced to use so great equivocation and
ambiguitie of words in their arguments and answers, not declaring in what sense
they take such ambiguous words: as in this question, concerning the temporal
power compounding the Church, and being subject thereunto, in one proposition
they will seem to take temporal power formally and in abstracto, signifying
temporal Princes formally, as they have temporal power, and in an other they
will take it materially, and in concreto, for temporal Princes, who indeed
have temporal power, but not as they have temporal power; In one proposition
they will seem to take the Church formally, as it signifies the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, and consists only of spiritual power, and in an other
they will take it materially for all Christian men, or for the Christian world,
as it is compounded both of temporal and spiritual power, and contains both
the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and the earthly kingdoms of the Christian
world. So likewise they will not insist upon any one authority of holy
Scriptures, any one decree of Pope or Council, or any one Theological reason,
as upon a firm, sure, and infallible ground of their new pretended faith,
which if they would do, this controversy would be quickly at end, but from
one place of holy Scripture they fly to an other, from the new Testament to
the old, from one Council to an other, and from one Theological reason to an
other, and when all their arguments be answered, then with clamours, slanders,
and forbidding of the books which are written against them, but not declaring
why, or for what cause they are forbidden, or what erroneous doctrine is
contained in them, they will make the matter clear. But truth and plain
dealing in the end will prevail, neither will violence, but reason satisfy
men's understandings, and this their violent, shuffling, and insincere
proceeding does plainly show, that they distrust their cause. And thus much
concerning the second argument.

Chap. 7.
Wherein the third argument, which is taken from the changing of temporal
government, when it hinders the spiritual good, is examined.

1. THe third argument, which Card. Bellarmine brings to prove, that the
civil power among Christians, not only as it is Christian, but also as it is
civil, is subject, and subordained to the Ecclesiastical as it is
Ecclesiastical, is this: Thirdly, says he, Lib. 5. de Rom: Pont. cap: 7.
if the temporal government hinder the spiritual good, the Prince, according
to the opinion of all men, is bound to change that manner of government, even
with the hinderance of temporal good, therefore it is a sign that the
temporal power is subject to the spiritual.

2 Neither does he satisfy, that should answer, that a Prince is bound to
change that manner of his government, not for the subordination to the
spiritual power, but only for order of charity, by which we are bound to
prefer greater goods before losser. For in regard of the order of charity,
one commonwealth is not bound to suffer detriment, that an other commonwealth
more noble do not suffer the like detriment. And one private man, who is bound
to give all his goods for the conservation of his own commonwealth, is not
bound to do the like for an other commonwealth, although the more noble.
Seeing therefore that the temporal commonwealth is bound to suffer detriment
for the spiritual common-weatlh, it is a sign that they are not two diverse
commonwealths, but parts of one and the same commonwealth, and one subject to
the other.

3. Neither also is it of force, if one should say, that a temporal Prince is
bound to suffer detriment for the spiritual good, not in regard of any
subjection of the temporal commonwealth to the spiritual common wealth, but
because otherwise he should hurt his subjects, to whom it is hurtful to loose
spiritualls for temporalls. For although those men, who are not his subjects,
but are of an other kingdom, should suffer any notable hurt in spiritualls,
for the government in temporalls of some Christian King, he is bound to change
his manner of government, whereof no other reason can be given, but that they
are members of the same body, and one subject to the other.

4. By this argument Card. Bellarmine, as you see, labors to prove two
things, the one is, that not only Laymen, and Cleargie-men do make one total
body, which is the Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is head, for of this no
Catholic makes any doubt, but also that the temporal and spiritual power
themselves, or which is all one, the temporal and spiritual common wealth, as
they consist of temporal and spiritual power, are parts or this total body
called the Church of Christ, whereof the Pope is the supreme visible head. The
second is, that not only temporal Princes are in spirituals subject to the
supreme spiritual Pastor, but also, that the temporal power itself, as it
is temporal, is among Christians subject to the spiritual power, as it is
spiritual, and consequently, that temporal Princes not only in spiritualls,
but also in all temporalls are subject to the spiritual power. But neither of
these can be rightly concluded from this argument, as I showed in my Apology
Number. 160. and seq.
, where I denied the consequence of this third argument, speaking of subjection
and subordination per se, and of it own nature. For if temporal government
do hinder spiritual good, the temporal Prince is bound to change that manner
of government even with detriment of temporal good, not for that the temporal
power is per se, and of it own nature subject to the spiritual, as though of
the temporal and spiritual power were made formally one politic body, but
for both the reasons alleged by Card. Bellarmine, which he did not
sufficiently confute in his Replies.

5. The first reason is for the order of charity, by which we are bound to
prefer greater goods before lesser. To the Reply, which Card. Bellarmine made
to the contrary, I answered thus, that although for the order of charity one
common wealth is not bound to suffer detriment, that an other common wealth
more noble do not suffer the like detriment, yet in case that both common
wealths be subject to one Prince, or that the Prince of the less noble common
wealth be also a subject of the more noble, then that Prince is bound for order
of charity, all other things being alike, to prefer the more noble
commonwealth before the less noble. And although one private man, who is
bound to give all his goods for the conservation of his own commonwealth, be
not bound to do the like for an other commonwealth, although the more noble,
yet in case that the same private man should at the same time be a Citizen of
both commonwealths, if he be bound to give all his goods for the conservation
of the less noble common wealth, whereof he is a Citizen, he is much more
bound for the same order of charity, to give all his goods for the
conservation of the more noble common wealth, to which also he is subject. And
this is the very case in this present question. For the spiritual and civil
power, and the common wealths which they compound, are so united and connected
among Christians, that every Christian is a Citizen of both common wealths, and
both common wealths may be subject to the same Prince, as appears in the
Pope, who is the spiritual Prince or Pastor of the whole Christian world, and
also a temporal Prince of some Provinces thereof.

6. The second reason, for which a temporal Prince is bound to change the
manner of his government in the aforesaid case, is, for that otherwise he
should hurt his subjects, to whom it is hurtful to loose greater goods for the
lesser, that is spiritual goods for temporal. To the Reply, which Card.
Bellarmine made to the contrary, I answered, that the reason wherefore a
temporal Prince is bound to change his manner of government, if it be greatly
hurtful to the spiritual good not only of his own subjects, but also of the
subjects of another Kingdom, is not for that the temporal power is per se,
and of it own nature subject to the spiritual, or for that both of them are
parts of one, and the same total common wealth, but because both the King, and
also those subjects of an other temporal kingdom, are also members of the
same mystical body of Christ, and Citizens of the same spiritual Kingdom,
and therefore that King least that he should greatly prejudice in spiritualls
the kingdom of Christ, whereof he is a Citizen, by his temporal government,
is bound to change that manner of government. Thus I answered in my Apology.

7. Now you shall see how cunningly D. Schulckenius would shift of this
answer. To the first part of my answer he replyeth thus: Page 339.
H^ere I see nothing that needs any answer saving that [as though of the
temporal and spiritual power were formally made one politic body] For my
Adversary Widdrington does grant the antecedent* of Card. Bellarmines argument,
and denies the consequence, and for this cause he does deny it, for that of
the temporal and spiritual power is not made formally one politic body, and
therefore one power is not per se subject to the other. But what man that is
well in his wits did ever say, that of the temporal and spiritual power is
made formally one politic body? For although Clergy men are Citizens of the
civil common wealth, as they live together with the Citizens of that common
wealth, and do buy, sell, and do other things according to the laws of that
commonwealth, yet because they are exempted from the power of the politic
Prince, and do observe his laws not by force of the law, but by force of
reason, they cannot properly and formally, but only materially be called parts
of the civil commonwealth.

8. Add also that if the Ecclesiastical and civil power should make one
politic body, the Ecclesiastical should either be superior, or subject to
the civil, superior it could not be, for that the King is head of the
politic body, neither could it be subject, for that a superior power ought
not to be subject to an inferior. And besides (as it has been said) Clergy
men are exempted from the power of a politic Prince, and therefore the
Ecclesiastical and civil power do not make properly and formally one
politic body. But my Adversary does feign absurd opinions, which he may
refell. That which Card. Bellarmine says, is, that the spiritual and
temporal power, that is, Bishops, Kings, and their subjects, Clerks and
Laikes do make one Church, one Christian commonwealth, one people, one
kingdom, or mystical body of Christ, wherein all things are well ordered and
disposed, and therefore superior things do rule inferior things, and
inferior things are subject to superior things. Let my Adversary Widdrington
overthrow this, and then let him deny the consequence of Card. Bellarmines
argument. Thus D. Schulckenius.

9. But how unsound, cunning, and insufficient, is this Reply of D.
Schulckenius, and also repugnant to his own grounds, you shall presently
perceive. And first when I denied, that the spiritual and temporal power do
make formally one politic body, by a politic body I did not understand, as it
distinguished and contra-diuided to a spiritual body, but as it is
distinguished from a natural body, and comprehends in general all politic
governments, whether they be temporal, spiritual, or mixed, in which sense not
only earthly kingdoms compounded of temporal power, but also the spiritual
kingdom, mystical body or Church of Christ consisting only of spiritual
power is a politic body. Wherefore by the name of a politic body I understood
a commonwealth in general, whether it were temporal, spiritual, or mixed of
both, as any man, who is not desirous to cavil, may easily perceive by all
those answers and assertions, which I did so often inculcate concerning the
union and conjunction of these two powers. So that my meaning in that place
only was to deny, that the temporal and spiritual power, as they are
referred to the visible heads and subjects of both powers, do make formally
one total commonwealth, but only materially, for that the same Christian
men, who have temporal power or temporal subjection, do make one spiritual
Kingdom or Church of Christ, but not formally, as they have temporal power,
or temporal subjection, for so they make only temporal and earthly
kingdoms, but formally as they have temporal and spiritual power, temporal
and spiritual subjection, and are referred to the visible heads thereof, they
make two total bodies or commonwealths, as before I have declared more at
large.

10. Secondly, although it be true, that temporal and spiritual power, that
is, Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes, as D. Schulckenius expounds those
words (which nevertheless is a very improper acception of those words, for
that temporal and spiritual power in abstracto does signify Kings and
Bishops, Clerks and Laikes as they have temporal and spiritual power) do
make one Church, one Christian commonwealth, one people, one kingdom or
mystical body of Christ, yet this was not all that, which Card. Bellarmine
affirmed, for Card. Bellarmine affirmed another thing, which I pretended to
impugn, and which D. Schulckenius cunningly concealeth, to wit, that Kings and
Bishops, Clerks and Laikes do not make two commonwealths, but one; This was
that which I impugned, [not two commonwealths, but one] I never denied that
they did make one commonwealth, to wit, the Church of Christ, but withal I
affirmed, that they did make also two, to wit the earthly kingdoms also of
this Christian world: So that I did not invent, or feign absurd opinions to
confute them, as D. Schulckenius untruly affirms, but I have clearly
showed, and that out of Card. Bellarmines, or D. Schulckenius his own grounds,
as before you have seen more at large, Cap. 1. 2. 3.
that the temporal and spiritual power do make formally two total bodies or
commonwealths, and that Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes diverse ways
considered are parts and members of them both.

11. Thirdly, although I had taken a politic body for a temporal
commonwealth, as in very truth I did not, but only for a commonwealth in
general, as a politic body is distinguished from a natural body, yet I
might be very well in my wits, and nevertheless have affirmed, that the
temporal and spiritual power do in the like manner, and for the same cause
make formally one temporal commonwealth, for the which D. Schulckenius does
here affirm, that temporal and spiritual power do make formally one
spiritual body or commonwealth. For the reason why he affirms, that the
temporal and spiritual power do make formally one Ecclesiastical or
spiritual commonwealth, is, for that Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes
are members of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and subject to the spiritual
power of the supreme spiritual Pastor, which reason, if it be of force, does
also conclude, that the temporal and spiritual power may in like manner ^e
said to make formally one temporal commonwealth, for that Kings and Bishops,
Clerks and Laikes, are also true members and parts of the temporal
commonwealth, and therefore they are either temporal Princes themselves, or
subject in temporals, to the temporal power of temporal Princes. And therefore
the reason, why D. Schulckenius does here affirm, That the temporal and
spiritual power do not make formally one politic or temporal body, is, as you
have seen, for that the Clergy are exempted from the power of a politic
Prince, and do observe his Laws not by force of the Law; but by force of
reason, and therefore, says he, they cannot properly and formally, but only
materially be called a part of the politic commonwealth. From whence it
clearly follows, that if a man may be well in his wits, and yet affirm, that
Clergy men are true parts, members, and subjects of the temporal common
wealth, and consequently are not exempted from temporal subjection; but do
owe true fidelity and allegiance to temporal Princes, he may also be well
in his wits, and yet affirm according to D. Shulckenius his reason, that of
the temporal and spiritual power, that is, of Kings and Bishops, Clerks and
Laikes is made properly and formally one politic body, or temporal
commonwealth.

12. And dare D. Schulckenius, trow you, presume to say that S. Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Oecumenius, Ad Romans 13.
and those others whom partly I did cite before Cap. 6.
, and partly I will beneath Cap. 12.
, were not well in their wits, when they affirmed, That whether he be a Monk,
or a Priest, or an Apostle, he is according to S. Paul, subject to temporal
Princes. Or dare he presume to say, that Dominicus Sotus, Franciscus Victoria,
Medina, Sayrus, Valentia, and innumerable other Divines cited by Sayrus Lib. 3.
Thesaurie. 4. (...). 16
, and also by Salas Disp. 14. de Legibus sect. 8.
the Jesuit, whose opinion he approoueth and withal affirms, That some few
modern Divines do hold the contrary, were not well in their wits; when they
taught, that Clergy men are directly subject to the civil Laws, which are
not repugnant to their state, nor to Ecclesiastical Laws, or Canons, and that
Kings are Lords of Clergy men, and that Clergy men are bound to come at
their call, and as Subjects to swear allegiance and obedience to them, as
Salas in express words affirms; and that Clergy men are not exempted from
secular power concerning the directive, or commanding force thereof, in civil
Laws, which are profitable to the good state of the common wealth, which are
the express words of Gregorius de Valentia, tom. 3. disp. 9. q. 5. punc. 3.

13 And to conclude, dare D. Schulckenius presume to say, that Cardinal
Bellarmine was not well in his wits, when he wrote, Lib. 1. de Clericis c^p.
28. propos. 2a.
That Clergy men are not in any manner exempted from the obligation of civil
Laws, which are not repugnant to holy Canons, or to the office of their
Clergy, although in the last Editions of his Book, he has left out those
words [in any manner] not alleging any cause wherefore. And therefore although
Clergy men are by the Ecclesiastical Laws, and privileges of temporal
Princes, exempted from the tribunalls of secular Magistrates, and from paying
of certain tributes, and personal services: yet to say that they are exempted
wholly from temporal subjection, and that they are not subject to the
directive power of the civil Laws, nor can truly and properly commit treasons
against any temporal Prince, for that they owe not true fidelity, allegiance,
and civil subjection to any temporal Prince (as some few Jesuits of these
latter times have not feared to a uerre, whose opinion Card. Bellarmine now,
contrary to his ancient doctrine, which for many years together he publicly
maintained, does now seem to follow) is repugnant in my judgment both to holy
Scriptures so expounded by the ancient Fathers, to the common opinion of the
School Divines, and once also of Card. Bellarmine himself, at which time I
think D. Schulckenius will not say, that he was not well in his wits, and also
to the practice both of the primitive Church, and of all Christian Kingdoms
even to these days, and it is a doctrine newly broached in the Christian world
without sufficient proof, scandalous to Catholic Religion, injurious to
Chrian Princes, and odious to the pious ears of all faithful and well
affected Subjects.

14. The other reason, which D. Schulckenius allegeth, why Kings and Bishops,
Clearkes and Laics do not make properly and formally one politic body or
temporal commonwealth, (for to say that temporal and spiritual power in
abstracto do make formally either one temporal, or one spiritual
commonwealth, is very untrue and repugnant to his own grounds, as I have
showed before, unless we will speak very improperly) to wit, for that
Clergy men are superior and not subject, is as insufficient as the former;
for that temporal Princes are in temporalls superior, and have pre-eminence
not only over Laymen, but also over Clergy men. And therefore the temporal,
and spiritual power, or Kings and Bishops, Clearkes and Laikes, as they are
referred to the visible heads here on earth, do neither make one politic or
temporal body, nor one spiritual or Ecclesiastical body, nor one total
commonwealth consisting of both powers, whereof the Pope is head, but they do
make formally, and properly two total bodies or commonwealths, to wit, the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, which consists only of spiritual power, and
the earthly kingdoms of this Christian world, which consists only of
temporal and civil authority, both which bodies are commonly signified by the
name of the Christian world, or Christian commonwealth, wherein all things are
well ordered, and rightly disposed, and therefore superiors are above
inferiors, and inferiors are subject to superiors; but in temporal causes
temporal power, whereof temporal Princes are the head, has the pre-eminence
not only over Laymen, but also over Cleargy-men, and in spiritual causes the
spiritual power, whereof the Pope is head, is superior, and to confound these
two powers, were to break all good order, as before I also declared. And
therefore for good reason I granted the antecedent proposition of Card.
Bellarmines argument, and denied his consequence.

15. But fourthly observe, good Reader, another palpable untruth, which D.
Schulckenius in this place affirms. Card. Bellarmine, as you have seen,
endeavored by his third argument to prove, that the temporal power as it is
temporal, is among Christians subject to the spiritual power, as it is
spiritual; and his argument was this: If the temporal government hinder the
spiritual good, the Prince is bound to change that manner of government, even
with the hinderance of the temporal good, therefore it is a sign that the
temporal power is subject to the spiritual.. The antecedent proposition I did
grant, and I denied his consequence. Now D. Schulckenius affirms, that for
this cause I denied his consequence, for that of the temporal and spiritual
power is not made formally one politic body, which is very untrue. For
although I should acknowledge, as in very deed I do, that the temporal and
spiritual power, as they are referred to Christ the invisible and celestial
head, do make properly and formally one total body, or commonwealth,
consisting of both powers, which may be called the Christian common wealth, but
more properly the Christian world, yet I would and do deny his consequence:
and the reason hereof I alleged before, for that they are not essential parts
of this total body, as the body and soul are of man, but integrall parts,
as two shoulders, two sides, hands, feet, eyes, ears, etc. are integrall
parts of man's body, and do not make an essential, but an integrall compound,
in which kind of compound it is not necessary, as I showed before Cap. 6. nu.
6. 10.
, that one part be subject to an other, but it suffices that both be subject
to the head. And although I should also grant, as I do, that temporal and
spiritual power do make formally one politic body, or temporal common
wealth, taking temporal and spiritual power in that improper sense, as is
declared by D. Schulckenius, to wit, for Kings and Bishops, Clerks and Laikes,
who diverse ways considered, do make properly, and formally not only a
spiritual, but also a politic body or temporal commonwealth: yet I should
and do notwithstanding deny his consequence, for those two causes, which Card.
Bellarmine did in his Replies allege, but, as you have seen, not sufficiently
confute.

16 And truly if this argument of Card. Bellarmine were of force, it would in
my opinion convince, that not only the temporal power among Christians is
subject to the spiritual power of the Pope, but also that the temporal power
among infidel Princes is also subject to the Popes spiritual authority,
which nevertheless Card. Bellarmine does deny; for if the temporal
government of an infidel Prince do hurt and hinder the spiritual good of
Christian Religion, he is bound to change that manner of government even with
the hinderance of temporal good, therefore I might conclude with Card.
Bellarmine, that it is a sign that the temporal power of an heathen Prince is
subject to the spiritual power of Christian religion. And therefore as the
changing of temporal government among infidells, when it hinders the
spiritual good of Christian religion, is no probable sign of any subjection
per se of their temporal power to the Popes spiritual authority, but only
of a bond of charity, whereby all men are by the law of God and nature bound
not to hinder true spiritual good for a temporal commodity, so also among
Christians it is no probable sign of any subjection or subordination of the
temporal power to the spiritual, but at the most of a greater bond of
charity, whereby Christians not only by the law of God and nature, but also by
the bond of Christian religion, which they profess, are obliged not to hinder
the spiritual good thereof for a temporal commodity.

17 Now you shall see, how insufficiently also D. Schulckenius replyeth to
those two answers, which I made to Card. Bellarmines Replies, wherein are
alleged the causes, why I denied the consequence of his argument, and why a
temporal Prince is bound to change the manner of his temporal government,
when it hinders the spiritual good. And first to my first answer D.
Schulckenius replyeth thus: Page 341.
that by my answer it is clearly gathered, that I say nothing in this place,
which makes to the overthrowing of Card. Bellarmines argument. For I confess,
says he, that a Prince of a less noble commonwealth is not bound to suffer
any detriment only for the order of charity, that an other commonwealth more
noble do not suffer the like, unless either he be subject to the Prince of
that noble commonwealth, or unless one has both the common wealths subject
to him. Therefore I am constrained, says he, to confess, that the principal
reason, why a temporal Prince ought to suffer detriment in temporalls, lest
that the spiritual good be hindered, is not the order of charity, but the
subjection of the temporal common wealth to the spiritual, when they concur
to make one Christian commonwealth, or one mystical body of Christ.
Therefore I have not, says he, confuted Card: Bellarmines argument, but have
yielded up the bucklers, yea and also have confirmed it.

18 But truly it is strange to see, with what boldness, men otherwise learned,
dare adventure to avouch such gross and palpable untruths, and when their
answers are clean overthrown, to brag not only of the victory, but also that
their Adversary has granted, and confirmed their answers. For observe, good
Reader, how untrue and fraudulent this answer is. I affirmed, as you have
seen, that the reason, why a temporal Christian Prince is bound to change his
manner of government, if it hinder the spiritual good, is not, for that the
temporal power is per se, and of it own nature subject to the spiritual, as
Card. Bellarmine pretended, but because he being a Christian Prince, to whom
especially, more then to a Heathen, it does belong to have care of true
spiritual good, which Christian Religion ought chiefly to intend, is by the
order of charity, and not for any intrinsecall subjection, or subordination of
the temporal power to the spiritual, bound to prefer, caeteris paribus, the
spiritual good before the temporal. And whereas Card. Bellarmine replied,
that for the order of charity one common wealth, although the less noble, is
not bound to suffer detriment, that an other common wealth more noble do not
suffer the like detriment; and one private man, who is bound to give all his
goods for the preservation of his own common wealth, is not likewise bound to
do the like for an other common wealth although more noble; Seeing therefore
that a temporal commonwealth is bound to suffer damage for the spiritual, it
is a sign, that they are not two diverse commonwealths, but parts of one and
the self same common wealth, and one subject to another.

12. To this Reply I answered, by showing the disparitie betwixt one temporal
commonwealth compared to an other, and a temporal commonwealth compared to
the spiritual common wealth: because the same Prince, or subject of one
temporal common wealth is seldom, or never, a Prince or subject of the other,
and therefore the order of charity requires, that both the Prince and subject
ought to prefer the temporal good of their own common wealth, before the
temporal good of an other more noble common wealth: As also a man less noble
ought in charity to prefer, if other things be alike, his own temporal good
before the temporal good of an other man more noble. But if it should so fall
out, that the same man were Prince of both common wealths, or the same private
man were a part and member of both common wealths, in this case the order of
charity would require, that he, who is member, or has charge of both
commonwealths, should prefer, if other things be alike, the temporal good
of the more noble common wealth before the temporal good of the less noble,
not by reason of any subjection of one common wealth to the other, but because
both commonwealths are subject to the same Prince, or the same private man is
subject to both common wealths, and therefore they ought with due respect and
order of charity to have care of both, and to prefer the more worthy common
wealth before the less worthy.

20. As likewise if one man has diverse trades, one more noble, an other less
noble, one more profitable, and other less profitable, if in case he should
be compelled to loose, or prejudice one of his trades, the order of charity
would require, that he should rather loose, or prejudice the less noble, then
the more noble, the less profitable, then the more profitable trade, neither
from hence could it be gathered, that one trade were subject, or subordained
to another, but only that both trades were subject to one man. So likewise if a
man were constrained to loose either his eye or his finger, the order of
charity would require that he should prefer the eye before the finger, for
that the eye is a more noble, a more necessary, a more profitable part of the
body then the finger, and yet from hence we cannot well conclude, that
therefore the finger is subject or subordained to the eye, but that both are
parts and members of the body of the same man, who therefore by order of
charity ought with due order and respect to have a care of the whole body and
every part thereof, and to prefer the more worthy, necessary or profitable
before the less worthy, necessary or profitable member. And this I said was
the plain case of the temporal power among Christians compared to the
spiritual, for that the Ecclesiastical and civil power, temporal power and
spiritual subjection etc. are among Christians so united in one subject, that
the same Christian man is a part, member, and Citizen both of the temporal,
and also of the spiritual common wealth, and both common wealths may be
subject to the same Prince, as appears in the Pope, and therefore the order
of charity does require, that every Christian man ought to prefer the
spiritual good, and spiritual common wealth, before the temporal good and
the temporal commonwealth, not for that the temporal power, or common wealth
is subject to the spiritual, but for that all Christian Princes and people are
parts, members, and Citizens of both common wealths, and the spiritual is
far more noble, and worthy, and therefore if other things be alike, to be
preferred before the temporal, by them who are parts and members of them both.

21. Now D. Schulckenius would cunningly forsooth make the Reader believe, that
I say the very same that Card. Bellarmine does, and that I do not by my
answer overthrow, but confirm Card. Bellarmines Reply: for that I am
enforced, says he, to confess that the chief cause, why a temporal Prince
ought to suffer damage in temporalls, least the spiritual good should be
hindered, is not the order of charity, but the subjection of the temporal
power to the spiritual, when they make one spiritual common wealth, or
mystical body of Christ, which nevertheless, as you have seen, is apparently
untrue. For although I do indeed allege subjection for a cause, why the order
of charity does require, that a temporal Christian Prince ought to prefer
the spiritual good before the temporal, by which word [subiection] D.
Schulckenius takes occasion to delude his Reader, yet I do not allege that
manner of subjection, which Card. Bellarmine does, as D. Schulckenius untruly
affirms, to wit, the subjection of the temporal power to the spiritual, or
of the temporal common wealth to the spiritual, taking temporal
commonwealth properly as it consists of temporal power and temporal
subjection, but the subjection of both commonwealths to one Prince, or the
subjection of all Christians to both common wealths, to be the cause, why the
order of charity requires, that a Christian Prince is bound to change his
manner of government, when it hinders the spiritual good.

22. Belike D. Schulckenius would infer, that because the Pope is Lord of
Ancona, and Ferrara, and ought to prefer caeteris paribus the good of the one
before the other, therefore the State of Ancona is subject to the State of
Ferrara, or contrariwise, or because the King of Spain is King of Naples and
Duke of Millan, therefore the State of Millan is subject to Naples, or because
a man has two trades, and ought to prefer the one before the other,
therefore the one is subject to the other, or because one man is a Citizen of
two cities, therefore one of those cities is subject to the other, or because
the eyes and ears are parts and members of the same body of man, who ought
therefore by order of charity to prefer the good of the more worthy and
necessary member before the good of the less worthy and less necessary,
therefore the ears are subject to the eyes or contrariwise. I ever affirmed,
that the temporal power among Christians is not per se, and of it own nature
subject to the spiritual, and that they do not properly and formally, as they
are referred to the visible heads here on earth, make one total, but two
total commonwealths, although the same Christian man being considered diverse
ways, is a part and member of both commonwealths, and as in spiritual causes
he is subject to the Ecclesiastical power, which only does properly and
formally make the spiritual, or Ecclesiastical commonwealth, so in temporal
causes he is subject to the civil power, which only does properly and
formally make the remporall or earthly kingdoms of this Christian world, and
because the spiritual commonwealth and good thereof is the more noble and
more worthy, therefore the same Christian man, being a member and citizen of
both commonwealths, ought to prefer, if other things be alike, the
spiritual good before temporal, and not for any subjection of the temporal
power, or commonwealth to the spiritual. But when men are not disposed to
deal sincerely for truths sake, but are resolved to defend per fas and nefas,
what they have once taken in hand to maintain, and do not fight for truth,
but for credit, they little regard what they say, so that with cunning and
smooth words they may color their sayings in such sort, as that they may
blind, dazel or confound the understanding of the Reader. And thus much
concerning Card. Bellarmines first Reply.

23. Now to the answer, which I made to Card. Bellarmines second Reply, by
which he pretended to prove the subjection of the temporal power to the
spiritual, D. Schulckenius Page 343.
replieth in this manner. I answer that my Adversary Widdrington says nothing,
which does weaken Card. Bellarmines argument. That which Card. Bellarmine did
assume, to wit, that a temporal Prince is bound to change his manner of
government, not only, least that he should hurt in spirituals his own
subjects, but also least that he should hurt other Christians, my Adversary
Widdrington does grant. And in this assumption, or antecedent proposition all
the force of Card. Bellarmines argument does consist. Besides, when Widdrington
denies, that the temporal power is per se subject to the spiritual, or that
both of them be parts of one, and the self same Christian commonwealth, and
afterward grants, that a temporal King, and those, who are ciuilly subject
unto him, are members of the mystical body, and Citizens of the same
spiritual Kingdom, he does manifestly contradict himself. For what else is
this, that Christian Kings and their Subjects are members of the same mystical
body of Christ, and Citizens of the same spiritual Kingdom, I say, what else
is this, then that Christian Kings, and their Lay-Subiects are parts of the
Christian commonwealth? For the Christian commonwealth, and the mystical
body of Christ, and the spiritual Kingdom of Christ are altogether the same:
of which commonwealth Kings with Laikes, Bishops with Clerks are parts, as
oftentimes has been said. In which Christian com-wealth, and mystical body,
and Kingdom of Christ all things are so well disposed and ordered, that
temporal things do serve spiritual, and civil power is subject to
Ecclesiastical, which conclusion my Adversary Widdrington has many ways
attempted to overthrow, but he was not able. And he was not able not only to
overthrow the conclusion, but also he has not been able to weaken at all with
any probable answer the first argument which Card. Bellarmine brought to prove
this conclusion, which the Readers will easily perceive, if without
perturbation of mind they will consider that which has been said by us.

24 But this Reply of D. Schulckenius is as fraudulent, and insufficient, as
the former: for in effect it is only a repetition of his former Reply, to which
I have already answered, besides some fraudulent dealing, which he has used
herein. And first it is very true, that I granted the antecedent proposition of
this second Reply of Card. Bellarmine, but that all the force of Card.
Bellarmines argument does consist in the antecedent proposition, or assumption,
as D. Schulckenius affirms, is very untrue, and I wonder, that D.
Schulckenius is not ashamed with such boldness to affirm the same. The
Antecedent proposition was, that a Christian Prince is bound to change the
manner of his temporal government, if it hurt the spiritual good, not only of
his own Subjects, but also of the Subjects of other Christian Princes, and
this proposition I did willingly grant him, but the force of his argument did
not consist only in this antecedent proposition, as D. Schulckenius untruly
affirms, but in the consequence, which he inferred from this antecedent
proposition, or if we will reduce his argument to a syllogisticall form, in
his Minor proposition, or assumption, which was this, but of this, to wit, that
a Christian Prince is bound to change the manner of his temporal government in
the case aforesaid, no other reason can be given, but that both powers are
members of the same body, and one power or body subject to the other. And this
consequence, assumption, or Minor proposition, wherein the whole force of his
argument did consist, I utterly denied, and I alleged, as you have seen, an
other plain and perspicuous reason, why a Christian Prince in the case
aforesaid is bound to change the manner of his temporal government, to wit,
not for that temporal power is per se subject to the spiritual, or for that
they make one total body, or commonwealth, consisting of temporal and
spiritual power, but for that all Christians, both Princes and subjects, are
parts and members not only of the temporal, but also of the spiritual
commonwealth, for which cause a Christian Prince is bound to change the manner
of his temporal government, when it is hurtful to the spiritual good of the
Church, or spiritual kingdom of Christ, whereof he is a true part and member,
as I declared before.

25. Secondly, it is very untrue, that I do any way contradict my self, as
D. Schulckenius affirms, first in denying that temporal power is per se
subject to the spiritual, or that both of them are parts of one and the
selfsame Christian commonwealth or Church of Christ, and afterward in
granting, that temporal Kings, and their subjects, are members of the same
spiritual kingdom or Church of Christ. For these propositions, temporal
power is not per se, subject to spiritual power, and temporal Princes are
subject to spiritual power, are not repugnant or contradictorie one to the
other, as neither these propositions are contradictory, Temporal power and
spiritual power, are not parts of the spiritual kingdom or Church of Christ,
and temporal Princes are parts of the spiritual kingdom or Church of Christ.
For contradiction according to Aristotle Lib. 1. de Interp. cap. 4.
, is an affirming and denying of the same thing, and in the same manner: But
there is no man so ignorant that will affirm that the same thing, and in the
same manner is affirmed and denied in the aforesaid propositions: for the
subject of the first propositions, is temporal power in abstracto, and it is
taken formally, and in the second propositions it is temporal power in
concreto, and it is taken only materially, and has this sense, that temporal
Princes, who have both temporal power, and also spiritual subjection, are
indeed subject to the spiritual power, and are parts and members of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, but not formally, as they have temporal power,
but only materially, who have temporal power, but formally as they have
spiritual subjection. But D. Schulckenius does manifestly contradict himself,
as I plainly showed before Cap. 2.
, first affirming, That the Church of Christ is compounded of temporal and
spiritual power, which are formally two distinct powers, as he himself also
confesses, and afterward in denying, that it is compounded of temporal, or
civil power, which is formally civil.

26. But mark now good Reader, what fraud D. Schulckenius uses in proving,
that I do manifestly contradict my self. He would seem to his Reader to
prove, that I affirm and deny one and the self same thing: for this he takes
upon him to prove, and yet he proves nothing else, but that which I have
always affirmed, and never denied, to wit, that Christian Kings, and their
subjects are parts and members of the Church, and subject to the spiritual
power thereof, but the contradiction, which he pretended to prove, he does not
prove at all, nor make any show of proof thereof, to wit, that it is all one
to say, that Christian Princes and their subjects are parts and members of the
Church, and subject to her spiritual power, which I always granted, and that
the temporal and spiritual power do compound the Church, or that the
temporal power it self is per se, subject to the spiritual power of the
Church, which I ever denied, and out of Card. Bellarmines own grounds have
clearly proved the contrary, and have plainly showed, that temporal power
does only compound a temporal or civil body or commonwealth, whereof the
King is head, as D. Schulckenius does here expressly affirm, and that the
Church of Christ his mystical body, and spiritual Kingdom, or Christian
commonwealth (taking the Christian commonwealth for the Church only, and not
for the Christian world, as it contains temporal and spiritual power) is
compounded only of spiritual, and not of temporal power. In which Church of
Christ, and also Christian world, all things are so well ordered and disposed,
that temporal things ought by the intention of good Christians, to serve
spiritual things, and temporal Princes, although in spiritualls they are
subject to the spiritual power of the Church, yet in temporalls, or as they
have temporal power, they are not subject but supreme, and consequently the
temporal power it self speaking properly and formally, is not subject to the
spiritual, nor does compound the spiritual kingdom or Church of Christ. And
therefore I have not only weakened, but also quite overthrown, and that out
of his own grounds this conclusion of Card. Bellarmine, and all those three
arguments, which he brought to confirm the same, as any judicious Reader, who
will duly examine both our writings, will easily perceive.

Chap. 8.
Wherein is examined the fourth argument, taken from the authority of S.
Gregory Nazianzene, comparing the temporal and spiritual power among
Christians, to the body and soul in man.

1. THE fourth argument, which Card. Bellarmine brings to prove this
subjection of of the temporal power among Christians, to the spiritual power
of the Church, is taken from the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzene, who
compares the temporal and spiritual power among Christians to the body and
soul in man: yea, and also affirms, that temporal Magistrates are subject
to spiritual Pastors. And this similitude does so greatly please Card.
Bellarmines conceit, that when he has any fit occasion, he spares not to
inculcate it, as a very strong argument, and fit similitude to prove, that the
temporal power among Christians is per se, and of it own nature subject to
the spiritual, as the body in man is per se, subject to the soul. For as the
spirit and flesh, says he Lib. 5. de Ro^. pont. cap. 6.
, are in man, so are the spiritual and temporal power in the Church. For the
spirit and flesh are as it were two commonwealths, which may be found
separated, and also united. The flesh has sense and appetite, to which are
answerable their acts and proper objects, and of all which the immediate end is
the health and good constitution of the body. The spirit has understanding and
will, and acts and proportionate objects, and for her end the health and
perfection of the soul. The flesh is found without the spirit in beasts, the
spirit is found without the flesh in Angels.

2 Whereby it is manifest, that neither of them is precisely for the other. The
flesh also is found united to the spirit in man, where because they make one
person, they have necessarily subordination and connection. For the flesh is
subject, the spirit is superior, and although the spirit does not intermeddle
her self with the actions of the flesh, but does suffer the flesh to exercise
all her actions, as she does exercise in beasts, yet when they do hurt the
end of the spirit, the spirit does command the flesh, and does punish her, and
if it be needful, does appoint fastings, and also other afflictions, even with
some detriment, and weakening of the body, and does compel the tongue not to
speak, the eyes not to see, etc. In like manner if any action of the flesh,
yea and death it self, be necessary to obtain the end of the spirit, the
spirit has power to command the flesh to expose her self and all hirs, as we
see in Martyrs.

3 Even so the civil power has her Princes, laws, judgments etc. and
likewise the Ecclesiastical has her Bishops, Canons, judgments. The civil
has for her end temporal peace, the spiritual everlasting salvation. They
are sometimes found separated, as long since in the time of the Apostles,
sometimes united as now. And when they are united, they make one body, and
therefore they ought to be connected, and the inferior subject, and
subordained to the superior. Therefore the spiritual power does not
intermeddle her self with temporal affairs, but does suffer all things to
proceed, as before they were united, so that they be not hurtful to the
spiritual end, or not necessary to the attayning thereunto. But if any such
thing do happen, the spiritual power may and ought to compel the temporal
by all manner, and ways, which shall seem necessary thereunto.

4 Thus you see, that Card: Bellarmine has made here a plausible discourse,
but truly more beseeming, as I will most clearly convince, a cunning orator,
who with fine, and witty conceits seeks rather to please curious ears,
then a sound Divine, who with substantial arguments, and forcible proofs
should endeavor to convince the understanding of judicious men, especially in
such points, as are pretended to belong to Catholic faith, and eternal
salvation. For neither is the temporal and spiritual power among Christians
well compared to the body, and soul of man, either in union, or in subjection,
and besides, although it were in all things a fit similitude, yet it does not
any way prove that, which Card. Bellarmine pretends to prove thereby, but it
does clearly and directly, as you shall see, convince the flat contrary.

5 For first, as I showed before Cap. 2. 3.
out of Card Bellarmines own grounds, the temporal and spiritual power, as
they are referred to their visible heads here on earth, do not make properly
and formally one total body, or commonwealth, which is the spiritual
kingdom, or Church of Christ, but they do make properly, and formally two
total bodies, or common wealths, to wit, earthly kingdoms, or a temporal,
and civil body, whereof the King is head, as D. Schulckenius expressly
affirms Page 339.
, and the spiritual kingdom, mystical body, or Church of CHRIST, whereof
the Pope is head, and which as D. Schulckenius also affirms, Page 203.
is only compounded of spiritual power. Seeing therefore, that the reason why
Card. Bellarmine affirms, that temporal power among Christians is subject to
the spiritual, is for that they do make one total body, or commonwealth, as
the body and soul do make one man, and consequently the temporal power must
be subject to the spiritual, as the body is subject to the soul of man, and
as I have clearly proved, there is no such union of the temporal and
spiritual power to make one total body consisting of both powers, which is
the spiritual kingdom or Church of CHRIST, it is manifest, that Card
Bellarmines argument drawn from this similitude of the soul and body, being
grounded upon this union of the temporal and spiritual power, compounding one
total body, has no sure ground, or foundation at all.

6 Secondly, although I do willingly grant, as you have seen before Cap. 1.
, that not only the temporal and spiritual power among Christians, as they
are referred not to their visible heads here on earth, but to CHRIST the
invisible head of them both, do make one total body, or commonwealth,
consisting actually of both powers, which may be called the Christian world
(in which sense the Christian common wealth is usually taken, but the Church of
CHRIST, and especially the spiritual kingdom of CHRIST is seldom taken in
that sense) but also the whole world, consisting of Christians, and Infidells,
may in that manner be called one total body, whereof CHRIST, at least wise,
as he is GOD, is the invisible, and celestial head, nevertheless this
similitude of the soul and body united in one man does nothing avail to
prove the subjection of the temporal power to the spiritual, both united in
one total body, whereof CHRIST only, and no earthly creature is the head.
For the reason, why the body in man is subject to the soul, is because the
body and soul do make one essential compound, as the Philosophers do call
it, whereof the body is the matter, and the soul is the form, and
consequently the body must of necessity, and by a natural sequel, be
subject to the soul, as every matter is per se and of it own nature subject to
the form, with which it makes one essential compound, but the temporal and
spiritual power or earthly Kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom of Christ, as
they make one total body, whereof Christ only is the head, do not make one
essential compound, whereof one is as the matter, and the other as the form,
but they do make one integrall compound, as the Philosophers do call it, in
that manner as the body of man is compounded of eyes, ears, tongue, hands,
feet, which are called by the Philosophers integrall, and not essential parts
of man's body; but in an integrall compound, it is not necessary, as I showed
before Cap. 6. nu: 10.
, that one part be subject to another, although all must be subject to the
head, as it is apparent in the eyes, ears, tongue, hands, and feet of man's
body, whereof none is subject one to the other, although all be subject to the
head. Seeing therefore that the temporal and spiritual power are only
integrall parts of the total body, whereof Christ only is the head, it is
evident that from hence no probable argument can be drawn to prove, that the
temporal power is subject to the spiritual, but that both of them are united
and subject to Christ the invisible head of them both.

7. Thirdly, although I should also grant, that this were a fit similitude in
all things, and that the temporal power is subject to the spiritual in that
manner as the body is subject to the soul of man, yet this manner of
subjection would nothing avail to prove, that the spiritual power could
either directly, or indirectly dispose of temporalls, deprive temporal Princes
of their temporal lives or dominions, use temporal punishments, or exercise
any temporal action, but it is rather a very fit similitude to convince the
flat contrary. For as I will easily grant, that the soul has power to
command, or forbid the body to exercise any corporal action, when it is
necessary or hurtful to the end not only of the soul but also of the body,
(which last clause Card. Bellarmine cunningly omitteth, for that it favors,
as you shall see, the Popes direct power to command temporalls) as to see, to
hear, to speak, and such like actions, which are subject to the command of
man's will, I say, which are subject to the command of man's will, for that there
be many corporal actions, which are not in the power of man's will to command,
as are all the actions of the nutritive, vegetative and generatiue powers; But
if the body by any let, or hinderance can not, or (if it were possible) would
not do that corporal action, which the soul would willingly have the body to
do, as to see, to hear, to speak, or to go, the soul has no power of her
self either directly, or indirectly, that is, either for the good of the body,
or for the good of the soul, to do that corporal action, as to see, hear,
speak, or go, without the concurrence of the body it self.

8. Neither has the soul any power to inflict any corporal punishment by way
of coercion or constraint, that is, to punish actually with corporal
punishment any member of the body without the concurrence of some one or other
member thereof, but only by the way of command, that is, to command some one
member to punish it self; or an other member, as the hands, feet, or head, to
put themselves into fire or water, or the hands, to whip the shoulders, to
close thy eyelids, to stop the ears, not to put meat into the mouth, and
such like, which if the bodily member by any let, or hinderance can not, or, if
it were possible, would not do, the soul has done all that is in her power
to do, for that she cannot of her self do any corporal action, without the
concurrence of some corporal member, but the most that she can do concerning
any corporal action or punishment, is to command the body to concur with her
to the doing of that corporal action, or punishment. I said [if it were
possible] for that there is such a natural, necessary, and intrinsecall
subjection of the body to the soul, that the body cannot resist the effectual
command of the soul in those things which are subject to her command, and
therefore I said, that if it were possible, that the body could resist the
command of the soul, yet the soul of her self has not power to exercise any
corporal action without the concurrance of a corporal organ; which manner of
subjection is not between the temporal and spiritual power, for that this
subjection being in diverse persons having free will, is free and voluntary,
and therefore the command may be resisted, but the former being of the body to
the soul, making one only person, who has free will, is necessary and
natural, and therefore can not be resisted.

9. In the like manner I will easily grant, that the temporal power is subject
to the spiritual, or rather that temporal Princes, who have temporal power,
but not as they have temporal power, are subject to spiritual Pastors, who
have spiritual power, in such sort, that the spiritual Pastor has power to
command the temporal Prince to do those temporal actions belonging to his
temporal power, which are necessary to the end of the spiritual power, and
to forbid him those actions belonging to his temporal power, which are
repugnant to the end of the spiritual power, which is eternal salvation,
which if he refuse to do, and will not obey the command of the spiritual
Pastor, the spiritual Pastor can not by virtue only of his spiritual power
exercise any temporal; or civil action, belonging to the temporal, or civil
power, without the consent, or concurrance of the temporal power: Neither can
the spiritual Pastor inflict any temporal, or civil punishment by way of
coercion, constraint, or compulsion, that is, punish actually with any
temporal, or civil punishment without the consent, and concurrance of the
temporal, or civil power, but only by the way of command, that is, he has
power to command the temporal Prince, who only has supreme temporal
authority, to punish himself, or his subjects with temporal, or civil
punishments, if they use their temporals to the hurt? and prejudice of the
spiritual power, or the end thereof? although I do willingly grant, that the
spiritual Pastor has power to punish the temporal Prince, or his subjects,
with spiritual punishments, not only by the way of command, but also of
coercion and constraint that is, to punish them actually, whether they will or
no, with spiritual punishments, when they shall refuse to obey his just
command, for that this manner of punishing by way of coercion does not exceed
the limits of the spiritual coerciue power.

10. Now if my Adversaries demand or me, why the spiritual power may of her
self command temporal actions, and yet neither directly, nor indirectly, that
is, neither for temporal, nor spiritual good, exercise temporal actions, may
command civil punishments, when they are necessary to the end of the
spiritual power, and yet neither directly, nor indirectly punish actually with
civil punishments without the concurrance of the spiritual power, I answer
them by their own similitude, which pleases them so much; for the same
reason, that the soul has power of her self to command bodily actions, and
yet neither directly, nor indirectly, that is, neither for the good of the
body, nor of the soul, to do of her self alone any bodily action, has power
to command bodily punishments, and yet of her self has not power to inflict
any bodily punishment, without the concurrance of the body it self. And thus
you see, that this similitude, of which Card. Bellarmine, and his followers do
make so great account, is no fit similitude to prove their doctrine, but
rather to confirm ours, and that from this similitude no probable argument can
be drawn to prove, that the spiritual Pastor has power either directly or
indirectly to dispose of temporals, to depose temporal Princes, or to punish
temporally by way of coercion or constraint.

11. But fourthly, although the temporal and spiritual power were aptly
compared by Card. Bellarmine to the body and soul, yet it would prove two
things more then he, as I suppose, would willingly admit; The first is, that:
the temporal power can exercise no temporal action without the concurrance
and assistance of the spiritual power, as the body can do no corporal
action, unless the soul also, as an efficient cause thereof, do concur
thereunto; For this is a clear and approved principle in philosophy, that
the soul is cause of all motions in the body, according to that common
definition or description of the soul assigned by Aristotle 2. De Anima tex.
24.
; Animaid est, quo vinimus, and sentimus, and mouemur, and intelligimus primo.
The soul is that, whereby we first or principally live, and have sense, and
are moved, and do understand.

12. The second is, that the spiritual power may command or forbid the civil
power to exercise civil actions, not only when they are necessary, or
hurtful to the end of the spiritual power, which is the health of the soul,
but also when they are necessary or hurtful to the end of the temporal
power, which is temporal peace, as the soul has power to command or forbid
the body to exercise bodily actions, as to see, hear, speak etc. not only
when they are necessary, or hurtful to the end, and good of the soul, which
is spiritual life and health, but also when they are necessary or hurtful to
the good of the body, which is bodily health and life. And therefore Card.
Bellarmine declaring this similitude of the spirit and flesh does only affirm,
that the spirit does command the flesh, when her actions are hurtful to the
end of the spirit, but cunningly omitteth, that the spirit also dorh command
the flesh, when her actions are necessary, or hurtful to the end of the
flesh, least the Reader should presently perceive thereby the disparity of this
similitude, or else from thence infer, that in the same manner the spiritual
power may command the temporal power not only in order to spiritual good,
but also in order to temporal good, which is the Canonist, doctrine, and which
Card. Bellarmine does at large impugn.

13. Lastly, in what manner S. Gregory Nazianzene did compare the temporal and
spiritual power, or rather temporal and spiritual Princes to the body and
soul, I have sufficiently declared before Cap. 3.
to wit, not in the manner of their union or subjection, but only in nobility,
and in that temporal Princes are in as excellent and worthy manner subject to
temporal Princes, as spiritual things are more excellent and worthy then
temporal. So that neither from the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzene, nor
from the similitude it self of the body and soul, as it is declared and
urged by Card, Bellarmine, can it with any probability be gathered, that the
spiritual power can of her self exercise any temporal action belonging to
the civil power, without the concurrance of the civil power, although it be
necessary to the end of the spiritual power, as the soul cannot of her self
without the concurrance of the body exercise any bodily action, although it be
necessary to the end, not only of the body, but also of the soul. And
therefore I marvel, that Card. Bellarmine could be so much ouerseene, as to
urge and repeat so often this similitude of the soul and body to prove the
Popes power to depose, and to dispose of all temporals, which is so flat
against him, and which, if it were a fit similitude, does rather confirm the
doctrine of the Canonists, whom Card. Bellarmine takes upon him to confute,
then his own opinon. But the truth is, that it confirms neither, for that,
as I declared before, Cap. 2.3.
the temporal and spiritual power, or the temporal and spiritual
Commonwealth are not parts compounding one total Body or Commonwealth, as
the body and soul do compound a perfect man.

Chap 9.
Wherein the fifth argument to prove the subjection of the temporal power to
the spiritual, taken from the authority of S. Bernard and Pope Boniface the
eight, is examined.

1. THe fifth argument, which Car. Bellarmine brings Lib. 5. de R^m Pont. c. 7.
to prove the subjection of the temporal power among Christians to the
spiritual, is taken from the authority of S. Bernard Lib. 4. de considerat
and Pope Boniface the eight, in the Extrauagant, Vnam Sanctam, who does
imitate, says Card. Bellarmine, S. Bernards words. The words of S. Bernard to
Pope Eugenius are these. Why do thou again attempt to usurp, or use
Vsurpare.
the sword, which once thou wast commanded to put up into the scabbard? which
nevertheless he that denies to be thine, does seem to me not sufficiently
to have considered the speech of our Lord saying, Return thy sword into the
scabbard. Therefore it is also thine, to be drawn forth perchance at thy beck
Nutu tuo.
, or direction, although not with thy hand. Otherwise if also it does in no
manner appertain to thee, when the Apostles said, Behold to swords here, our
Lord had not answered, It is enough, but it is too much. Therefore both the
spiritual, and the material sword do belong to the Church, but the material
is indeed to be exercised, or drawn forth for the Church; but the spiritual
also by the Church: the spiritual with the hand of the Priest, the material
with the hand of the Soldier, but indeed at the book, or direction, of the
Priest, and at the command of the Emperor.

2. The pricipall words of Pope Boniface, besides those which he does imitate
out of S Bernard are, That in the Catholic, and Apostolic Church, whereof
Christ is the head, and S. Peter his Vicar, and in her power there be two
swords, the spiritual, and the temporal, as we are instructed by those words
of the Gospel, Behold here; that is in the Church, two swords, etc. And that
the sword must be under the sword, the temporal authority subject to the
spiritual power. For the spiritual, the truth so witnessing, has to instruct
the earthly power, and to judge if it be not good. So of the Church, and of the
Ecclesiastical power, the prophecy of Jeremy is verified, behold I have
appointed thee this day over nations and Kingdoms, and the rest which follow.
Therefore if the earthly power goes out of the way, she shall be judged by
the spiritual power, but if the inferior spiritual power goes out of the
way, she shall be judged by her superior, but if the supreme goes out of the
way, she can be judged by God alone, and not by man, according to the
testimony of the Apostle, That the spiritual man judges all things, and he is
judged by none. From all which Card. Bellarmine, who only relates S. Bernards
words, and affirms, that Pope Boniface does imitate the same, does conclude,
that the meaning of S. Bernard, and Pope Boniface was to affirm, that both the
temporal and spiritual sword are in the power of the Pope, and that the Pope
has per se, and properly the spiritual sword, and because the temporal sword
is subject to the spiritual, therefore the Pope may command, or forbid a King
the use of the temporal sword, when the necessity of the Church does require
it.

3. Thus you see what S. Bernard and Pope Boniface do affirm, and also that
Card. Bellarmine infers, and concludes from their words. And although to
this, which Card. Bellarmine infers from their words, there needs no
answer at all, for that I do willingly grant all that, which he does infer,
to wit, that the temporal sword is subject in some cases to the commanding
power of the Pope, and that the Pope may command, or forbid a King the use of
the temporal sword, when the necessity of the Church shall require it: seeing
that the question between me and Card. Bellarmine is not concerning the Popes
commanding power, and whether the Pope may command a King to use the temporal
sword in the necessity of the Church, as I have oftentimes in all my Books
expressly affirmed, but concerning the Popes coerciue power, and whether if a
King will not use the temporal sword at the Popes command, the Pope has power
to use it himself, and may constrain a King not only with spiritual, but
also with temporal compulsion, and punishment to fulfill his just command;
Nevertheless, because Card. Bellarmine has now in his Schulckenius, taken
some exceptions against the answer, which I made in my Apology to the
authortie of S. Bernard, and consequently of Pope Boniface, who, as he says,
does imitate S. Bernards words, I think it not amiss to set down my answer,
and also his Reply, that so the Reader may clearly perceive, whether S.
Bernard does favor, or disfavor Card. Bellarmines opinion concerning the
Popes power to use the temporal sword, in case a temporal King will not use
it at the Popes command, and whether D. Schulckenius has sufficiently confuted
the answer, which I did make to the aforesaid authority of S. Bernard.

4 Thus therefore I answered in my Apology Nu. 196. and seq.
, that the words of S. Bernard do only signify, that both the material, and
the spiritual sword do belong in some sort to the Church, and are subject
unto her, not for that the civil power is per se, and of it own nature
subject to the Ecclesiastical, or that the Church, has by the law of God any
power to use the material sword even in order to spiritual good, but because
Christian Princes, being children of the Church, are bound (and consequently
the Church may command them, and by Ecclesiastical Censures compel them
thereunto) in defense of their holy mother the Church, to use the temporal
sword. Wherefore although the Church, when she has present need, has power to
command, or forbid the use of the material sword, or rather without any
positive, or constitutiue command of the Church Secular Princes are bound in
that case to use it, yet it does not therefore follow, that the Church her
self has dominion, right, or power to use the corporal sword, seeing that to
command the use thereof, and to use it her self are far different things, as
I have showed before Number. 99.
yea and the very words of S. Bernard do plainly show as much. For otherwise
if the Church, that is, as she consists of Ecclesiastical power, should
have the dominion of the material sword, and might use it in order to
spiritual good, it might by the law of God be drawn forth and used, not only
for the Church but also by the Church, not only with the hand of the soldier,
but also of the Priest, which nevertheless S. Bernard does affirm to be
against our Saviors command, who commanded S. Peter to put up his sword into
the scabberd.

5 Wherefore I do not mislike that very exposition (if it be rightly
understood) which Card: Bellarmine him self gathers from those words of S.
Bernard, who in this very place, as you have seen, does affirm, that S.
Bernard, and Pope Boniface did by those words signify, that the Pope has per
se, and properly the spiritual sword, (as a temporal Prince has per se, and
properly the material sword) and because the temporal power is subject to the
spiritual (not per se, but per accidens to command temporal things in order
to spiritual good, but not to punish temporally by way of coercion, but only
spiritually as I have often declared) therefore the Pop-hath power to command
or forbid a King the use of the temporal sword, when the necessity of the
Church does require it.

6 Therefore the temporal sword according to the opinion of S. Bernard does
belong to the Pope, and is called his sword, for that, when the necessity of
the Church does require, it is to be drawn forth for the Church, but not by
the Church, with the hand of the soldier, but not of the Priest, at the beck
indeed, or direction, of the Priest, but at the command of the Emperor. By
which last words S. Bernard does signify, that the Emperor in using the
temporal sword for the necessity of the Church is indeed to be directed by
the Pope (for that the Pope ought to declare, when the Church has necessity,
but the use it self of the sword does immediately depend upon the Emperors
command, to whose command the soldiers in using the temporal sword are
immediately subject.

7 But what if the Emperor shall refuse to use the temporal sword at the
Popes beck, or direction? Has therefore the Pope, according to S. Bernards
opinion, power to draw it forth himself, or can the Emperor by the Popes
authority be deprived of the dominion thereof? No truly. But because he does
not keep that promise, which he has given to the Church, and contrary to the
law of God he does not relieve the necessities of the Church, the Church has
power to punish him with Ecclesiastical and spiritual punishments, as I have
often said. Wherefore these words of S. Bernard do nothing favor the Popes
temporal power, or his power to use the temporal sword, but rather do
directly concontradict it. And this very answer has Ioannes Parisiensis in
Tract. de potest Regia, and Papali cap. 1^.
in express words etc. Thus I answered in my Apology.

8 Now you shall see, how well D. Schulckenius replyeth to this my answer. I
answer, says he Page 386. ad number. 196.
, that which my Adversary Widdrington first does say, that both the swords do
belong to the Church, he says well, but that which he adds, that both the
swords are subject to the Church, he says not well. For the spiritual sword
to be subject to the Church, does signify no other thing, then that the Popes
power is subject to the Church, which is manifestly false, whereas contrariwise
it is to be said, that the Church is subject to the spiritual sword, or to
the power of the Pope, unless perchance Widdrington be of opinion, that the
Shepherd is subject to his sheep, and not the sheep to the Shepherd.

9 Mark now, good Reader, the cunning, not to say, fraudulent proceeding of
this man. Hitherto he has, as you have seen, taken the Church, the Christian
commonwealth, the mystical body, or spiritual kingdom of Christ to be all
one, and to be one total body, consisting both of temporal, and spiritual
power, and compares her to a man compounded of body and soul; And may it
not, I pray you, be rightly said, that all the powers both of body and soul
are subject to man? and why then may it not also be rightly said, that the
spiritual sword or power is subject to the Church? But now forsooth this
Doctor, that he might take an occasion to charge me with a manifest falsehood,
will not take the Church, as he took it before for the whole mystical body
of Christ, which total body includes both the Pope, and all other inferior
members thereof, in which sense I did take the Church, when I affirmed, that
not only the spiritual, but also the temporal sword is in some sort subject
to the Church, but he will take the Church for one part only of this
mystical body, to wit, for all the members of the Church besides the Pope, in
which sense the Church is indeed sometimes taken, as when the Church is
compared with the Pope, and it is said, that the Pope is head of the Church;
but when the Church is compared with Christ, and is said to be the mystical
body and spiritual kingdom of Christ, the Church does include both the Pope,
and all other inferior members thereof, who jointly make one total body,
whereof Christ is the head. And the very like is seen in the body of man; for
when the body is compared with the head, the body does not include the head,
but when the body is compared with the soul, and said to be subject to the
soul, and that of the body and soul is made one man, then the body does
also include the head.

10. Wherefore taking the Church, as it does signify the whole mystical body
of Christ, in which sense both Card. Bellarmine himself, and also S. Bernard
in this very place do take it, when they affirm, that the material sword is
to be drawn forth for the Church, and the spiritual by the Church, it is
truly said, that the spiritual sword is subject to the Church: Neither does
this signify, that the Popes spiritual power, is subject to the Church, for
now the Church is taken, as it excludes the Pope, but rather that all
spiritual power, which is in any member of the Church, is subject to the whole
body of the Church, and consequently to the Pope, in whom all the power of the
Church according to Cardinal Bellarmines opinion, does reside. And would not
D. Schulckenius think, that I did cavil, if I should say of him, as he says
of me, that he spoke not rightly, when in this very place he affirms, that
Christ gave to the Church both the swords. For the spiritual sword to be given
to the Church does signify no other thing, to use his own words, then that
the Popes power was by Christ our Savior given to the Church, which in Card.
Bellarmines opinion is not only manifestly false, but also an erroneous
doctrine.

11. I omit now, that the ancient Doctors of Paris, (who hold, that the whole
body of the Church taken collectiue, and not including the Pope, which a
general Council lawfully assembled does represent, is superior to the Pope)
would not think to speak any falsehood at all, if they should say, that Christ
gave all the power, which the Pope has, also to the Church, and that the Popes
power is subject to the Church, and that it does not therefore follow, that the
Pastor is subject to the sheep, or the superior to the inferior, but rather
contrariwise. But in very truth this was not my meaning, when I affirmed, that
both swords are in some sort subject to the Church, for by the name of Church I
understood also the Pope, as I declared before

12. Secondly, when Widdrington affirms, says D. Schulckenius, that the
civil power is not per se subject to the Ecclesiastical, he does corrupt the
text of S. Bernard, and of Pope Boniface the eight. For when S. Bernard says,
that the material sword is the Popes, and is to be drawn forth at his beck,
and direction, he clearly confesses, that the material sword is subject to
the spiritual sword, which Pope Boniface does declare more plainly, when he
says, that the sword must be under the sword, and temporal authority subject
to spiritual power.

13. But how shamefully D. Schulckenius accuses me of corrupting the text of
S. Bernard, and Pope Boniface, let the Reader judge; seeing that I neither add,
nor diminish, nor alter any one word of their text, but do say the very same
words which they do say. For S. Bernard does say, that the material sword is
the Popes, and does belong to the Pope, but with this limitation, in some sort,
to be drawn forth for the Church, but not by the Church, with the hand of
the Soldier, not of the Priest, at the beck, or direction, of the Priest, but
at the command of the Emperor: and I also say the very same. But S. Bernard
does not say, that the material sword is subject to the spiritual sword per
se, but only in some sort, to be drawn forth for the Church, not by the Church
etc. From which words it is plainly gathered, that the material sword, or
temporal power is, according to S. Bernard, subject to the spiritual, not per
se, but per accidons, in spiritualls, not in temporalls, to be commanded in
some case by the Priest, as he is a Priest, but not to be drawn forth, or used
by a Priest as he is a Priest, but as he is a temporal Prince, or a public,
or private soldier. In like manner I say with Pope Boniface, that the sword is
under the sword, and the temporal power is subject to the spiritual, but Pope
Boniface does not say, that the sword is per se under the sword, and the
temporal power is per se subject to spiritual authority, and therefore,
seeing that he does imitate S. Bernards words, as Card. Bellarmine here
affirms, he is to be understood in that sense, as S. Bernard understood them,
to wit, that the sword is under the sword, in some sort, and the temporal
power subject to the spiritual in some sort, to be drawn forth, or used for
the Church, but not by the Church etc. as I now declared.

14. Thirdly, when Widdrington, affirms, says D. Schulckenius, that the
Church has not by the law of God power to use the material sword even in
order to spiritual good, he speaks too ambiguously. For the law of God does
not command Ecclesiastical men to use with their own hand the material sword,
neither does it so forbid them, but that his lawful for them in some cases to
use it also with their own hand: But nevertheless according to S. Bernards
opinion Christ gave both the swords to the Church, and by this he gave her
power to use the material sword in that manner, as does beseem her, to wit, by
the service, or hands of others, in directing Secular Princes, that they draw
it forth, or put it in the scabard, as it is expedient to the honor of God,
and the salvation of Christian people.

15. But my words are very plain, and no whit ambiguous I say, that the
Church, taking the Church, not materially, for all the members of the Church,
but for Churchmen, formally as they are Churchmen, or which is all one, for the
Church, as it consists of Ecclesiastical power, are according to S. Bernards
doctrine commanded not to draw forth, or use with their own hands the
material sword even in order to spiritual good. For S. Bernards words are
plain, why do thou again attempt to use the sword, which thou wast once,
not only counseled, but commanded to put up into the scabard etc. But if the
Pope become a temporal Prince or a Priest do lawfully become a Soldier, to fight
either in his own defense, or in the defense of others, which Christ did not
forbid, although the Church in some cases has forbidden it, neither I, nor S.
Bernard do deny, that the Pope, as he is a temporal Prince, or a Priest, as
he is a lawful Soldier, has power to use with their own hands the material
sword. Neither did S. Bernard ever grant, that the Pope, as he is Pope, or a
Priest as he is a Priest, or, which is all one, by his spiritual, or Priestly
authority, has power to draw forth, or to use with his own hands the
material sword, although the Pope by his spiritual power may direct and
command a temporal Prince to draw it forth, and use it, when the necessity
of the Church shall require, which only D. Schulckenius in this paragraph does
affirm.

16. Fourthly, that is false, says D. Schulckenius, Page 387.
which Widdrington affirms, that the material sword in that only sense does
belong to the Church, because Secular Princes being children of the Church are
bound to fight in defense of the Church their mother. For S. Bernard does grant
much more to the Ecclesiastical Prince, when he says, Therefore it is also
thine, to wit, the material sword. And beneath, Therefore both the spiritual
and the material sword are the Churches, but the material sword is to be
drawn forth for the Church, and the spiritual also by the Church, the
spiritual with the hand of the Priest, the material with the hand of the
Soldier, but truly at the beck, or direction of the Priest, and at the
command of the Emperor. Where S. Bernard does not only signify, that
Soldiers or Princes are bound to draw forth the sword for the Church, but
also at the beck, or direction of the Priest, that is, with subordination to
the Ecclesiastical power, as Soldiers ought to use the sword with
subordination to the command of the Emperor.

17. But any man who reads over but slightly my answer in that place, will
easily perceive, that this is a mere cavil, and also a plain untruth; for
that in express words I do affirm, that Secular Princes and Soldiers are,
according to S. Bernard, to draw forth, and use the material sword for the
necessity of the Church, at the beck, counsel, direction, yea, and command of
the Priest, which is as much, as D. Schulckenius here affirms S. Bernard to
say; although S. Bernard did expressly distinguish betwixt beck and command,
at the beck, says he, of the Priest, but at the command of the Emperor;
whereby it is manifest, that S. Bernard did not account beck and command to be
all one, and consequently, he did not approve the same subordination to be
betwixt Secular Princes, and the Priest in using the material sword, as is
betwixt Soldiers, and the Emperor. For albeit S. Bernard by the name of beck
did not only understand advise and counsel, which Christian Princes in all
their weighty affairs concerning the Law of God and Christian Religion ought
to demand of learned Priests, and who are skillful in the Law of God, and
Christian Religion, but also a command to fight, and use the material sword in
defense of the Church and Christian Religion, and to the observing of which
command, Christian Princes may, as also I said, by Ecclesiastical censures be
compelled, yet this command being a declaratiue command, which does only
declare a former command of God, and nature, and does not make a new bond, but
only declare and signify a former obligation, may rather be called a
beckening, and signifying, that Christian Princes are by the Law of God bound
in that case to draw forth, fight, and use the material sword, then a true,
proper, and constitutiue command, which does not only signify. but also
induce a new bond or obligation.

18. And in this sense not only Ioannes Parisiensis, whom I cited before, Number.
8.
does understand those words of S. Bernard (at the beck indeed of the Priest)
but also our learned Countri-man Alexander of Hales, There is, says he, 3.
Par. q. 34. memb. 2. ar. 3.
an authority to command, and an authority to beckon; in the authority to
command it does follow, he does that thing by whose authority it is done, but
in the authority to beckon this does not follow. The authority to command
wicked men to be slain is in the Emperor, but the authority to beckon is in
the Pope and Priests. And this beckoning as has been said, is a preaching of
the Law of God, and an exhorting, that Princes will obey the Law of God,
Whereupon S. Bernard shows how both the material and spiritual sword are the
Churches, and do belong to the Church, not for as much as concerns use or
command, but for as much as concerns beckoning: whereupon he speaks in this
manner to Eugenius, he that denies the material sword to be thine, seems
to me not to regard sufficiently the word of our Lord saying, Return thy sword
into thy scabard, and so forth as it follows in S. Bernard.

19. Wherefore, according to S. Bernard, the material sword is subject to the
spiritual, not absolutely, but in some sort to be beckoned, but not to be
used or commanded, as beckoning is distinguished from command, by the Priest,
as he is a Priest. And therefore that Gloss, which D. Schulckenius makes of
those words [at the beck indeed of the Priest] that is, says he, with
subordination to the Ecclesiastical power, as Soldiers ought to use the sword
with subordination to the command of the Emperor, is very untrue, and expressly
against S. Bernards words; both because the Emperor has power to command the
soldier to use the material sword, but the Priest according to S. Bernard
has only power to beckon, but not to command the use thereof, and also
because if the Soldier will not use the material sword at the Emperors
command; the Emperor, as Emperor, may use it himself, and with his own
hand, which the Priest, as Priest, or, which is all one, the Ecclesiastical
power, according to S. Bernard, cannot do; and moreover because the Emperor,
as Emperor, may compel the soldier with temporal punishments to use the
material sword, and not only deprive him of his power and right to use the
same; but also of his temporal life, which the Priest, as Priest, or the
Ecclesiastical power, cannot do.

20. And therefore who would not marvel to see D. Schulckenius so boldly, and
in such public writings to affirm, That the question is not, whether the
spiritual Prince has dominion, right, or power to use the material sword:
but only, whether the sword be under the sword, and whether the temporal
power be subject to the spiritual. And whereas Widdrington, says he, in this
place confesses, that the Church has power to command, or forbid in time of
necessity the use of the material sword, from thence we do gather that the
sword is under the sword, and the temporal power is subject to the command,
and prohibition of the spiritual power, which only Card. Bellarmine in that
his second argument did intend. Wherefore Widdrington does seem to decline of
set purpose the principal question. For, as we have often said, the question
is not concerning the dominion, or use of the material sword, but concerning
the power to direct it, and concerning the subjection of the material sword to
the spiritual. But these in the option of S. Bernard are most manifest. And
for as much as appertains to the use of the material sword, we assent
altogether to S. Bernard, that it does not beseem Ecclesiastical men to use
the material sword, but only the spiritual, and thus much only those words
of our Savior do signify, Put up thy sword into thy scabbard, and those of
S. Bernard, Why do thou again attempt to use the sword, which once thou
wast commanded to put into the scabbard? For here it is not meant of the Law
of God, by which Ecclesiastical men are absolutely forbidden to use the
material sword; seeing that it is manifest, that in some cases, and especially
in defense of themselves, and of their Country: this is lawful, but of the
command of God, by which Clergy men are instructed, and taught, that their
vocation is not to fight with the material, but with the spiritual sword.
Thus D. Schulckenius.

21. But it is strange to see, how far affection will carry the pens of
learned men; In very truth I should never have imagined, that D. Schulckenius,
or any other learned man, who has read my Apology, would ever have been so
bold, as to affirm, That the question betwixt me, and Card. Bellarmine is not,
whether the Pope has power to use the material sword, but only whether the
sword be under the sword, and the temporal power subject to the command, and
prohibition of the spispirituall power, and that this only was intended by
Card. Bellarmine in his second argument. For first concerning the question
betwixt me, and Card. Bellarmine it is evident, that I have oftentimes
declared in my Apology, and D. Schulckenius also sets down my words, that
the true state of the question betwixt me and Card. Bellarmine, is not
concerning the Popes power to command, but to dispose of temporalls, nor
whether the sword be in any manner whatsoever under the sword, or the temporal
power in any sort subject to the spiritual, but in what manner the sword is
under the sword, and after what sort the temporal power is subject to the
spiritual. For I have often granted, that the spiritual power, or the Pope as
Pope, may command temporalls, and the use of the material sword, and punish
disobedient Princes with Ecclesiacall censures: but what, which I utterly
denied, was, that the spiritual power, or the Pope as Pope may dispose of
temporalls, use the material sword, or punish disobedient Princes by taking
away their lives, kingdoms, or goods.

22. Secondly, it is also manifest, that Card. Bellarmine in his second
argument did not only intend to prove, that the temporal power is subject to
the command, and prohibition of the spiritual power, as D. Schulckenius
affirms, but also, that the spiritual power may use, and dispose of
temporalls, depose temporal Princes, and institute others, and constrain or
punish with temporal punishments. For mark, I pray you, his second argument:
In the first part thereof he argues thus. The power to use and dispose of
temporalls (and consequently of the material sword which is a temporal thing)
is necessary to the spiritual end, because otherwise wicked Princes might
without punishment favor Heretics, and overthrow Religion, therefore the
Church has also, this power. And yet D. Schulckenius does not blush to
affirm, that Card. Bellarmine in his second argument did only intend to
prove, that the temporal power is subject to the command, and prohibition of
the spiritual power. And in the second part of his argument he concludes
thus: Therefore much more the spiritual commonwealth, has power to command
the temporal commonwealth, which is subject unto her, and to constrain her
to change her government, and to depose Princes, and to institute others, when
she can not otherwise defend her spiritual good. And in this manner are to be
understood the words of S. Bernard, and Pope Boniface, etc. Thus Card.
Bellarmine. So that according to Card. Bellarmine, S. Bernards words do prove,
that the Pope has power not only to command the material sword, but also to
use it, unless the material sword is not to be comprehended under the name of
temporalls. And therefore not I, but D. Schulckenius does of set purpose
decline the difficulty, and also untruly affirms, that Card: Bellarmine did
not intend to prove in his second argument, that the Pope has power to use the
material sword, but only that the material sword is subject to the command
and prohibition of the spiritual power, seeing that Card: Bellarmines second
argument does most clearly show the contrary.

23 But mark now how clearly D. Schulckenius does either contradict S.
Bernards words and him self, or else fowly equivocate, and confirm the answer
which I gave to the authority of S. Bernard. I affirmed, that S. Bernards
words are so to be understood, that it is lawful for Ecclesiastical men, as
they are Ecclesiastical men, to command in some cases the use of the material
sword, but that to use the material sword themselves, as they are
Ecclesiastical men, they are forbidden by the express command of Christ. Now
D. Schulckenius affirms Page 390.
, that for as much at appertains to the use of the material sword, he
assenteth altogether to S. Bernard, that it does not beseem Ecclesiastical
men to use the material sword, but only the spiritual; and thus much only
those words of our Savior do signify, Return thy sword into the scabbard;
and those of S. Bernard, why do thou again attempt to use the sword, which
once thou wast commanded to put into the scabard? For here it is not meant of
the law of God, by which Ecclesiastical men are absolutely forbidden to use
the material sword, seeing that it is manifest, that in some cases, and
especially in defense of themselves and of their country, this is lawful, but
of the command of God, by which Clergy men are instructed, and taught, that
their vocation is not to fight with the material, but with the spiritual
sword. Thus D. Schulckenius.

24 But if D. Schulckenius mean that Ecclesiastical men are only for
decency, which implies no command, not to use the material sword, he plainly
contradicts S. Bernard, to whom nevertheless he affirms altogether to
assent, who expressly auerreth, that the Pope in S. Peter was not only
counseled, but commanded not to use the material sword. And therefore S.
Bernards words can not otherwise be understood, but that Ecclesiastical men,
as they are Ecclesiastical men, and the Pope, as Pope, are by the command of
Christ absolutely forbidden to use the material sword; for S. Bernard did not
intend to affirm, that Ecclesiastical men, if they become temporal Princes,
or being considered, as they are private men, or citizens, and parts, or
members of the temporal commonwealth, are by the command of Christ forbidden
to use the material sword, and to fight in defense of their own persons, or
of their Country.

25 Wherefore those last words of D. Schulckenius, to wit, that S. Bernards
saying is to be understood of the command of God, by which Clergy men are
instructed, and taught, that their vocation is not to fight with the material,
but with the spiritual sword, are somewhat equivocall. For if D. Schulckenius
do only understand of such an instruction, which implies no command of
Christ, but only a certain decency, counsel, and advise, for that it does
not beseem the perfection of those men, who have a spiritual vocation, to
fight with the material sword, he plainly contradicts himself, and also S.
Bernard himself, for that he acknowledges a command of God, whereby Clergy
men are instructed etc. but this instruction supposes no command of God; S.
Bernard also he contradicts, who expressly speaks of a command, whereby
Ecclesiastical men are by the law of Christ, and not only of the Church
forbidden to use the material sword, which command of Christ, as I said
before, can be no other, then that Ecclesiastical men can not, as they are
Ecclesiastical men, use the material sword; for that although the
Ecclesiastical power does according to S. Bernard and the truth, extend to the
beckoning, or declaratiue commanding of the material sword in some cases, yet
it does not extend to the using thereof, but this power to use the material
sword does proceed from the law of nature, or the civil power, who do give
authority to every man, whether he be a Clerk, or Laike in case at least wise
of necessity, to use the material sword in defense of his own person, or of
his country. And if D. Schulckenius only intend to signify thus much by those
last words of his, which in very deed can not be otherwise understood, unless
we will make them repugnant to themselves, he does favor, not contradict,
confirm and not impugn my answer.

26 Fifthly, observe, good Reader, how cunningly D. Schulckenius would shift off
the last, and principal Answer, which I made to the authority of S. Bernard.
I granted, as you have seen before, that the Pope, as Pope, has, according to
S. Bernard, power to beckon, or command the Emperor to use the material
sword, when the necessity of the Church shall require and to punish him with
Ecclesiastical punishments, if he shall refuse to obey his just command, or
beck, and I affirmed, that this is the most, that can be gathered from those
words of S. Bernard. But if the Emperor should refuse to use the material
sword at the Popes command, or beck, I affirmed, that it could not be inferred
from that authority of S. Bernard, that the Pope, as Pope, could use it
himself, or deprive the Emperor of his temporal dominion, or power to use
the material sword, for this were to use, and to dispose of temporalls, and
implies a power to use, and draw forth the material sword it self, which S.
Bernard expressly denies to the Pope: and that therefore S. Bernards
authority does nothing favor, but clearly contradict the Popes power, I do
not say, to command temporalls, but to dispose of temporalls, and to use
temporalls, as Ioannes Parisiensis, and Alexander of Hales, Number. 18.
did before affirm. Now to this my answer D. Schulckenius replyeth Page 393.
in this manner.

27. Thou did run well, who has hindered thee so soon not to obey the
truth? For now thou do not follow S. Bernard, but William Barclay, as thy
Master. If that the Emperor shall refuse to use the sword at the beck of the
Pope in great necessity of the Church, it is not indeed fitting for the Pope
to use the material sword, but he has power to constrain the Emperor,
first with Ecclesiastical punishments, and afterward also by depriving him of
the sword, as in the like case the Council of Lateran often cited does teach,
which one Council is to be preferred before all the Barclaies, or John's of
Paris, all men do think, who are not mad.

28. Is not this think you a trim answer? The question betwixt me, and Card.
Bellarmine in this place was not concerning the Council of Lateran, whereof I
will treat beneath, Part. 3. cap. 9. and seq.
and plainly show, that, notwithstanding all the clamours of my Adversaries,
the said Council has neither defined, or supposed for certain, nay or
supposed at all, that the Pope has power to depose Sovereign Princes, as D.
Schulckenius does here collect from thence, but the question was only
concerning the authority of S. Bernard. And I proved clearly out of S.
Bernards words, that although the Pope, as Pope has power to command, or
forbid in some cases the use of the material sword, yet that he has power,
as he is Pope, to use it himself, or to deprive the Emperor of the use
thereof, which implies a power to use it himself, this I said could not be
proved, but rather the contrary out of those words of S. Bernard, who does not
only say, that it is not fitting for the Pope to use the material sword, as D.
Schulckenius would mince his words, but that it is forbidden the Pope to draw
forth, or use the material sword. Now D. Schulckenius passes over S.
Bernard, and flies to the Council of Lateran to prove, that if the Emperor
refuse at the Popes command to use the material sword, he may by the Popes
authority be deprived of the use thereof, whereas the present question was
only concerning the opinion of S. Bernard, and not what was the doctrine of the
Council of Lateran in this point, whose authority I do as much respect either
as Card. Bellarmine, or any other Catholic is bound to do. But it is an easy
matter to wrest the words of the Council of Lateran, or any other to their
purpose, contrary to the true meaning of the Council, and then to cry out o
the Council of Lateran, which is to be preferred before all Barclaies, and
Widdringtons etc. whereas we do as much respect the authority of the Council
of Lateran, or any other, as they do, although we do not so much respect their
over wrested collections, which they to serve their own turns, do gather
from any Council, or text of holy Scripture, contrary to the plain, proper,
and true sense and meaning of the words. But to such shiftings, and windings
even learned men are sometimes brought, when they will make their uncertain
opinions, and private expositions of holy Scriptures, or Counsels to be
infallible grounds of the Catholic faith.

29. Lastly but the foundation, says D. Schulckenius, of Widdringtons error
is, for that he thinks, that the Pope has authority to constrain the
Emperor by reason of the faith, and free promise, which the Emperor gave, and
made to the Pope, according to the similitude, which a little before he put
concerning one, who promised an other to spend his life, and all his goods in
defense of him. But this foundation is false, because the authority of the
Pope over Christian Princes does not proceed from their only promise, or
faith, which they have given, but from the law of God, by which law the Pope is
made by Christ the Pastor of all his stock, the chief of all his family,
the head. of all his body, and the Rectour of all his Church, Wherefore it is
no marvel, if from false foundation he conclude a falsehood to wit, that S.
Bernards words do not only, not favor the Popes temporal power, but are flat
contrary to it. What I beseech you, could be spoken more clearly for the
Popes temporal power, then that which S. Bernard said, that the temporal
sword is the Popes, and that both swords are the Churches, and that the
temporal sword ought to be drawn forth at the Popes beck? And as for
Ioannes Parisiensis there is no great reckoning to be made of him whatsoever he
says, both for that he is repugnant to the Council of Lateran, and many
others, and also that other his errors are condemned by the Church in the
common Extrauagant, Vas electionis, and lastly, for that either he denies only
the Popes direct power in temporalls, or else he does plainly contradict
himself.

30. But truly it is strange, that learned men, and who pretend to maintain
nothing but truth, dare adventure to avouch so bouldly, and in such public
writings so manifest untruths, and which they themselves in their consciences
can not but see to be plain, and palpable untruths. I very often, and that of
set purpose did affirm in my Apology, and D. Schulckenius does also set down
my words, that the Pope, as Pope, has power to command temporal Princes in
temporals in order to spiritual good, and yet this man to make his Reader
believe, that I do teach flat heresy, blusheth not to affirm in an other
place, Page 256.
that I deny, that the Pope, as Pope, has power to command temporal Princes
in temporalls in order to spiritual good. So likewise, I did oftentimes in my
Apology affirm, Number. 90.91.181.223.341.
and D. Schulckenius does also set down my words, that the Pope, as Pope has
power by the law of God, and for that he is appointed by Christ to be the
supreme spiritual Pastor of the Catholic Church, to constrain and punish
all disobedient Christians both Princes and people, with spiritual and
Ecclesiastical punishments; and yet now this man to persuade his Reader, that
I teach here a manifest error, is not ashamed to affirm, that I am of
opinion, that the Pope has authority to constrain the Emperor in regard
only of the free promise, which the Emperor has made to the Pope. And
therefore D. Schulckenius neither deals truly nor sincerely, and both
deludeth his Reader, and also wrongeth me, in affirming, that to be my
doctrine, which I expressly impugn, and that to be the foundation of my
opinion (which he is pleased to call an error) which I in express words, and
that oftentimes have denied.

21. For as I do willingly grant, that although a temporal Prince has power
to command, and with temporal punishments to compel, if need require, his
temporal subjects to make, and swear an express promise of that true faith,
loyalty and temporal allegiance, which by the Law of God and nature they do
owe to their lawful Prince, yet I do not affirm, that a temporalll Prince
has power to constrain his rebellious subjects by virtue only of the
promise, which they have made, but by virtue of his supreme temporal power
which he has, as he is a supreme temporal Prince by the Law of God and
nature; So also I do willingly grant, that although the Pope has power to
command, and with spiritual punishments to compel, if need require, all
Christian Princes and people to make and swear an express promise of that the
true faith, loyalty and spiritual allegiance, which as they are Christians and
members of the mystical body of Christ, they do owe by the Law of God to the
supreme spiritual Pastor and visible head of this mystical body and Church
of Christ, and the Emperor at his coronation takes such an oath,
nevertheless I do not affirm, that the Pope has power to constrain and
punish disobedient Princes, and people by virtue only of the promise, which
they have made to the Pope of their spiritual obedience, but by virtue of his
supreme spiritual power, which he has by the Law of God, and his Pastoral
authority given to him by our Savior Christ Jesus.

32. True it is, that the Reader might the better understand, that to command
one to use a temporal thing, and to use it himself, to command one to dispose
of temporals, and to dispose of them himself, are very different things, and
that the one does not necessarily follow from the other, I brought a familiar
example of one, who either, by promise, or by some other obligation (and yet D.
Schulckenius takes hold only of the promise, and clean omitteth the other
obligation) is bound to dispose, and give his goods, or life at anthers
command, who notwithstanding this promise, or other obligation, does still
keep the property, dominion and right over his goods and life, in such sort,
that the other cannot be virtue of his commanding power, which he has over him
and them, take them away and dispose of them without his consent, but if he
will not dispose of his goods at the others command, according as by virtue
either of his promise, or of some other obligation he is bound to do, the
other may complain to the Magistrate, that he will punish him for his
offense, or cause him to perform his promise, so far forth as the coerciue
power of the Magistrate does extend. From which I concluded, that considering
to have the power to command the use of the temporal sword, and to have a
power to use it, or to deprive of the use thereof, are two different things,
neither does one necessarily follow from the other, although the Pope, as Pope,
has according to S. Bernard, power to command the Emperor to use the
temporal sword, yet it does not therefore follow that if the Emperor will not
use the temporal sword at the Popes command, the Pope, as Pope, can use it
himself, or deprive the Emperor of the use thereof, which implies a power to
use the same, but only, that the Pope, being a spiritual Prince or Pstour,
may punish the Emperor for his contempt with spiritual punishments, which only
do belong to the coercive power of the supreme spiritual Prince and Pastor of
the spiritual kingdom and Church of Christ.

33. Thus therefore you have seen, that S. Bernard does nothing favor, but it
is rather flat contrary to the Popes power to use the temporal sword, neither
could he scarce speak more clearly against the same, then he has done. For
although it be clear, that the temporal sword is, according to S. Bernard,
the Popes in some sort, and does belong to the Church in some sort (which words
[in some sort] D. Schulckenius here cunningly omitteth) and that in some cases
it must be used at the beck, direction or declaratiue command of the Pope, yet
the aforesaid limitations of S. Bernard that it is the Popes, and belongs to
the Pope in some sort, that it is to be used for the Church, but not by the
Church, with the hand of the Soldier, and not of the Priest, at the beck
indeed of the Pope, but at the command of the Emperor, and that our Savior
commanded, and not only counseled S. Peter to put up his sword into the
scabard, do plainly show, that, according to S. Bernard, the Pope as Pope,
cannot use the temporal sword, nor constrain a temporal Prince by, using
temporal punishments, which does imply a power to use the temporal sword.

34. And for D. Barclay, and John of Paris (to omit our learned Countryman,
Alexander of Hales, whose words I related before) Number. 18.
who do give the very same answer, which I have given to the aforesaid words
of S. Bernard, of whose authority although Card. Bellarmine, here does make
very small reckoning, yet I do plainly confess, that in this controversy
concerning the Popes authority to use the temporal sword, and to dispose of
all temporals in order to spiritual good, I do more regard their authority,
then I do Card. Bellarmines, speaking with all dutiful respect, for that in
my opinion they have handled this question more soundly, more clearly, and
more sincerely then he has done. Neither is their doctrine repugnant to the
Council of Laterane, but only to the particular exposition, which some few
especially of late years (who have scraped together all the authorities of
Fathers, Counsels, Scriptures, facts, and decrees of Popes which may seem any
way to favor the Popes temporal authority) have wrested out the words of the
said Council, contrary to the plain sense of the words, and the common
understanding of all ancient Divines, who never urged this authority of the
Council of Laterane, although it has been so long publicly extant in the
body of the Canon Law. But it is now adays a common fault even among Catholic
Divines, and those also, who, not perceiving their own error, do accuse
others of the same, to allege, in confirmation of their opinions, the holy
Scriptures, and sacred Councels understood according to their own private
spirit and meaning, and then to cry out against their brethren, who mislike
their opinions, that they have the holy Sriptures, and sacred Councels on their
side, and that therefore their doctrine is of faith, and the contrary
heretical, and that their Adversaries do oppose themselves against the holy
Scriptures, and decrees of the Catholic Church, whereas we do regard, with
all dutiful respect the holy Scriptures, sacred Councels, and decrees of the
Catholic Church (the authority of which consists in the true and authentical
sense, and not in the letter, or in the exposition of any private Catholic
Doctor, which exposition others do contradict) and do oppose our selves only
against their uncertain opinions, and expositions of holy Scriptures, or
sacred Counsels, grounded upon their private spirit and understanding,
contrary to the true, proper, and plain meaning of the words.

35. And although this Ioannes Parisiensis, or rather another John of Paris
living at the same time, and surnamed de Poliaco, as I said before Part. 1. ca.
3. nu. 7. and seq.
, was compelled to recall in open Consistory, at Auinion before Pope John the
22. certain errors, which he maintained concerning confession, and absolution
(of whose authority nevertheless Card. Bellarmine in the latter Editions of
his controversies; notwithstanding those his errors, makes some rekoning,
seeing he cites him as a Classical Doctor in favor of his opinion Lib. 5.
de Ro^. Pont. cap. 1.
) yet this rather confirms me in my opinion. For if his doctrine, which
denies that the Pope, as Pope, has power to deprive iuridically, and by way
of sentence, temporal Princes of their dominions, and to use the temporal
sword, had been thought in those days to have been heretical, or erroneous,
as now Card. Bellarmine, and some few other Jesuits will needs have it to be,
it is like, that he should also have been compelled to recall that doctrine,
and that those learned Authors, who write of heresies, as Alphonsus de Castro,
Prateolus Genebrard, D. Sanders, and others would for the same have taxed him,
and Marsilius of Padua (as also Albericus, and those many Schoolmen and
Doctors, related by Trithemius and Almaine, who did defend the same doctrine)
with some note of heresy, or error, which seeing they have not done, it is a
manifest sign, that they did not account that doctrine for heretical, or
erroneous, and that the decree of the Council of Lateran, which was long before
any of these men's days, and which was also so public and registered in the
corpse of the Canon Law, was not in those times understood in that sense, as
Card. Bellarmine now of late (for before in his controversies he made small
reckoning of that authority, for that he clean omitteth that decree: yet
bringing many particular facts of Popes, yea and of Pope Innocent the third, in
whose time, and by whose authority that Council was held) and some few others
without sufficient proof, as I will show beneath Part. 3. ca. 9. and seq.
, will needs have that decree to be understood.

36. Neither is that true, which D. Schulckenius affirms, that Ioannes
Parisiensis (in acknowledging. That when the Pope does becken, the Emperor
ought to exercise the jurisdiction of the secular power for the spiritual
good. But if he will not, or if it does not seem to him expedient, the Pope
has no other thing to do, because he has not the material sword in command,
but only the Emperor, according to S. Bernard) does either speak of the
direct power of the Pope to use them material sword, or else contradict
himself, when afterward he writes, that the Pope may per accidens, depose
the Emperor, by causing the people to depose him. For Ioannes Parisiensis in
that his Treatise, de potestate Regia and Papali, does expressly impugn both
the direct, and indirect coerciue power of the Pope to punish by way of
sentence, and iuridically with temporal punishments, affirming, as D.
Schulckenius also himself here relates, that Excommunication, or some such
like spiritual punishment is the last, which an Ecclesiastical Judge can
inflict. For although it belongs to an Ecclesiastical Judge, to bring men
back to God, and to withdraw them from sin, yet he has not this, but
according to the way or means given him by God, which is by excluding from the
Sacraments and the participation of the faithful.

37 Neither does Ioannes Parisiensis therefore contradict himself in
affirming, that the Pope may depose per accidens by means of the people. For
although he be of opinion, as I showed before Part. 1. ca. 2.
, that the people have in some cases a coerciue power over their Prince and in
some cases may depose him, and consequently the Pope may in those cases, if it
be necessary to the good of the Church, command the people, and with
spiritual punishments compel them to use their coerciue power, and so the
Pope may be said to depose a Prince per accidens by means of the people, with
which philosophical question I will not at this time, as I often said,
intermeddle, yet concerning the Popes coerciue power to use him self the
temporal sword, or to depose the Emperor by way of iuridicall sentence,
(which is not repugnant to his authority to depose by means of the people, if
the people have any such authority to depose, which many learned Divines, to
whose opinion the ancient Fathers seem to assent as I have signified
heretofore do deny,) in my Apology nu. 411. and here part: 1. cap. 3. nu. 5.
Ioannes Parisiensis is clean opposite to Card. Bellarmines opinion, and
expressly affirms, that the Pope has no power to deprive iuridically, or by
way of sentence, temporal Princes of their kingdoms, but only to inflict by
way of coercion or constraint Ecclesiastical or spiritual Censures. And thus
much both concerning my answer to S. Bernards authority, and also the Reply,
which D. Schulckenius has made thereunto.

38 Now to the authority of Pope Boniface the 8. I answer first that his words
are to be understood in that sense, as I expounded S. Bernard, whom he, as
Card: Bellarmine affirms, did imitate, to wit, that the temporal power is in
order to spiritual good, or, which is all one, in spiritual things subject to
the command of the spiritual power, and that she is to be instructed by the
spiritual, not absolutely in temporal government, but in Christian faith and
religion, and that if she go out of the way, or err in things belonging to
Christian faith and religion, she is to be judged by the spiritual, but with
spiritual not temporal punishments. And in this sense it is very true, that
the sword is under the sword, and the temporal power is subject to the
spiritual, but by this it is only signified, that temporal Princes are in
spiritualls, but not in mere temporals, subject to the spiritual command, and
spiritual correction of spiritual Pastors.

39 Secondly, although Pope Boniface should understand those words in this
sense, that temporal Princes are, not only in spiritualls, but also in
temporalls subject to the Popes power both to command, and also to punish
temporally, yet his authority herein, as he is Pope, (for as he is a private
Doctor, it is no greater then of other Doctors) is not of any great weight;
considering first, that, as well observes D. Duvall De suprema Romans Pont.
potest. part. 2. q. 4. page 262.263.
a learned Schoole-Diuine, and one of the Kings Readers in the College of
Sorbon, although Pope Boniface does make mention both of the spiritual, and
temporal sword, and in the progress of his Constition does say, that the
temporal sword is under the spiritual yet in the definition or conclusion
(which chiefly as in the decrees of Counsels is to be regarded, seeing that
this only binds to believe) this only he pronounces in general, but we
declare, say, define, and pronounce, that it is necessary to the salvation of
every humane creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. But in what manner
all men must be subject, it is not expressed in this definition; and therefore
not to contradict this definition it is sufficient to affirm, that all men
must in spiritualls be subject to the Popes power to command, and to punish
s;piritually.

40 Secondly, for that this Extrauagant was recalled by his Successor Pope
Clement the fifth, in cap. meruit, de privilegijs, wherein he declares, that
no prejudice shall arise to the King of France by that Extrauagant of Pope
Boniface, but that all things shall be understood to be in the same state, as
they were before that definition, as well concerning the Church, as concerning
the King, and Kingdom of France, Thirdly, for that all the authorities, which
he brings from holy Scriptures to prove, that the Pope has both the
temporal and spiritual sword, do prove only, that the Pope is the spiritual
Pastor of the Church, and has spiritual power to bind, and loose, to judge
and punish spiritually, as, whatsoever thou shall bind on earth etc. and a
spiritual man does judge all things, and he is judged by none, which place
some Catholic writers expound of public and authentical judgments: For all
the other places of holy Scripture, which Pope Boniface alleges, are either
taken in the mystical, and not in the literal sense, as those behold two
swords here, and put up thy sword into the scabard, but from the mystical
sense no forcible argument can be drawn, as all Divines do grant, to prove
any doctrine, unless to have that mystical sense it be declared in other
places of holy Scripture, or else they make nothing to the purpose, as are
those words, which God spoke to the Prophet Jeremy, Behold I have appointed
thee this day over the Gentiles, and over Kingdoms, that thou may pluck up
and destroy, and waste and dissipate, and build and plant, not to destroy
nations, and kingdoms, and raise up others, but by his preaching to plant
virtues, and destroy vices, as S. Hierome expounds, and by foretelling the
destruction of Kingdoms and Nations, if they do not repent, and their
increase and salvation if they will be converted. Neither is the Pope S.
Ieremies Successor in the spirit of prophecy, neither do we read, that
Jeremy destroyed any kingdom, although he fulfilled all that, which he was
appointed to do by Alm: God.

41. It is the same, says Andreas Capella upon this place, to appoint him over
the Gentiles, and to give him a Prophet in the Gentiles; as he said before. I
give thee power and authority, says God, to declare and foretell in my name,
as my Prophet, the ruins and wastings of the Gentiles and of Kingdoms. That
thou threaten my enemies, whom in their Countries I have planted, placed,
confirmed, erected that I will abolish them with captiuities, unless they will
repent. And contrariwise, that I will build them, and plant them again, that
is, restore to their ancient state, them whom I shall destroy and abollish if
they will acknowledge their sins. And in these words all the charge of
Jeremy is comprehended, and the matter of this whole book is declared. For it
is a prophecy of the destruction of the City, and temple, and of the
captivity of the people, and of their return from captivity, and of the
reedifying of the temple and City, and of the overthrow of other nations, and
kingdoms. Thus Capella. And the same exposition of these words has the Gloss
upon this place Besides Pope Boniface in this Extrauagant alleges for
Scripture that, which is no Scripture, to wit, for the truth testifying the
spiritual power has to institute or instruct the earthly power, and to judge
it if it shall not be good, which words are not to be found in the holy
Scripture.

42. Lastly, there is no more account to be made of the authority of Pope
Boniface the eight for this his doctrine in this point, touching the Popes
temporal authority over temporal Princes, if we take him, as a private
Doctor delivering his opinion, then of an other Doctor, as well learned as he
was, who holds with the Canonists, that the Pope is direct Lord and King of
the world not only spiritual, but also temporal; for that Pope Boniface was
of this opinion, that the Pope has direct power not only in spiritualls, but
also in temporalls. Whereupon he wrote to Philip the fair, King of France,
that he was subject to him in spirituals and temporalls, and that all those,
who should hold the contrary he reputed for heretics: and that the kingdom of
France by reason of the Kings disobedience was fallen to the Church For which
words Pope Boniface is taxed by Ioannes Tilius In Chron. ad annum 1302.
Bishop of Meldune, by Robertus Guaguinus Lib. 7. in Philippo Pulch.
, by Platina In vita Bonifaci^ octaui.
, and others, of great pride, impudency and arrogancy. Whereupon Paulus
Aemilius (who does otherwise greatly favor Pope Boniface) writes thus: In
Philippo Pulchro.
Pope Boniface did add, at which all men did marmaile, that the King of France
ought to reverence the Pope not only in sacred manner, and by Episcopal right,
as a Father of our souls, but he ought also to acknowledge him, as his Prince
by civil Jurisdiction, and in profane matters and dominion. All this being
considered, as also, that all the words of that Extrauagant are so general,
that they may be understood as well, if not better, of the Popes direct
dominion in temporalls, as of his indirect power to dispose of temporals, which
is only in order to spiritual good, what great reckoning is to be made of this
co^stitution of P. Boniface, it being withal reuersed by P. Clemens the 5. who
next but one succeeded him, I remit to the consideration of the judicious Reader

Chap. 10.
Wherein the similitude of Pope Innocent the third, who compares the
spiritual and temporal power to the Sun and Moon, is examined.

1. THe sixth, and last argument, which Card. Bellarmine bringth to prove the
sbiection of the temporal power to the spiritual, is taken from the authority
of Pope Innocent the third, who in cap. Solitae de maioritate and obedientia
does well, says he, In tract. contra Barcl: c. 13. in fine.
compare the spiritual and temporal power to the Sun and Moon. Therefore as
the moon is subject to the Sun, for that she receives light from the Sun, and
the Sun is not subject to the Moon, for that the Sun receives nothing from
the Moon, so also a king is subject to the Pope, and the Pope is not subject to
a king

2. But first this similitude does not prove, that the temporal power it self
is subject to the spiritual, or, which is all one, that a temporal King is
subject to the Pope in respect of his temporal power, which he does not
receive from the Pope, but in respect of the light of faith, which a temporal
King receives from the spiritual power. And therefore as the Moon, when she
is eclypsed, and in opposition to the Sun, does not loose that little light,
which, according to the doctrine of the Philosophers and astronomers, she has
of her own nature, and not derived from the Sun, so temporal Princes, when
of Catholics or Christians they become heretics, or infidells, and are in
opposition to the Pope, do not loose their temporal power, and the light of
natural reason, which they receive not from the Pope, but only the light of
faith and grace, which they did receive from the spiritual power.

3. Secondly, that, which Card. Bellarmine affirms, that the Pope receives
nothing from temporal Princes is very untrue, and therefore in this point also
that part of the similitude is not fitly applied. For the Pope has received
from temporal Princes all his temporal dominion, jurisdiction, and temporal
sword, and the whole patrimony of S. Peter, wherein, as the same Pope Innocent
affirms, In cap. per venerabilem qui filij sint legitimi.
he does now exercise the power of a supreme temporal Prince. Neither is it
only true, that temporal Princes are in spiritualls subject to the spiritual
power of spiritual Pastors, from whom they receive spiritual light, and
supernatural directions by the holy Scriptures and Ecclesiastical laws, by
which they may see how to live like good Christians, and to attain to life
everlasting, but it is also true, that spiritual Pastors, as inferior
Bishops and Clergy men are in temporals subject to the temporal power of
temporal Princes, from whom they receive the increase of natural light, and
civil directions by civil and temporal Laws, by which they may see, how to
converse ciuilly among themselves and other men, and to attain to temporal
peace and quietness in the civil commonwealth.

4. Whereupon well said S. Ambrose, Lib. 10. in Luca^. cap. 20.
If thou will not be subject to Caesar, do not have wordly things, but if thou
have riches, thou art subject to Caesar. For all men, says Astensis, In summa.
lib. 2. tit. 39.
are subject to the Emperor, Laymen in temporals, and Clergy men, who do
receive from him temporals. And Gratian the Compiler of the first and most
ancient part of the Canon Law, called the Decree, writes thus: Causa 11. q. 1.
cap. 11.
Clergy men by their office are subject to the Bishop, by the possessions of
farms or mannours they are subject to the Emperor. From the Bishop they
receive unction, tithes and first fruits, from the Emperor they receive
possessions of farms or mannours. Therefore because by the Imperial Law it is
made, as he proves out of S. Austin, that farms be possessed, it is manifest
that Clergy men by the possessions of farms are subject to the Emperor. See
also above Cap. 6. nu. 13. 14. 15. and cap. 7. nu. 12. 13.
many other Catholic Authors who do affirm that Clergy men are subject to
the directive power of temporal Princes. Neither does Pope Innocent in the
aforesaid Chapter deny, but in express words affirm, that the Emperor is
superior to those, who do receive from him temporals; And therefore this
similitude of the Sun and Moon does not prove, that the temporal power is
subject to the spiritual, or, which is all one, that temporal Princes are in
temporals, or as they have temporal power, subject to spiritual Pastors, but
it rather proves the flat contrary.

5. Yea and Card. Bellarmine himself, Lib. 2. de To. Pont. cap. 29.
did for many years together hold with Albertus Pighius, Lib. 5. hierach.
Eccles. cap. 7.
that it is the more probable opinion, that S. Paul, (and consequently the rest
of the Apostles) was subject in temporals to Caesar, not only de facto, but
also de iure: from whence supposing another true and undoubted principle
granted also by Card. Bellarmine, Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 29. and lib. 5.
cap. 3.
that the Law of Christ does deprive no man of any his right or dominion, it
necessarily follows, that if infidel Princes have rightful power and
dominion, or jurisdiction over Clergy men, there is no repugnance, but that
they may keep the same power, and jurisdiction over Clergy men, although they
become Christians. But Card. Bellarmine has now forsooth in his Recognitions
recalled that opinion. I do not now approve, says he, Page 16.
that which I said with Albertus Pighius, that S. Paul did appeal to Caesar,
as to his lawful Prince. And therefore I do persist in the former answer, that
S. Paul was subject to Caesar de facto, not de iure, and did appeal to him,
not as his own Superior, but as to the Superior of the President of Iewry
and of the Jews, by whom he was wronged. For otherwise he could not free
himself from that unjust judgment and danger of a most unjust death, but by
having recourse to their Prince and Judge, which he himself did signify Acts
28. when he says, I am constrained to appeal to Caesar.

6 If Card. Bellarmine has upon sufficient ground recalled either this, or any
other of his former opinions, he is truly therefore much to be commended, as
likewise is S. Austin, for making his book of Retractations. But if she should
without sufficient ground not only recall this opinion, which he for above
twenty years together in public print, and for many years before in public
writings had defended for the more probable, but also condemn it for
improbable, it being also the common opinion of Divines, any man might justly
imagine, that affection, not reason moved him thereunto. I do not approve,
says he, Page 16.
in his Recognitions, that which I said in that place with Albertus Pighius,
that S. Paul did appeal to Caesar as to his lawful Prince. But in his book
against D. Barclay he goes much farther. I have admonished, says he, Cap.
21. page 206.
in the Recognition of my writings, that the opinion of Pighius, which in times
past I did follow, is improbable, and that with better Doctors it is to be
affirmed, that the Apostles were exempted de iure from all subjection to
earthly Princes.

7. But truly I cannot but marvel, that Card. Bell. could be so much ouerseen,
as to affirm, that he did admonish in his Recognitions, that the opinion of
Pighius is improbable, seeing that he only says there, I do not approve the
opinion of Pighius, etc. But he does not say, that it is improbable, unless,
forsooth, what opinion C Bellarmine does not approve, although it be approved
by other learned Catholics, must forth with be accounted improbable. Besides I
would gladly know, who be those better Doctors, whom Card. Bellarmine says are
to be followed against the opinion of Phighius. For my own part I do not know
what better Doctors there be (abstracting from the ancient Fathers, and
Doctors of the Church) if we speak only of the Doctors themselves, and not of
the doctrine which they teach; then among the Thomists, John of Paris,
Dominicus Sotus, Victoria, Bartholomaeus, Medina, Bannes; among the Scotists,
Richardus de Media villa, Ioannes, Medina, Joseph Angles; and among the
Jesuits, Salmeron, Molina, Valentia, Richeome, Salas, and many other Divines,
whom Salas cites, who do hold, that Clergy men are not by the law of God and
nature, but only by the Ecclesiastical Canons and privileges of Princes
exempted from the coactiue power of Secular Magistrates, and not at all from
their directive power, but that they are subject to the directive power of
Secular Princes in those things, which do not repugne to the Ecclesiastical
Canons, and their state, and consequently, that Clergy men in the time of the
Apostles, and long after were subject to the coactiue power of temporal
Princes. Yea and the ancient Fathers, especially S. Chrysostom, Theophylact,
and Oecumenius do in express words affirm, Ad Romans 13.
that whether he be a Monk, a Priest, or an Apostle, he is according to the
doctrine of S. Paul subject to Secular powers. Only the Canonists (and yet not
all of them, as Pope Innoc: Nauar, and Coverruvias) whom now Card: Bellarm:
leaving the Divines, and his ancient opinion upon very weak grounds, as you
shall see, does follow, do vehemently defend, that Clergy men are by the law
of God and nature, exempted from all subjection to Secular Princes.

8 Now you shall see, for what reasons Card: Bellarmine was moved to recall his
former opinion, and to condemn it as improbable. For if the reason, says he
In his Recognitions, page 16.
, of the exemption of Clergy men be for that they are ministers of Christ, who
is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and King of Kings, truly they are
exempted de iure not only from the power of Christian Kings, but also of
Heathen Princes. If Card. Bellarmine mean, that the reason, wherefore the
Ecclesiastical Canons, and Christian Princes have exempted Clergy men (I do
not say from all subjection, for notwithstanding their exemption they still
remain subjects to temporal Princes, but from paying of tributes, from the
tribunal of Secular Magistrates and such like) be, for that they are Ministers
of Christ in spiritual, but not in Secular matters, I will not contradict this
reason, but from hence it does not follow that therefore Clergy men in the
time of the Apostles, when there were no such positive laws of their
exemption, were not in temporal causes subject de iure to infidel Princes.

9. But if Card. Bellarmine mean, that the reason, why Clergy men are not
only by the Ecclesiastical Canons and laws of Princes, but also by the law
of GOD and nature exempted from all subjection to temporal Princes, is, for
that they are Ministers of Christ, who is the King of Kings, this reason does
not prove, but suppose, that which is in question, to wit, that Clergy men
are by the law of GOD, and nature, exempted from all subjection to temporal
Princes, which the common opinion of Divines does constantly deny, whose
opinion to account improbable, or temerarious for such a weak reason, which
does not prove, but suppose the question, were in my judgment to exceed the
limits of Christian prudence, and modesty. Neither is there any repugnance in
natural reason, but that the Ministers of Christ, who, as it is probable, was,
according to his humanity, only a spiritual, and not a temporal King, (and
although he was also a temporal King, yet Secular Princes are his Ministers in
temporalls, and the Apostles and their Successors are his Ministers in
spiritualls) might in temporal causes be truly, and de iure subject to
temporal Princes, as the Apostles themselves, who are Christ his chief
Ministers in his spiritual kingdom, and Church, were, according to the
express doctrine of the ancient Fathers, as they are parts, members and
citizens of the temporal commonwealth subject to temporal Princes, in their
temporal kingdoms, and in temporal affairs. Neither do those words of Saint
Paul Act. 28.
I am constrained to appeal to Caesar, signify, that he was subject to
Caesar only de facto, and not de iure, more, then if a Priest, being unjustly
oppressed by his Ordinary, should appeal to the Pope, and say, that he was
constrained, for that he had small hope to find justice at his Ordinaries
hands, to appeal to the Pope, signify thereby, that he was not subject de
iure, but only de facto to the Pope.

10. An other reason, which moved Card. Bellarmine to recall his former
opinion, and to affirm, that Saint Paul did not appeal to Caesar, as to his
own lawful Judge but as to the Judge of the president of Iewrie and of the
Jews, who did unjustly oppress him, was says he In tract. contra Bard. cap.
3 page 51.
, for that the cause of which they did accuse him being spiritual, to wit,
concerning the resurrection of Christ, and the ceremonies of the law of Moses,
could not by right appertain to a Heathen Prince. See the Acts of the Apostles
chap. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25.

11. But truly it is strange, that Card. Bellarmine durst so confidently remit
his Reader to those chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, to prove, that the
cause, whereof Saint Paul was accused by the Jews to the Tribune, and
President of Iewrie, and wherefore he appealed to Caesar, was spiritual, and
not appertaining by right to a Heathen Prince, unless he will have the
raising of sedition, and tumults, and the committing of a crime worthy of
death, not to belong to a Heathen Prince. For it is clear by those chapters,
that the Jews accused him of sedition, and that he had offended Caesar, and
endeavored to have him therefore put to death. We have found, says one
Tertullus Act. 24.
, who went to accuse S. Paul before the President Felix, this man pestiferous,
and raising seditions to all the Jews in the world, etc. And afterward, Act.
25.
the Jews before the President Festus objected against S. Paul many, and
gre^uous crimes, which they could not prove, but they might easily have proved,
that S. Paul did preach the Resurrection of Christ, for that he confessed the
same before both the Presidents, and King Agrippa: Whereupon King Agrippa said
to S. Paul Act. 26
, A little thou perswadest me to become a Christian. And before Act. 25.
S. Paul made answer to the President Festus, that neither against the law of
the Jews, nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar, have I any thing
offended; which signifies, that he was accused that he had offended against
Caesar. And a little after says S. Paul to Festus, The Jews I have not hurt
as thou very well know. For if I have hurt them, or done any thing worthy of
death, I refuse not to dye, but if none of those things be, whereof they
accuse me, no man can give me to them, I appeal to Caesar.

12* By all which it is very clear, that the Jews sought to have S. Paul put
to death, and that all the crimes which they objected against him, were false,
and consequently that he was not accused merely for preaching the resurrection
of Christ, which S. Paul would never have denied, but for raising sedition and
tumults in the people, and for doing wrong to Caesar. Whereupon S. Chrysostom
Hem. 51. in Act.
commends S. Paul, that he would be judged before him whom he was accused to
have wronged. And Card. Bellarmine himself, not agreeable to this his reason,
did before in his Controversies affirm Lib. 2. de Romans Pon^. cap. 19.
, which as yet he has not recalled, that S Paul did for good and just cause
appeal to Caesar, when he was accused for raising sedition and tumults in the
people. And in that very place of his Recognitions, where he recalleth his
opinion, he does very plainly insinuate, as you have seen, that the cause
whereof he was accused, was criminal, for which he was in danger says Card.
Bellarmine, of a most unjust death.

13 True it is that S. Paul did preach to the Jews the resurrection of Christ,
according to the predictions of the holy Prophets, and for this cause they
accused him of sedition, and to be a man worthy of death, and therefore he
appealed to the tribunal of Caesar, not that Caesar should judge, whether
Christ was risen from death to life, for this indeed had been a spiritual
cause, but whether to preach to the Jews the resurrection of Christ, according
to the predictions of the holy Prophets, were sedition, and a crime worthy to
be punished with death by the Secular Magistrate. Wherefore Festus the
President of Iewrie, and King Agrippa, after that S. Paul had discoursed about
the resurrection of Christ Act. 26.
, and King Agrippa had said to S. Paul, A little thou do persuade me to
become a Christian, they all rose up, and going aside they spoke among
themselves, saying, that this man has done nothing worthy of death, or bonds;
which answer also made Lycias the Tribune to the President Foelix before in
the 23. Chapter.

14 A third reason, which moved Card. Bellarmine to recall his former opinion,
and that S Paul did not appeal to Caesar, as to his lawful Judge, is, for
that, says he In tract. contra Barclaium. cap. 3. page 49.
, it does seem to be altogether repugnant to the Gospel, that Christ did not
free expressly, and by name S. Peter, and the Apostles from the obligation,
wherein they stood bound to Heathen Princes. For Christ Mat. 17. did pay the
didrachmes for himself and Peter, to avoid scandal. For that otherwise
neither himself, nor Peter were bound to pay that tribute, he did demonstrate
by those words: The Kings of the earth, of whom do they receive tribute or
cense? of their children, or of strangers? And Peter answering, of strangers,
Jesus said unto him, therefore the sons are free: by which words he declared,
that he was free from all tribute and cense, for that he was the son of the
King of all Kings, and because when the son of a King is free, also his
family is reputed free, therefore Peter, and the Apostles, who by the gracious
favor of Christ did appertain to his family, ought also to be free.

15 But this reason is neither sufficient, nor agreeable to Card. Bellarmines
own principles. For first Card. Baronius affirms Ad ann. Christi 33. nu. 31.
, that this didrachme, which was exacted from our Savior in this place, was
not a tribute due to Caesar, but only to God for the use of the Temple,
according to the law of God decreed in the 30. chapter of Exodus: And therefore
from this place no sufficient argument can be drawn, according to Card.
Baronius doctrine, that the Apostes were exempted from paying of tributes, or
any other temporal subjection, due to temporal Princes. Yea, and which is
more, Card. Bellarmine himself in the latter Editions of his Controversies
approves this Exposition for most true. There be two interpretations, says he
Lib. 1 de Clericis cap. 28. in propos. 4.
, of this place: Therefore sons are free. The former is of S. Hillarie, who
affirms, that this place is only meant of the tribute, which God did impose
upon the Children of Israel, Exodus 30. to the use of the temple, which
tribute was properly called a didrachme; and according to this Exposition,
which seems to us to be most true, this is the force of the argument. The
Kings of the earth, do not exact tribute of their sons but of strangers,
therefore the King of heaven will not exact tribute of me, who am his proper
and natural son. The second interpretation, which is of S. Hierome, who
expounds those words of the tribute which was to be paid to Caesar, seems
to be the less probable, because the tribute which was to be paid to Caesar,
was not a Didrachme, but a penny, as it is plain by Math. 22. Show me the
tribute coin: and they offered him a penny. Neither can it be demonstrated by
any found reason, that the tribute of the Didrachme was wont to be paid to
Caesar, but after the Ascension of Christ into heaven. For Josephus lib. 7. de
bello Iudaico cap. 26. does write that the tribute of the Didrachme, which all
the Jews did pay to the temple every year, should afterward be brought into
the Capitole. Thus Card. Bellarmine.

16 Wherefore it is strange, that he should now be so forgetful, as to bring
this text of holy Scripture for a reason, why he changed his former opinion,
and which reason also he says does demonstrate, that Christ our Savior did
expressly, and by name free S. Peter and the Apostles from the obligation
wherein they stood bound to Caesar, whereas Card. Bellarmine himself, as you
have seen, expounds this place not of any tribute to be paid to Caesar, but
only due to God for the use of the temple. And therefore small reason had
Card. Bellarmine for the aforesaid reasons, which are so weak, and repugnant
to his own doctrine, as you have seen, to recall his former opinion, which
for so long time he had in public Schools, and writings, with the common
opinion of Divines, taught and maintained against the Canonists: but truly he
had no reason to condemn for such weak reasons the contrary opinion of the
School Divines, of whose profession he himself also is, as improbable.

17 Far more agreeable to reason, and also to Card. Bellarmines profession, he
being a School Divine, were it for him in my judgment to return to his
ancient opinion, which the School Divines do generally maintain, and rather
to recall some other his opinions, wherein he plainly contradicts his own
doctrine, as I have showed before: As that our Savior by those words,
therefore sons are free etc. Math. 17. did expressly, and by name free S.
Peter and the Apostles from the obligation, wherein they stood bound to Heathen
Princes, which is flatly repugnant to that, which he taught in another place,
that these words are not meant of any tribute, which was to be paid to Caesar,
but only of the tribute, which God did impose Exodus 30. upon the children of
Israel to the use of the Temple. And besides that, the cause whereof the Jews
did accuse S. Paul, and for which he appealed to Caesar, was spiritual, In
tract. contra Barcl. cap. 3 page 51.
which is clearly repugnant to that, which he taught in another place, Lib 2.
de Romans Pont. cap. 29.
that S. Paul did for good and just cause appeal to Caesar, and did
acknowledge him for his Judge, when he was accused of raising sedition, and
tumults in the people. And moreover, (to omit sundry other his contradictions)
that the Church of Christ is compounded See above cap. 2.
of spiritual and temporal power, as a man is compounded of soul and body,
and that the temporal and spiritual Commonwealth do make one total body
whereof the Pope is head, as a man is compounded of b^dy and soul, which is
clearly repugnant to that which he taught in other places, that the Church of
Christ is compounded only of spiritual power, and that the Pope, if we will
speak properly, has only spiritual and not temporal power.

18 But secondly although we should grant, that those words of our Savior,
therefore sons are free etc. were meant of the tribute which was to be paid
to Caesar and not to the temple, yet Card. Bellarmine himself did in the
former Editions of his Controversies give thereunto a very sufficient answer,
and which in his latter Editions he has not confuted. For thus he writes lib.
1. de Clericis Cap. 28.
: I answer first that this place does not convince: for otherwise he should
exempt from tributes all Christians, who are regenerate by Baptism. Secondly I
answer, that our Savior does speak only of himself. For he makes this
Argument: The sons of Kings are free from tributes, because they neither pay
tribute to their fathers, for that the goods of the parents and children are
common, nor to other Kings, because they are not subject to them, but I am the
son of the first and chiefest King, therefore I owe tribute to no man.
Wherefore when our Savior says, therefore Sons are free, from thence he
meant only to gather this, that he himself was not bound to pay tribute: of
other men he affirmed nothing.

19 Thus answered Card. Bellarmine in times past, when he followed the opinion
of the Divines, concerning the exemption of Clergy men against the Canonists,
who urged this place of holy Scriptue to prove, that Clergy men are exempted
from paying of tributes by the law of God. But now, forsooth, he forsakes the
Divines, and this very text, therefore sons are free, which then he brought
for an objection against his opinion, and clearly answered the same, he
brings now for a chief ground to prove his new opinion, and (which is very
remarkable) he concealeth the answer which he then made to the said objection:
only he adds this: that when the sons of Kings are exempted from tribute,
not only their own persons, but also their servants and Ministers, and so
their families are exempted from tributes. But it is certain that all Clergy
men do properly appertain to the family of Christ, who is the son of the
King of Kings. And this our Lord did seem to signify when he said to S.
Peter, But that we may not scandalize them, finding the stater take it, and
give it for me and thee. As though he should say, that both he, and his
family, whereof S. Peter was a chief governor, ought to be free from
tributes. Which also S. Hierome does seem to have understood in his Commentary
of that place, when he says, that Clergy men do not pay tributes for the
honor of our Lord, and are as Kings children free from tributes: and S. Austin
lib. 1. qq. Euang. q. 23. where he writes, that in every earthly Kingdom, the
children of that Kingdom under which are all the Kingdoms of the earth, ought
to be free, ( not are free, as Card. Bellarmine affirms S. Austin to say,)
from tributes.

20 Thus you see, how Card. Bellarmine runs up and down from the words of
holy Scripture, by which it is demonstrated, says he, that S. Peter was not
bound to pay tribute to Caesar, to the sense which he himself disproueth, and
then from the sense to his private collections, and inferences, that if S.
Peter was free, all the Apostles were free, and if all the Apostles, all
Clergy men. But if it had pleased him to have also set down the answer,
which in the former Editions of his books he made to this objection, the
Reader would easily have perceived, that from this place of holy Scripture no
sufficient reason could be gathered to cause him to recall his former opinion,
although we should grant, that those words of our Savior were meant of the
tribute, which was to be paid to Caesar, of which nevertheless Card.
Bellarmine will not have them to be understood, but only of the tribute which
the children of Israel were by the law of God, Exodus 30. commanded to pay for
their souls unto the use of the tabernacle of testimony, for at that time the
temple was not built. For first, says he, if this argument did convince, not
only Clergy men, but also all Christians, who being regenerate by baptism
are the children of Christ, and also do properly appertain to his spiritual
family, or Church, of which, S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles under him
were chief governors, should be exempted from paying tributes. Secondly, our
Savior, says he, does speak only of himself, who was the son of the
first and chiefest King, and that he himself was not bound to pay tribute: of
other men he affirms nothing.

21 Thirdly, to the authority of S. Hierome, he answers, that S. Hierome did
not intend in that place, to prove out of the Gospel, that Clergy men are
free from tribute, but only he does bring a certain congruence, wherefore
they are freed by the decrees of Princes: for therefore he says, that they do
not pay tributes as the children of the Kingdom, and he adds an other cause,
to wit, the honor of Christ: for he says, that for his honor Clergy men do
not pay tributs. Therefore not the law of God, but the decrees of Princes made
for the honor of Christ, have exempted Clergy men. Thus Card. Bellarmine.

22 Fourthly, to the authority of S. Augustine he answers, that although
Iansenius (whom Salmeron and Suarez do follow) does affirm, that S. Austen by
the children of the supreme kingdom did understand the natural children of
God, and that he spoke in the plural number to observe the manner of our
Saviors spech, so that the meaning of S. Austen was, that all the natural
sons of God if it were possible that God could have more natural sons then
one, should be exempted from paying of earthly tributes: yet Card. Bellarmine
does not like well of this answer, and therefore he thinks the answer of
Abulensis to be the more probable, that S. Austen did not understand natural
children, but Clergy men and Monks, who, as also S. Hierome affirms, in
Cap. 17 Mat., were and are free from tributes, as those who appertain to the
family of Christ. Neither does it therefore from hence follow, that Clergy
men are by the law of God free from tributes. For first, that which S. Austen
says, is not in the words of our Savior, but it is only gathered by a
probable consequence, For our Savior does only speak of the true and
natural children of Kings, as S. Chrysostom does expound that place.
Secondly, our Savior himself does also properly command nothing in this
place, that it may be called the law of God, but does only show by the use and
custom of men, that the children of Kings are free from tributes. Thus Card.
Bellarmine answered in his former Editions, which answer in his later editions
he altogether concealeth, but for what cause I remit to the judgment of the
prudent Reader.

23 By all which it is apparent that our Savior did only speak of himself,
and of the natural children of Kings, when he used those words, therefore
sons are free; and of the servants, or family, either of Kings, or of the
children of Kings he says nothing at all; and therefore from an other
consequence drawn from the use, and custom of men, and not from the words of
our Savior, can it be gathered, that those who are servants, or of the family
of the children of Kings, are exempted either from subjection to the inferior
magistrates of the kingdom, or from the paying of tributs. But by no probable
consequence it can be deduced, that those who are either servants, and of the
family of Kings children, or also servants, and of the family of the King
himself, are by the custom of any nation either exempted from subjection to
inferior Magistrates, and much less to the King himself, or also from paying
tributes, unless the King upon some other special consideration does grant to
any of them such a privilege.

24 To those words of our Savior, But that we may not scandalize them etc. it
is easily answered according to the first exposition of that didrachme, which
Card. Bellarmine thinks to be most true, that it was a tribute due to the
temple or tabernacle, and not to Caesar: For I do willingly grant, that S.
Peter, who was appointed by Christ to be the chief governor of his Church and
temple, was exempted from paying tribute to the temple. But although we should
admit, that the aforesaid didrachme was a tribute due to Caesar, and not to
the temple, yet from those words of our Savior, no sufficient argument can be
drawn to prove, that S. Peter, and especially the rest of the Apostles, were
by the law of God exempted from paying tributes, and much less from temporal
subjection to Heathen Princes.

25 First, for that we may probably answer with Iansenius, and Abulensis, that
Christ did speak to S. Peter in the plural number, [but that we may not
scandalize them] not for that S. Peter was bound to pay tribute only by reason
of scandal, but either because our Savior did speak of his own person,
using the plural number for the singular, as it is usual, especially among
great persons; we are wont, says S. Epiphanius In the heresy of the Manichies.
, to speak singular things plural, and plural singular. For we say, we
have told you, and we have seen you, and we come to you, and yet there be not
two who speak, but one who is present: or else because the scandal, which
Christ should have given, would in some sort have redounded to S. Peter, as
being a mediator in that business. And therefore, as well affirms Iansenius
In C^ncord. Euang. cap. 69. in Mat. 17.
, our Savior did pay tribute for himself only to avoid scandal and for S.
Peter to honor him as with a certain reward for his faith, obedience, and
diligence, as a mediator of this business, and an executor of the Miracle of
finding the stater in the fishes mouth, or as Barradius the Jesuit, and others
do affirm In cap 17. Mat. ^om. 2. Lib. 10. cap. 32.
, to honor him above the rest, as the Prince of the Apostles, and the head of
the Church. See Abulensis, q. 198. 199. and 200. in cap. 17. Mat. and Barradius
upon this place.

26 Secondly, although we should grant, that our Savior did for some special
cause exempt S. Peter from paying tribute to Caesar, either by a personal
privilege, or else real, and descending to his successors, it does not
therefore follow, that he did exempt him from all civil subjection to temporal
Princes, as neither does it follow, that because the Children of Kings, for
that their goods and their fathers are common, or any of the Kings servants
are by special privilege exempted from paying tributes, they are therefore
exempted from all civil subjection and alleagiance to the King.

27 Thirdly, for that there is no probability in my judgment, that either
Christ did by those words intend to exempt the rest of the Apostles, seeing
that there is no mention at all made of them in that place, or also that this
priuiledg of exemption is extended to S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles,
in regard only that they were of the spiritual family, or Church of Christ
(I say of the spiritual family, for that I will not deny, but that as they
were of his corporal family, and lived with him here on earth, and had no
corporal goods but such as belonged to Christ, they were exempted from paying
tributes, but not from civil subjection to Heathen Princes) because the
exemption of servants with their Master, or of those, who are of the family
of Kings Children with the Kings Children themselves, is not grounded in the
law of nature, but only in a certain congruity, and custom of men, from
which custom this argument to exempt the Apostles, for that they were of
Christ's family, is drawn: but there is no such custom among nations, that
the servants or family of Kings Children or of the King himself, are
exempted from paying tributes, although the children of Kings having no other
goods, then which are their fathers, be exempted, as Card. Bellarmine a little
above affirmed. But howsoever, neither the servants to Kings children, nor the
kings children themselves, are exempted from civil subjection, or from the
directive, or coerciue power of the King.

28 And therefore neither Fa. Suarez, who handles this question at large, dare
affirm, that from those words of our Savior it can certainly, but only
probably be gathered, that this exemption was extended to the rest of the
Apostles. I answer, says he In defens. fid^ Ca^^o and (...) lib. 4 cap. 8.
in sine.
, that it is true, that Christ did not say plainly, that the family is
exempted with the children, neither does it follow by any evident, or necessary
consequence, and therefore the aforesaid opinion, for as much as belongs to
this part, is neither of faith, nor altogether certain. Nevertheless it is
most likely, that this extention to the rest of the Apostles is according to
the intention of Christ,

29. But truly, although there may be alleged some probable congruities,
wherefore our Savior might grant some special prerogative, and privilege of
exemption to S. Peter, whom he had chosen to be the first and principal head
and governor of his Church, rather then to the rest of the Apostles, as
likewise the Divines do yield probable congruities, wherefore God almighty
might give to the B. Virgin Mary, whom he had chosen to be the mother of his
immaculate Son, a special prerogative and privilege of exemption from
original sin, but whether he did grant that privilege or no, it cannot
certainly be proved, nevertheless for my own part I do not see any probable
likelihood, that our Savior should give to the rest of the Apostles, and much
less to all Clergy men, any special privilege of exemption from all civil
subjection to temporal Princes. And therefore the most part of the School
Divines, yea also and of the Jesuits themselves do hold, that Clergy men
are directly subject to the civil laws of temporal Princes, in all those
things, which are not repugnant to their state, nor to the Ecclesiastical
Canons, and consequently that they are not exempted from all subjection and
obedience, and from the directive or commanding power of Secular Princes, but
that they are bound not only by force of reason, but also by virtue of the
law, and of their due obedience, to observe such civil laws.

30 A fourth reason which Card. Bellarmine brings In tract. contra Barcl.
cap. 3. page 50
wherefore he recalled his former opinion, and why the Apostles were not de
iure subject to temporal Princes, is because they are appointed by God Princes
over all the earth, as we read in the 44. Psalm. For although that
principality was spiritual, not temporal, yet it was true principallity, and
far more noble then temporal principallitie. But this reason is not
sufficient, for as I observed in my Apology, nu. 68. and seq
the same man being considered diverse ways may be subject, and superior;
subject in temporalls, and supreme in spirituals, and contrariwise; neither is
temporal subjection repugnant to spiritual authority, nor temporal authority
repugnant to spiritual subjection: neither from hence does it follow, that
either temporal authority it self, is subject to spiritual power, or
spiritual power subject to temporal authority, but only that the same man,
who is superior in temporalls, is subject in spiritualls, and who is superior
in spiritualls is subject in temporalls, as the same man who is a Musition may
be subject and servant to a Physician, or contrariwise, and yet it does not
from hence follow, that Music it self is subject to Physic, or
contrariwise.

31 And if Card. Bellarmine do answer, as he does in his Schulckenius Page
172.
, that when the powers are equal, it may perchance fall out, that the same
compared diverse ways may be subject and superior, but if the powers be
unequal, and one subordained to an other, as are spiritual and civil power,
it cannot fall out, that the same man be subject to him who is his superior,
this answer is also as insufficient as the former. First, for that the
temporal power it self is not subordained to the spiritual, as I have showed
before: for otherwise temporal Princes should not only in spiritualls, but
also in mere temporalls be subject to spiritual Pastors, as if Music it
self be subject to Physic, a Musition, as he is a Musition, and in all
things belonging to Music, should be subject to Physic, and consequently
to a Physician, as he is a Physician. Secondly, for that it is the common
opinion of the School Divines, and also of the Jesuits, that Clergy men are
subject to the directive temporal power, or command of temporal Princes.

32 Thirdly, for that there is no repugnance, but rather a necessary
consequence, that spiritual Princes, not as they are spiritual Princes, but
as they are true parts and members of the temporal common wealth, should be
subject in temporal affairs to temporal Princes, for every member, says
Card. Bellarmine, Li^ de Monachis. cap. 19.
ought to be subject to the head, and Clergy men, besides that they are
Clergy men, are also citizens and parts of the civil common wealth, as Card.
Bellarmine affirms in an other place Lib. de Clericis. cap. 28.
, and the King is head of the politic or civil body, as also in his
Schulckenius, he expressly affirms Page 339.
. Fourthly, for that Card. Bellarmine is also now of opinion, at least wise he
was when he wrote against D. Barckley, that it is probable, that the Priests of
the old law, who had true spiritual power, and were true spiritual Princes,
were subject to Kings, and therefore for this reason to recall his former
opinion, and especially to condemn it as improbable, were both to contradict
himself, and also to condemn of temeritie the learned School Divines of
this age, and also of his Society.

33 These be all the principal reasons, which I can find in Card. Bellarmine,
for which he was moved to recall his former opinion, and to condemn it as
improbable, which how probable they be, or rather very insufficient to move
such a learned man, as Card. Bellarmine is, to forsake the Schole Divines, and
to fly to the Canonists, who as pope Pius the fifth sincerely confessed, Nauar.
super cap. non liceat Papa^ 12. q. 2 55. 3^. nu. 6
do attribute to the Pope more authority then is fitting, and to censure so
rigorously, and rashly the learned Catholics of this age, and also of his
own Society, of temeritie, I remit to the judgment of the discreet Reader,
as also to consider, whether reason, or affection to advance the Popes
authority moved him not only to recall his former opinion, but also to
condemn it as improbable.

33 Lastly, that the Reader may have some knowledge of the true state of the
question concerning the authority of spiritual Pastors to exempt Clergy men
from the power of Secular Princes, for that some Divines are of opinion, that
from the exemption of Clergy men a strong Argument may be drawn to p^oue that
a spiritual Prince or Pastor has power to depose or deprive a temporal
Prince, who is subject to him in spiritualls, of his temporal Kingdom and
Dominions. First therefore the true state of the question betwixt me and my
Adversaries is, not concerning the exemption of Clergy men by way of command,
for I do willingly grant, that a spiritual Prince, or Pastor as he is a
spiritual Pastor, has power to command a Christian Prince, who is subject to
him in spiritualls, not to exercise his temporal power in some cases, if the
necessity of the Church, or Christian Religion does require it, over the
persons of Clergy men, who are his temporal Subjects: so that if a secular
Prince should disobey the lawful command of his spiritual Pastor, he should
offend against the virtue of Religion, for the which offense his spiritual
Pastor might punish him with Ecclesiastical censures: and of this manner of
exemption by way of command, and spiritual coercion, all the Canons and
Decrees of Popes and Counsels. which do signify. imply, or suppose that
Clergy men may by the authority of the Church without the consent of temporal
Princes be exempted from secular powers, either touching their persons or
their goods, may be very well understood: I said if the necessity of the
Church does require it; for at this present I will not enter into particulars,
what manner of necessity is required, that a spiritual Pastor may impose such
a command upon his temporal Prince.

34 But the controversy betwixt me and my Adversaries betwixt those
Catholics who are so vehement for the Popes power to depose Princes, and those
on the contrary side is, whether spiritual Pastors, as they are spiritual
Pastors, or by virtue of their spiritual power, have not only by way of
command, and spiritual coercion, but also by way of sentence authority to
exempt without the consent of Princes Clergy men, who before were subject to
them in temporalls, from the directive, and coerciue power of secular Princes,
in such sort, that after the sentence of such exemption be given, Clergy men
are no more the subjects of that secular Prince, for that his spiritual Pastor
does deprive him of that civil power, which before the sentence he had over
Clergy men: And what is said of particular Bishops, in respect of Princes who
are their spiritual children, is to be understood of the Supreme spiritual
Pastor in respect of all Christian Princes, who are subject to him in
spiritualls. This is the true state of the question.

35 So that the Reader may clearly perceive, that although from the first
manner of exemption, by way of command, and spiritual coercion, no good
argument can be drawn, to prove, that the spiritual power can depose Princes,
and deprive them of their Regal authority, by way of sentence, yet there is
great coherence betwixt these two questions concerning the power of spiritual
Pastors to depose Princes by way of sentence, and their power to exempt by way
of sentence Clergy men from all subjection to Secular Princes. For the first
question is whether the spiritual power can by way of sentence deprive
temporal Princes of all their temporal power, and absolve all their Subjects
from their temporal alleagiance: and the second is, whether it can deprive
them of some part of their temporal power, and absolve some of their subjects
from their temporal allegiance. And therefore those Catholics who do grant
the second, will easily grant the first, and who do grant the first, must of
necessity grant the second, for that there can be no sufficient reason
alleged, why the spiritual power can in order to spiritual good deprive
Princes of some part of their Regal authority, and not of all, and absolve
some subjects from their temporal allegiance, and not all; and if it can
deprive o^ all, i^ must needs follow that it can also of some part. And
contrariwise those Catholics, who affirm, that the spiritual power cannot
exempt, ot absolve Clergy men from their temporal allegiance and subjection
to temporal Princes, must consequenily affirm, that it can not exempt or
absolve all subjects from their temporal allegiance: and who affirm, that it
can not absolve, or exempt all subjects from their temporal allegiance, nor
deprive a temporal^ Prince of all his Regal authority, will easily affirm,
that it cannot exempt or absolve Clergy men from their temporal alleagiance
and subjection, nor deprive a temporal Prince of any part of his Regal
authority.

36 But some do greatly urge this objection: If the spiritual power can
command temporal Princes not to exercise their temporal power over the
persons or goods of Clergy men, without the consent of their Ecclesiastical
superior, it does consequently follow, that a temporal Prince does offend, if
he transgress the just and lawful command of his spiritual Pastor, and
therefore it seems, that a temporal Prince has no power over the persons or
goods of Clergy men after such a command, supposing it to be lawful, unless
we will grant, that a temporal Prince has power to commit sin, and to
transgress the lawful command of his spiritual Pastor.

37 To this objection (wherewith I have known diverse men of learning to be
somewhat perplexed) those Catholics, who deny that the spiritual power can
deprive by way of sentence, a temporal Prince of his Regal Authority, either
wholly or in part, may easily answer in this manner: that if a temporal Prince
does exercise his temporal power over the persons or goods of Clergy men
against the lawful command of his spiritual Pastor, he sins indeed
against Religion, and the general virtue of obedience, in that he uses his
power contrary to the lawful command of his spiritual Pastor, but he does
not sin against the special virtue of legal, or moral justice, in using
his authority over them, who are not his subjects, and over whom he has no
temporal power and Authority, in that manner as another man, who is not their
Prince, should offend. Neither is it unusual for a man to commit a sin in
doing that which in respect of justice he has power and authority to do.

38 As for example, it is a sin against the virtue of liberality for one to
give away his goods prodigally, although if we respect justice he has true
and full power to give them away, for that he gives nothing but that, which is
his own: and therefore that prodigal gift, although it be unlawful, yet is
not unjust, as justice is taken, not as it comprehends all virtues in
general, but in particular for a special virtue, and one of the four
Cardinal virtues. So also it is a sin against the virtue of temperance to give
money to commit an dishonest act, and yet the gift is not unjust for that he
gives nothing but his own, and which according to justice he has power to
give. So likewise if a Ghostly father command his penitent to give a certain
part of his goods to the poor in satisfaction of his sins, if the penitent
do bestow them otherwise then he was commanded, he sins against the
virtue of Religion and Sacrament of penance, in transgressing his Ghostly
fathers lawful command, but he commits no injustice, because he gives that
which is his own, and which, if we regard the virtue of justice, he has
power to give: neither does the command of his Ghostly father deprive him of
the right, dominion, property and power, which he had before over those goods.

39 Lastly, if the Pope should upon just cause suspend a Priest from the Altar,
or a Bishop from his Episcopal function, and consequently forbid the Priest to
consecrate, and the Bishop to give orders, if they should disobey the Popes
lawful command, they should sin against the virtue of Religion, in using
their power unlawfully, but they should not sin for doing that which they
have no power to do, as he who is no Priest or Bishop should in consecrating
or giving orders offend, for that the power of a Priest to consecrate and of a
Bishop to give orders, cannot either wholly or in part be taken away from them
by the Pope. So likewise although a spiritual Pastor should for just cause
forbid a temporal Prince, who is his spiritual child, and subject, to
exercise his Regal power and authority over Clergy men, if that temporal
Prince should herein transgress the command of his spiritual Pastor,
supposing it to be lawful, he should indeed offend against religion, in
using his Regal power and authority contrary to the lawful command of his
spiritual Pastor, which command was imposed for the motive of Religion,
nevertheless he should not offend against justice, in doing that which he
has no power and authority to do, in that manner as another man, who is not
their Prince, should by depriving them of their goods, or punishing their
persons if they transgress the laws, offend. For that it is not in the power
of a spiritual Pastor to deprive a temporal Prince either wholly or in part
of his Regal power, and temporal Sovereignty.

40 Wherefore if we respect the power it self, and the virtue of legal or
moral justice, a temporal Prince has full, ample, and supreme royal power
and authority over Clergy men, notwithstanding that his spiritual Pastor
should for just cause command him not to exercise his Regal power upon the
persons of Clergy men, who do offend his laws: but if we respect the use
and execution of the power, and the virtue of religion, the use indeed of his
power in the aforesaid case is so limited by the lawful command of the
spiritual Pastor, that the Prince using his power over Clergy men, sins
against Religion, for that he disobeyeth the lawful command of his spiritual
Superior, which was imposed for the motive of religion, but not against
justice for that he does not exercise his Regal power but upon those who are
his Subjects, and do owe unto him true loyalty and temporal obedience.

41 And truly if the aforesaid objection were of force, that the temporal
Prince has no power or authority over Clergy men, who are subject to him in
temporalls, against the lawful command of his spiritual Pastor, because he
has no power to sin, it would likewise follow, that a suspended Bishop, or
Priest, have no power to give orders, or to consecrate, because they have no
power to sin; and a penitent has no lawful right, or power to sell, or give
away his goods against the lawful command of his Ghostly Father, because he
has no power to sin; and a man has no power, or right to give money to a
dishonest end, or to give away his goods prodigally, and consequently they
should be restored back again, because he has no power to sin. I will say
nothing at this time, how far Clergy men, either by the privileges of
Christan Princes, or by the Ecclesiastical Canons are de facto exempted both
in their goods, and in their persons from civil powers, but only I thought
good at this time to set down the true state of the question among Catholics
concerning the authority of spiritual Pastors to exempt Clergy men from the
temporal power of Christian Princes, that thereby they may clearly perceive,
what kind of argument may be drawn from the exemption of Clergy men, to
prove the Popes power to depose Princes, and by way of sentence to deprive them
wholly of their Regal authority.

42 Thus you have seen in what manner temporal things are subject to
spiritual, temporal ends to spiritual ends, temporal power to the
spiritual power, the temporal sword to the spiritual sword, the flesh to the
spirit, the Moon to the Sun, and temporal Princes to spiritual Pastors;
and that from the subjection and subordination of the temporal power to the
spiritual, no good argument can be brought to prove, that the Pope, by virtue
of his spiritual power can dispose of temporalls, depose temporal Princes, or
punish temporally by way of coercion, but only that in order to spiritual
good he can command temporalls, and punish temporally by way of command, but by
way of coercion only with spiritual, and not with temporal punishments. And
by this which has been said, the Reader may easily understand the true sense
and meaning of a certain proposition, which Card. Bellarmine in his
Schulckenius does often inculcate (as though there were some great mystery lie
hidden therein) to prove the Popes power to depose temporal Princes, to wit,
that a Christian Prince is a child of the Church, and subject to the Pope, not
only as he is a Christian man, but also as he is a Christian Prince; and the
same he affirms of a Christian ^awyer, of a Christian Soldier, of a
Christian Physician, and so of the rest.

43 For all these three propositions, A Christian Prince, as he is a Christian
Prince, is a child of the Church, and subject to spiritual Pastors: A
Christian Prince as he is a Christian is a Child of the Church, and subject to
spiritual Pastors: and a Prince as he is a Christian, is a Child of the
Church and subject to spiritual Pastors; have one and the self same sense;
and so likewise of a Christian Lawier, of a Christian Soldier, of a Christian
Physician etc. For the true meaning of them all is, that Christianity, and not
Regal authority, or the knowledge of law, warfare, or Physic, is the cause
why a Prince, a Lawier, a Soldier, a Physician, and all other men of what trade
soever they be, are Children of the Church, and subject to spiritual Pastors;
and that therefore they are to be directed and instructed by spiritual
Pastors, not precisely in the rules of civil government, in the rules of
law, warfare, or Physic, but only in the rules and principles of Christian
doctrine, and how they ought to govern ciuilly, and use their knowledge and
trades according to the rules and precepts of Christian Religion: which if they
refuse to do, they may be corrected and punished by spiritual Pastors, with
spiritual or Ecclesiastical punishments.

44 But from hence it does not follow, that either temporal power, the
knowledge of the law, warfare, or physic, are among Christians per se
subject to the spiritual power, but only per accidens, as I have often
declared, and in those things, which do concern or belong to Christian
Religion, or that spiritual Pastors can by virtue of their spiritual power
correct, or punish Christian Princes, Lawiers, Soldiers, Physicians etc. by
depriving them by way of sentence of their Regal authority, of their skill
and knowledge in the laws, in warfare, or Physic, which they did not receive
from the spiritual power, but only by depriving them of the Sacraments, and
such like spiritual benifites, of which they are made partakers by being
Christians, and by means of the spiritual power and authority of spiritual
Pastors. And thus much concerning the union and subjection of the temporal
and spiritual power, and also of the second part.

AN ADJOJNDER to the first and second Part, wherein Widdringtons Interpretation
of that Clause of the Oath, wherein the Doctrine (that Princes, who are
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects) is abiured as impious and heretical, is proved to be sound, and
sufficient, and is cleared from all absurdity or contradiction, even by Mr.
FITZHERBERTS examples, and that it may without any Perjury be sworn by any
CATHOLIC.
Perceiving, Courteous Reader, that this my Answer to Mr. Fitzherberts Reply
does arise to a greater bigness, then at the first I imagined: for that I am
compelled not only to answer him, but also D. Schulckenius, to whom he
remitteth his Reader for the confutation of many of my Answers: I thought good
for diverse reasons to divide it into two Books, and to conclude the first
Book with the first and second Part; only adjoining, by way of an Appendix,
for thy better satisfaction, the Answer which I made to Mr. Fitzherberts fourth
Chapter, wherein he excepteth against those words of the Oath (as impious and
heretical Doctrine) for against no other clause of the Oath does he make any
particular objection, besides his general discourse in favor of the Popes
power to depose Princes, and to dispose of all temporalls. Which his Doctrine,
seeing that I have already by extrinsecall grounds, and the authority of
learned Catholics (for to all the intrinsecall grounds which my Adversary
brings, I will answer in the next book, which, God willing, ere it be long
thou shall receive) proved not to be so certain, but that the contrary has
ever been, and is at this present approved by learned Catholics, and
consequently may without any danger of heresy, error, or temerity, be
maintained by any Catholic: and considering also that Mr. Fitzherbert takes
no particular exception against any clause of the Oath, but only against those
words (as impious and heretical Doctrine) it is evident that any man of
judgment may from that which I have already said and proved, easily conclude,
that the Oath may lawfully, and with a safe Conscience be taken, if my
Adversaries objections against those words of the Oath (as impious and
heretical Doctrine) be once clearly confuted.

2 First therefore Mr. Fitzherbert in the beginning of his fourth Chapter,
seems to take it very ill, for that I fall, says he, upon him very foul,
charging him with flat falsity at the first word. But truly he does in this
exaggerate the matter somewhat more then is needful, as also in that he says,
that for a while I made my self merry with Fa. Lessius. For besides that the
word flat is added by himself, I did neither cogge, scoff, gibe, or make my
self merry with Fa. Lessius: but after I had brought those four instances to
confute Fa. Lessius his antecedent proposition, whereon he grounded his
consequence, I only demanded, not by way of scoffing, cogging, gibing, or
making my self merry, as this man in this, and his former Chapter untruly
affirms, but rather out of pity, compassion, and complaint, whether those,
and such like were not trim Arguments to move English Catholics prodigally to
cast away their goods, and to deny their allegiance to their Prince. And as for
charging my Adversary with flat falsity, my words were only these: Thirdly it
is false which this Author F. T. affirms, to wit, that the Doctrine
concerning the Popes power to depose Princes, is plainly abiured in ^his Oath,
as impious and heretical, for this doctrine only is abiured in this Oath as
impious and heretical, that Princes being excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their subjects or any other whatsoever:
which position, as I will declare beneath, has this sense, that it is in the
free power of Subjects to depose, or (if they will) to murder their Prince,
being excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope.

3 In the very first beginning I affirmed, and Mr. Fitzherbert in his first
Chapter related my words, that the supposition, which he made, to wit, that
the Popes power to excommunicate Princes is denied in this Oath, is most false
and then he took no exception against this word, most false: and now after he
has so often fallen very foul upon me, with charging me with being absurd,
ridiculous, foolish, malicious, impudent, impious, with cogging, scoffing
gibing, heretic, and being no good Child of the Catholic Church, and using
many such like slanderous, and disgraceful terms against me, he takes it
very ill for that I only affirm his assertion to be false, which word
nevertheless is usual in Schools among Disputers and Answerers, and is not
taken for any disgraceful term, being in sense all one with untrue, or I
deny the assertion or position. But because I perceive Mr. Fitzherberts
patience cannot brook the very least of those so many foul, disgraceful, and
slanderous nicknames he is pleased to bestow upon me, and does so easily see a
little mote in my eye, not perceiving the great beam in his own: I will
hereafter abstain from that word false, and in stead thereof use untrue, as
in the English Edition I did translate it: neither can he have any color to
be distasted with this word untrue, unless he do take it ill that I do not
forsooth approve all his opinions, and applaud whatsoever he shall say to be
true.

4 But to the matter. Mr. Fitzherbert in his fourth Chapter endeauoreth to
prove two things: the one that I have falsely charged him with affirming, that
the Doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, is manifestly abiured in
the Oath, as impious and heretical, which he denies to have affirmed,
although he grants withal, that it is true if he had affirmed it. The
second is, that my interpretation of that clause of the Oath, wherein the
aforesaid Doctrine and Position, That Princes being excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, is abiured as
impious and heretical, is absurd according to my own grounds.

5. As touching the first. Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, Cap. 4. nu. 1.
that he says nothing at all touching his own opinion, whether the doctrine
of deposing Princes be abiured in the Oath as impious and heretical (and much
less that it is manifestly abiured as I say he does) but he affirms only,
that the Oath is wholly repugnant to a Canon of the great Council of Lateran by
reason of two clauses therein. And for proof thereof, he repeateth Nu. 2.
the words of his Supplement, which are these? Fourthly, it appears also
hereby, and by all the premises, that this Oath of pretended allegiance is an
unlawful Oath, and not to be taken by any Christian man, seeing that it flatly
contradicts the said Council, and Canon, not only because it denies that
the Pope has any power or authority to depose his Majesty, or to discharge
any of his Subjects of their allegiance, and obedience to his Majesty, but also
because it binds the takers of it in express words to swear thus. And I do
further swear, that from my heart I do abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious
and heretical, this damnable doctrine, and position, that princes excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope may be deposed, which position was by that Canon
expressly ordained to be practiced in some cases, yea and executed by the
Counsels order upon Reymond Earl of Tolosa. Thus say I in my Suppliment.

6. Now I report Nu. 3.
me to the indifferent Reader, whether I affirm any more, then that these two
clauses of the Oath are flatly against the Council of Lateran, because the
Popes power to depose Princes (which the said Council acknowledges and
approves by an express Canon) is denied therein; and this is manifest as well
by all my precedent discourse, as by that which follows; for all that which I
amply debated before, touching the Council of Lateran, concerned only the
Popes power to depose Princes, without any one word whether the abiuration or
denial thereof be heretical; and my conclusion of the later clause confirms
the same: for I add immediately these words, which position, (to wit, that
Princes being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed) was by
that Canon expressly ordained to be practiced in some cases; yea and was
executed by the Councels order, upon Reymond Earl of Tolosa.

7. Whereby it appears, Nu. 4.
that whereas the clause mentions two things; the one the doctrine and
position, that Princes excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope may be deposed;
and the other, that the said doctrine is abiured, as impious and heretical; I
treat only of the former, and speak not one word of the later. So as my
Adversary Widdrington charging me to have falsely affirmed, that the Popes power
to depose Princes is manifestly abiured in this Oath, has charged me falsely,
and therefore may take his imputation of falsity to himself. Thus M.
Fitzherbert.

8. But in truth I cannot but wonder, where Mr. Fitzherberts memory was, when
he wrote these words, that he could not perceive, that he himself here says
as much as I affirmed him to say: and therefore if he can find no better a
shift and evasion, then to deny with so bold a face that very same thing,
which he himself in this very place does so plainly affirm, the untruth, I
dare not say falsity, wherewith I charged him, will still remain with him, and
will not be taken from him by me, besides the disgrace for a man of his
fashion, quality, and profession, to deny so bouldly that he affirms that
thing, which every Child who understands English, may perceive that he does
affirm. For mark his words. The Oath, says he, binds the takers of it in
express words to swear thus: And I do further swear, that I do from my
heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable
doctrine and position, that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may
be deposed. Now let any man judge, whether he that affirms, that the Oath
binds the takers of it in express words to swear, that he does abjure as
impious and heretical this doctrine, that Prince^ excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope m y be deposed, does not affirm, that the doctrine concerning the
Popes power to depose Princes is plainly, manifestly, or in express words
abiured in this oath as impious and heretical.

9. But observe how cunningly M. Fitzherbert, belike to return the imputation
of falsity upon me would delude his Reader. Whereas the clause of the oath,
says he, mentions two things; the one the doctrine and position, that
Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed; and the other,
that the sai^ doctrine is abiured as impious and heretical, (Lo here again
he grants as much, as I said he did affirm, to wit, that the doctrine,
which holds that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed, is abiured in this oath as impious and heretical) I treat only of
the former, and speak not one word of the later; and all that which I amply
debated before touching the Council of Lateran concerned only the Popes power
to depose Princes, without any one word, whether the abiuration, or denial
thereof be heretical.

10. Belike this man would make his Reader believe, that I did say, that he had
amply debated, treated, or made some discourse of this point, and that he had
endeavored to prove, that the oath is unlawful, and against the Council of
Lateran, in regard it binds the takers of it to swear, that they do from
their heart abhor, detest, and abjure as impious and heretical this doctrine
and position, that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed; whereas I say no such thing, but only that Master Fitzherbert does
barely affirm, that the oath binds the takers to abjure, or, which is all
one in sense, that in this oath is abiured as impious and heretical this
doctrine, and categoricall proposition, ex part praedicati, that Princes
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed. And thus much he
himself, as you have seen in this very place, does twice affirm: which his
assertion I said is not true, for that it only binds the takers to abjure a
impious, and heretical, this doctrine and hypotheticall proposition ex part
praedicati, that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed
or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever, which has a far
different sense from the former, as I will show beneath. So that he may still
take to himself that imputation of falsity, or untruth, wherewith I did truly
charge him, and hereafter be more wary, if he have any care of his credit,
not to maintain such palpable untruths, which every Schoole-boy may easily
perceive so to be. And thus much for the first point. Now you shall see how
learnedly he proves the second.

11. Nevertheless I would not, says he, Nu. 5.
have Widdrington to think, that because I deny, that I have said so in my
Supplement, therefore I do, or will deny, that it is so: for it is evident in
that clause, that the taker of the oath abiureth this doctrine as impious and
heretical, to wit, that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other, whereby not only the
Popes power to depose Princes is denied, but also the doctrine thereof is
abiured as impious and heretical: And this, I say, is evident, notwithstanding
the frivolous evasion, which my Adversary Widdrington seeks by his extrauagant
interpretation of that clause, when he says, as you have heard, that the
sense and meaning thereof is no other, but that it is heretical to affirm it
to be in the free power of subjects or any other to depose, or (if they list)
to kill Princes that are excommunicated or deprived by the Pope.

12. Whereby Nu. 6.
he gives to understand, that the doctrine, and position abiured in that
clause, contains two members, the one concerning the deposition of Princes,
and the other concerning the murder of them; and that it is abiured as
heretical in respect of the later only: as who would say, that it is an
heretical doctrine to teach, or affirm, that Princes excommunicated by the
Pope may be murdered. So that albeit there be mention also of the deposition
of Princes (as that they may be deposed or murdered) yet the doctrine of
deposition is not abiured in that clause as heretical, except it be joined
with the murder of them; in such sort, that a man may freely choose whether he
will depose, or murder them.

13. But that the Reader may more fully understand, whether Master Fitzherberts
Reply be a mere shift, or my answer an absurd frivolous, and extrauagant
evasion, and contention de lana caprina (such foul terms, and far worse it
is not foul for him to use against me, and yet if I do only say, that he
affirms that which is false, or not true, I fall very foul upon him) I will
set down entirely, what I answered in my Theological Disputation, and not in
that lame manner, as he relates my answer. It was objected by the Author of
the English Dialogue between the two sisters Protestancie and Puritanisme,
that this clause of the oath. (And I do further swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure, as impiuos and heretical, this damnable doctrine
and position, That Princes which be excommuicated or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever) cannot be
taken without perjury: And this was his argument.

14. Whenever an affirmative proposition is heretical, of necessity it must
be either against faith, and consequently against the express word of God, or
else the contradictorie negative must be a position of faith, and contained in
the express word of God.

But neither this affirmative position, That Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any
other what soever, is against the express word of God, neither the
contradictorie negative, to wit, that Princes being excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope, may not be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other
whatsoever, is contained in the express word of God.

Therefore the former position, that Princes being excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other
whatsoever, is not heretical.

15 And if perchance it should be answered, that whereas it is written in the
20. Chapter of Exodus Thou shall not kill, and 1. Reg. 26. Destroy him not, for
who shall lay the hands on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? One part of
the aforesaid position, to wit, that Princes may be murdered, is heretical
and against the express Word of God, and therefore the whole position, in
regard of this one part, may be abiured as heretical; yet this answer is not
sufficient: For the position in hand, to wit, That Princes being excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope may be deposed, or murdered by their Subjects or any
other, does not absolutely affirm, that Princes, after they be excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, may be murdered by their subjects, or any other, but
with a disiuction, to wit, may be deposed, or murdered. And therefore although
the position were heretical, if it did only affirm they might be murdered,
yet not affirming this, but only that they may be deposed, or murdered, there
is no show of heresy in it, in regard of being contrary to the aforesaid
texts of Scripture, to which it is nothing contrary at all.

16. For, according to the most true and approved rule of the Logicians, to
make a disjunctive proposition, or any thing affirmed under a disjunction to be
false and heretical, it is necessary, that both parts of the disjunction be
also false and heretical; neither is it sufficient, that one only part be
heretical. And therefore although that the second part of the disjunction, to
wit, That Princes, being excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be
murdered, be heretical and against the express word of God; yet because the
first part of the disjunction, to wit, that such Princes may be deposed by
their Subjects, or any other, is not heretical, nor contrary to the express
word of God, the whole disjunctive position cannot be in very deed heretical,
and therefore neither can it be abiured as heretical.

17. To this objection I gave two answers. The first and principal answer was,
Cap. 5. sec. 2. nu. 8. et seq.
that albeit the aforesaid proposition, Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects etc. does
seem by reason of that later conjunction [or] to be a disjunctive proposition,
or rather a Categoricall proposition of such a disiunct predicate, as the
Logicians term it, which vertually does imply, or may be resolved into a
disjunctive proposition (to the verity of which disjunctive proposition, it is
only required, as it was said in the objection; that one part of the
disjunction be true: and to make the whole disjunction false and heretical,
both parts of the disjunction must be false and heretical: neither does it
suffice, that one only part be false and heretical) Nevertheless according to
the common sense and meaning of the words, it is in very deed, and according to
our English phrase, equivalent to a copulative proposition, or rather to a
Categorical proposition of such a Copulate predicate, which may be resolved
into a copulative proposition, to the ve ity whereof, according to the
Logicians rule, it is contrariwise required, that both parts of the copulation
be true; and to make the whole proposition false and heretical, it is not
required that both parts of the copulation be false and heretical, but it
suffices that one only part thereof be false and heretical. Neither is it
unusual, that a conjunction disjunctive be sometimes taken for a copulative,
and a copulative for a disjunctive, as we may see in Leg. saepe. F. de verb^rum
significat. Whereof read Felinus in Cap. inter caeteras de rescriptis. Ioannes
Azorius tom. 1. Instit. Lib. 5 Cap. 25. and Salas, disp. 21. de Legibus, sect.
3. regula 26.

18. But if any one will needs contend, that the aforesaid proposition,
Princes, which are excommunicated or deprived by the Pope etc. by reason o^
that disiunct^ue conjunction [or] is altogether a disjunctive proposition; this
notwithstanding being granted, the objection may easily be answered. For albeit
we admit it to be a disjunctive proposition, nevertheless we affirm, that it
is not an absolute disjunctive, whereof the aforesaid rule of the Logicians, to
wit, that both parts of the disjunction must be heretical, to make the whole
disjunction to be heretical, is to be understood, but it is a conditional
disjunctive, which imports a free choice, or election of the will, or which
is all one, a free power to chose whether part of the disjunction we please, to
the verity of which conditional disjunctive is required, that you may choose
whether part of the disjunction you please; and if it be heretical to affirm,
that it is in the free power of the will to choose whether part of the
disjunction we please, the whole disjunction, or disjunctive proposition
implying such a condition, or free election, without doubt is heretical.

19. Now that this disjunction [or] being placed in the aforesaid proposition
is in common sense, according to our English phrase, equivalent to The Latin
word aequi-pollet in this place of my Theolog. Disputation is not well
translated into English it does import, it should be, it is equivalent.
a copulation, or such a disjunction, which leaves a free power in the
Subjects to choose whether part they will, that is to depose the King, or if
they please, to murder him, will most evidently appear, if both in common
speech, and also in the laws of the Realm, we diligently consider the proper,
and usual signification of this word [may] when there follows the
conjunction disjunctive [or]. And this may be showed by almost innumerable
examples, whereof some of them we will here set down. As for example: you may
stay here, or depart. You may eat or drink. You may buy wine or oil. You may
go to such a place by land, or by water. You may buy that land in fee-farme,
or by lease. The King by virtue of an Act of Parliament may take of convicted
Popish Recusants twenty pounds for every month, or the third part of all their
lands. The Sheriefe may presently hang a theife condemned to die, or delay his
death for some small time. If any person hold any lands of an other Lord, then
of the King, by Knights service, he may give, dispose, or assure by his last
will, and testament, two parts of the said lands holden by Knights service, or
of as much thereof as shall amount to the full yearly value of two parts. If a
man by his last will and testament ordain, that his Executors may bestow
twenty pounds upon the poor, or repair such a bridge, it is in the free power
of the Executors, to choose whether of those two they please. Finally in
clauses of reuocation, where the words are, that one may by any deed in his
life time, or by his last will and testament revoke the said uses, and limit
new, it is in his power and choice to do it by the one, or by the other, as he
shall please. And in infinite such like examples the verb [may] implies a free
power to choose either part of the disjunction one pleases, neither can there
scarcely be alleged any one example, wherein the conjunction disjunctive [or]
immediately following the verb [may] is not so taken.

20. Wherefore the plain and usual meaning of the aforesaid proposition,
Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Prpe, may be deposed, or
murdered by their Subjects, or, which is all one, Subjects may depose, or
murder their Princes being excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope (for that
in this last only the verb passive is changed into the active) is, that it is
in the free choice of the Subjects to depose, or if they will, to murder such
Princes. So that if it be heretical to affirm, as without doubt it is, that
it is in the free power of Subjects to depose, or murder such Princes, because
it is heretical and against the express word of God to affirm, that they may
murder them, the aforesaid position consisting of that disjunction is
herepicall, and therefore it may without any danger at all of perjury be
abiured as heretical.

21. From hence it may be gathered first, that according to the common, and
usual understanding of our English phrase, there is a great distinction
betwixt these two verbs [may] and [can]. For [can] does usually signify a
power in general, whether it be natural, or moral, but [may] for the most
part imports a moral power, to wit, if it be used alone without any
conjunction following it, most commonly it signifies a lawfullnes to do the
thing proposed: As, I may do this, signifies, that it is lawful for me to
do this: but if there follow it a a conjunction copulative, or disjunctive, it
implies a choice, or free power, to choose whether part of the disjunction, or
copulation one will.

Seeing therefore that the Latin verb [possum] implies a power in general,
whether it be natural, or moral, and according to the thing affirmed or
denied, it is limited to a natural or moral power: as in this proposition,
Ignis potest comburere, The fire has power to burn, it signifies a natural
and necessary power in the fire to burn: and in this, potest homo eligo^e
bonum, aut m^lum; A man has power to choose good or evil, it signifies a
moral and free power: from hence it follows, that this proposition, Subjects
may depose or murder their Prince, being excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, is not so properly and significantly translated into Latin by the verb
[possum] Sabditi possunt deponere aut occidere suum Principem excommunicatum
etc. as by the substantive of [possum] or by the verb [permittitur] to wit, in
potestate est subditorum, or permittitur subditis Principem suum
excommunicatum, vel depriuatum per Pontificem, deponere aut occidere. It is in
the power of Subjects, or it is permitted to Subjects, to depose or murder
their Prince being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope. And therefore the
Latin translation of this Oath, does not by the verb [possum] significantly
express the proper and usual signification of the verb [may] contained in
the aforesaid Position, unless either the conjunction copulative [and] be put
in place of [or] to wit, Principes per Papam excommunicati vel depriuati possum
per suos Subditos deponi and occidi, deposed and murdered, as Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Antonius Capellus have it in their books translated, or else
there be understood a condition of the free will to choose whether part of the
disjunction they please, to wit, possunt deponi per suos Subditos, aut (si
velint,) occidi, be deposed, or (if the Subjects will) be murdered.

23 Secondly from hence it is also gathered, that in a disjunctive proposition,
wherein is employed a condition of the will to choose freely either part of the
disjunction, it makes all one sense, whether the conjunction copulative [and]
or the disjunctive [or] be used: For both of them do signify a free power to
choose which part one pleases: and so the conjunction disjunctive has in
sense the virtue and force of a copulative, and the copulative of a
disjunctive. Wherefore when the ancient Fathers speak of our free will, and do
affirm, that it is in our power to choose good or evil, they use
indifferently the conjunction disjunctive [or] and the copulative [and]
sometimes affirming that it is in our power to choose good or evil; other
times that it is in our power to choose goood and evil. Yea Card. Bellarmine
himself propounding in his Controversies the question concerning free will,
does confound [or] with [and], and takes them for all one. There is a
controversy, 1 Tom. 4. Lib. 5, Chap, 13, in principio.
says he betwixt Catholics and heretics, whether a man in the state of
corrupt nature has free will to choose moral good, [and] to avoid evil, or
which is all one, to observe [or] break moral precepts.

24. Seeing therefore that in this proposition, Princes being excommunicated,
or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or,
which is all one, Subjects may depose or murder their Prince being
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, the verb [may] does import a free
power in the Subjects to choose which part of the disjunction they please, that
is, to depose such Princes, or, if they please, to murder them, it makes all
one sense, whether it be said, Princes may be deposed or murdered, by their
subjects, or Princes may be deposed and murdered by their Subjects, as Card.
Bellarmine, and Antonius Cappellus, putting the Conjunction copulative [and] do
seem to have well observed, and to be of opinion, that the aforesaid
disjunctive proposition is in very deed equivalent to a copulative, or such a
conditional disjunctive, which vertually does contain a copulative. And
truly, if this pretended demonstration of this Author were so evident an
argument, as he imagines it to be, to condemn this oath as sacrilegious,
without doubt it could not have escaped the most quick understanding of Card.
Bellarmine, who also would not have neglected to produce any reason, which
might clearly have convinced the oath to be apparently unlawful.

Now from this which has been said, it is easy to answer in form to the
aforesaid objection, whose whole strength depends upon the nature and quality
of a disjunctive proposition.

Wherefore to the minor proposition it is answered, that it is heretical and
against the express word of God contained in the aforesaid two texts of holy
Scripture, to affirm, That Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other, or, which is
all one, that Subjects, or any other may depose or murder such Princes. For
the plain and common meaning of this proposition is, as I have showed before,
that it is in the free power of subjects, or of any other, to depose such
Princes, or, if they will, to murder them, which proposition is flat
heretical.

26. And whereas it is objected, that the aforesaid proposition, Princes which
be excommunicated etc. is a disjunctive, but to the verity of a disjunctive
proposition, it is sufficient, that one part of the disjunction be true, and to
make the whole disjunctive proposition to be false and heretical, it is
necessary according to the most certain rule of the Logicians, that both parts
of the disjunction be false and heretical.

It is answered first to the Minor, that although in external sound the
aforesaid proposition, Princes which be excommunicated etc. seem to be a
disjunctive, yet in very deed, and according to the plain and common
understanding of our English phrase, it is, as I have already showed,
equivalent to a copulative, to the verity of which it is necessary, that both
parts of the copulation be true, and to make the whole copulative proposition
to be false and heretical, it suffices, that one only part of the
copulalation be false and heretical. Now that one part of the aforesaid
proposition, to wit, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be murdered by their Subjects, or any other, is flat heretical, it
is too too manifest.

27 But least we should seem to contend about bare words, I answer secondly,
and grant, that the aforesaid proposition, Princes, which be excommunicated,
etc. is a disjunctive; But then the Minor proposition is to be distinguished.
For when the Logicians affirm, that to the verity of a disjunctive proposition
it is sufficient, that one part of the disjunction be true, and to make the
whole disjunctive to be heretical, it is necessary that both parts of the
disjunction be heretical, that approved rule of the Logicians is to be
understood of an absolute disjunctive, to wit, which does not vertually
contain in it a condition, or free power in the will to choose whether part
one pleases: For to the verity of this conditional disjunctive it is
necessary, that both parts of the disjunction may be chosen, and if it be
heretical to affirm, that it is in the free choice of any man to choose
whether part of the disjunction he pleases, the whole disjunctive proposition
is heretical. Now that it is heretical to affirm, that it is in the free
power of Subjects to depose, or if they will, to murder Princes being
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, no man can call in question.

Nevertheless the Author of this Dialogue does seem to deal somewhat
cunningly, and endeavors not so much to impugn directly the affirmative
proposition, which is expressly contained in the Oath, and to prove directly,
that the aforesaid position, Princes being excommunicated etc. may be deposed
or murdered, not to be heretical, as the oath affirms it to be; but he
flies from the affirmative to the negative, and indeauoureth to show, that the
contradictorie proposition, to wit, Princes being excommunicated etc. cannot be
deposed or murdered etc. is not certain of faith, nor contained in the
express word of God; from whence he concludes, that therefore the former
affirmative proposition, which is in express words contained in the Oath, is
not heretical, because in what degree of falsehood any position is false, in
the opposite degree of truth the contradictory must be true.

29. But this Author by his manner of arguing seems desirous to shun the
difficulty, and to impugn a proposition, which is more clear and manifest, by
an other more obscure and equivocal, which among Logicians is accounted a
great defect in arguing; whose nature is to prove one thing less manifest by
an other more apparent. For the falsehood of this affirmative proposition,
Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or which is all one, Subjects may depose or
murder such Princes, who be excommunicated etc. is more clear and manifest in
the common understanding of our English phrase, then is the truth of this
negative, Subjects may not depose or murder such Princes, who be
excommunicated etc. by reason of the negative aduerb [not] which as the
Logicians say, is of a malignant nature; for that it destroys, or denies
whatsoever follows after it, making an affirmative to be a negative, and a
negative to be an affirmative, an universal to be a particular, and a
particular to be an universal. As this universal affirmative proposition, all
men are sensible, is by putting not in the beginning, not all men are sensible,
made, a particular negative.
So that the meaning of the aforesaid negative proposition, is by reason of
that negative aduerbe [not] made ambiguous, and may have this sense, that
Subjects may neither depose nor murder such Princes, who be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope: which proposition so understood, is not of faith,,
neither in very deed contradictory to the proper and usual meaning of the
former affirmative, which is abiured in the Oath. And therefore no marvel
that this Author was desirous to fly from the affirmative to the negative.

30. Supposing therefore, that contradiction, according to the approved
doctrine of Aristotle, Lib. 1. de interpretat. Cap. 4.
is an affirming and denying of the self same thing, in the self same manner,
I answer, that this negative position, Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may not be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, is
contradictory to that affirmative position, which is abiured in the Oath, if
the verb [may] be taken in the same manner, or sense in the negative, as it is
taken in the affirmative: And then as the affirmative is heretical, so the
negative is of Faith. For as the sense of the affirmative is, as I have showed
before, that it is in the free choice of Subjects either to depose such Princes
who be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or if they will, to murder
them, which is false, heretical, and against those express words of
Scripture, Thou shall not kill, Kill him not etc. So the sense of the negative
contradictory must be, that it is not in the free choice of Subjects to depose
such Princes, or if they please, to murder them; which proposition is most
true, and contained in the express word of God, because it is not in their
free power to murder them, as is manifest by the former places of holy
Scripture.

31. And thus much concerning the first and principal Answer, which I thought
good to set down at large, both for that the Reader may the better judge of my
Answer, and also of M. Fitzherberts Reply, who takes no other particular
exception against the Oath, besides the general Doctrine concerning the Popes
power to depose Princes, which he will needs have to be a point of faith, and
therefore not to be denied by any Catholic, and also for that there be some
Catholics, who although they be of opinion, as was the Author of that English
Dialogue, that there is nothing against faith contained in the oath, and that
the Doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is not a point of faith, but
in Controversy among Catholics, notwithstanding the Popes Breues, or any
other decree of Pope or Council, which are urged to the contrary, yet they can
hardly be persuaded, but that by reason of that word [hereticall] that clause
of the Oath is unlawful and cannot be taken without perjury, as the Author of
that Dialogue did by the aforesaid Argument pretend to demonstrate.

32 Now you shall see what exceptions M. Fitzherbert takes against this my
Answer. First he says, nu. 10.
that I contend de lana caprina, and labor in vain to prove, that the English
word [may] in a disjunctive proposition implies a freedom to choose whether
part we list of the disjunction, wherein also by the way he says, that I abuse
strangers in seeking to persuade them, that the Latin verb [possunt] in the
Latin Translation of the Oath, does not sufficiently express the nature of
the English word [may] in this clause, Principes per Papam excommunicati vel
depriuati possunt per suos subditos, vel alios quoscunque, deponi aut occidi:
Princes being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

33 But first who sees not, that this question, to wit whether this
proposition, Princes which are excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other, be such a disjunctive
proposition which implies a free election in the Subjects or others, to choose
whether they will depose or murder such Princes, is both a question of great
moment, and not de lana caprina, and also that I have not labored in vain to
prove, but by the common understanding of the words in usual speech and in the
laws of our Realm, sufficiently proved that the verb [may] in an affirmative
disjunctive proposition, when there follows the conjunction disjunctive [or]
implies a freedom to choose whether part of the disjunction we list, as by
many examples both in common speech, and by the laws of our Realm I have
clearly convinced; neither can there scarcely be alleged any one example,
wherein the conjunction disjunctive [or] immediately following the verb [may]
in an affirmative proposition does not imply a free election to choose which
part of the disjunction we please.

34. Secondly, it is not true, that I have abused the Latin Reader in seeking
to persuade him, that the Latin verb [possunt] in the Latin Translation of
the Oath, does not sufficiently express the proper and usual signification of
the verb [may] contained in the aforesaid position, unless either the
conjunction copulative [et] be put in place of [aut], as Card. Bellarmine,
Anton. Capellus, and now lastly F. Suarez have it in their books translated,
or else there be understood a condition of the free will to choose in that
clause [deposed or murdered by their Subiects] which part of the disjunction
the Subjects please: But M. Fitzherbert rather abuses his English Readers, who
understand not Latin in affirming the contrary. For the Latin verb [possum]
does by his proper signification, as I have said, import a power in general,
whether it be natural or moral, and according to the matter it is limited to
a natural or moral power: but the verb [may] is by his proper signification
limited only to a moral or free power: free I mean, not as free is all one
with moral, but if there follow the conjunction copulative or disjunctive, to
choose whether part of the disjunction we please: and if the verb [may] do
sometimes signify a natural power, as in this, the fire may burn wood or
straw, it is by reason of the matter, or of the thing affirmed, or denied, and
not by virtue of the proper and usual signification of the verb [may]: And
howsoever, when the verb [may] goes before the conjunction disjunctive [or]
it does properly and usually signify a choice, freedom, or indifferency to
take either part of the disjunction.

35. But mark here the cunning (I dare not say fraud, and falsehood of my
Adversary, for that he checked me before for falling very foul upon him in
saying that he affirmed that which was false, as though forsooth all that he
affirms, I must take for true) in abusing both me and his Reader. For
whereas, says he, the great mystery of [may] is no other, as Widdrington
himself expounds it, but that it signifies in that clause a moral or
lawful, and not a physical, or natural power, who is so senseless, if he be
a Latinist, that does not understand so much by the word [possunt] in the
Latin translation of that clause, I mean that it signifies a moral and not
a natural power? Yea and that according to the axiom of the law, Hoc possumus
quod iure possumus, we may do that, which we may lawfully do? To what
purpose then does he abuse his Latin Reader with such a long, and impertinent
discourse, as he makes here, touching the difference betwixt [possunt] in
Latin, and [may] in English, as if in this case and question there were some
great diversity.

36. See now his slight: For when I did affirm, that the difference betwixt
the English word [may] and the Latin [possum] was, that [possum] does properly
signify a power in general, whether it be natural or moral, and [may] does
properly signify a moral and free power, I spoke of a moral power in
general, and that briefly without any such long discourse, as you have seen,
but when I spoke of this clause of the oath, [may be deposed or murthered] I
did not speak of a moral or lawful power in general, but in particular of
such a moral or lawful power, which implies a freedom to choose which part
of the disjunction we please. And therefore Master Fitzherbert says untruly
abusing therein both me and his Reader, that I do make no other mystery of
[may] in this clause of the oath, but that it signifies a moral or lawful,
and not a physical or natural power. For I make this mystery of [may] that
whenever there follows it the conjunction [or] as it does in this clause of
the oath, it does signify not only a moral, or lawful power in general,
but in particular such a moral, or lawful power, which implies a free choice
to take which part of the disjunction we list. Which if my Adversary will
likewise grant of the Latin verb [possum] we shall quickly be at an agreement
concerning this clause of the oath, to wit, that I may truly and lawfully
abjure as heretical this damnable doctrine, and conditional disjunctive
position, That Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed, or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever, although
one part only of the disjunction be heretical.

37. But the truth is, that Master Fitzherbert will not seem directly, and in
express words to admit, (although by those examples of propositions which he
himself beneath does bring it may clearly be gathered) that the word [may]
does in this clause of the oath signify such a moral, or free power, which
implies a free choice to take which part of the disjunction we please: and
therefore he makes a long discourse (I dare not say impertinent) and which
has bin already answered by me in my Theological Disputation, whereby he
would seem to overthrow my answer; and thereupon he called that
disjunction, which I made betwixt a conditional disjunctive proposition, which
implies a freedom and condition of the will to choose which part of the
disjunction we list, and an absolute disjunctive, which implies no such
choice, a frivolous evasion, and an extrauagant interpretation.

38, Observe now, good Reader, how insufficiently this man does impugn my
answer. But let us see, says he, Nu. 11.
What Widdrington proves by all this. He has told us, that the conjunction
[or] is sometimes taken for the copulative [and] especially when it follows
the verb [may] because then the proposition is not absolutely disjunctive, but
conditional, including a free election of either part of the disjunction,
whereof he alleges some examples out of the Fathers, yea out of Card.
Bellarmine himself. But what is this to the purpose? Will he say, that
because [or] is used in those places for [and] ergo it is always so used? me
thinks he should be ashamed so to argue; for besides that his argument would
be most vicious, he might be convinced by infinite examples of propositions,
wherein the disjunctive conjunction [or] is not taken for the copulative [and]
although the verb [may] goes before it, yea though there be also freedom of
election to choose either part of the disjunction, as if we should say, It is
impious and heretical to hold, that God may be denied, or blasphemed by his
creatures. It is not lawful to teach, that a Priest may eat or drink before
he say Mass. It is folly for a man to think, that he may travel by Sea or
Land, without money. It is a shame for a Soldier to say, that he may yield or
fly upon small occasion.

39 In these and infinite other such propositions Nu. 12.
(which might be added if it were needful) [or] is not taken for [and] but is
an absolute disjunctive conjunction, notwithstanding that [may] goes before
it, and that there is also free election to choose whether part of the
disjunction a man will; yea (which is specially to be observed for our purpose)
whatsoever is affirmed of the one part, is also affirmed of the other; as for
example, It is impious and heretical, whethersoeuer a man hold that God may be
denied, or blasphemed; It is as unlawful to teach, that a Priest may drink,
as that he may eat before he say Mass; it is no less folly to think, that
a man may travel by Sea, then by land without money; It is no less shame for
a Soldier to say, that he may yield, then that he may fly upon small
occasion: And the very like we say also of the proposition now in question, to
wit, that [or] in the words deposed or murdered, is no copulative, but a mere
disjunctive conjunction, and that the doctrine of deposing Princes is abiured
therein as impious and heretical, no less then the doctrine of murdering
them, notwithstanding that the word [may] does go before [or] and that a man
may choose whether part he will of the disjunction.

40. So as you see, nu. 13.
that neither his examples of propositions, wherein the disjunctive is taken
for the copulative, nor his distinction of absolute disiunctiues, and
conditional do prove any more, but that sometimes [or] is taken for [and] and
that in some disjunctive propositions, wherein the word [may] goes before [or]
the affirmation is not referred alike to both parts of the disjunction: and
therefore against us he has proved nothing at all, unless he can make good
this inference, It is sometimes so, ergo it is always so, which I am sure he
will not say for shame. And as for the Latin translation of the oath in Card.
Bellarmine and Capellus, in the which we read deponi et occidi, where the
conjunction copulative [and] is used for the disjunctive [or] it little
imports, for that it was an error of him, that translated the same out of the
English, which they understood not, and therefore must needs take it, as it was
given them. Thus M Fitzherbert.

41. But what sincerity can the Reader expect from this man's hands, when in a
controversy of such great moment, as is this concerning our obedience due to
God and Caesar, he deals so corruptly? For first he would make his Reader
believe, that I affirm, the conjunction disjunctive [or] in this clause of the
oath not to be a mere, and absolute disjunctive conjunction, but a copulative,
and that the conjunction [or] is taken for [and] as though I should affirm,
that the proposition is not in very deed a disjunctive, but a pure copulative
proposition; and that unless [or] be taken for [and] the said proposition,
Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects or any other, would not be heretical: Whereas I
mean no such thing; neither did I ever say, that [or] in this proposition is
taken for [and] or that this proposition is not a true, and proper disjunctive
proposition.

42. But that which I affirmed was, that [or] in this proposition is equivalent
to [and,] and that although the proposition by reason of that conjunction [or]
may seem to be such a pure and absolute disjunctive proposition, to the verity
whereof, according to the Logicians rule, is only required, that one part of
the disjunction be true, and to make the whole proposition false and heretical
both parts of the disjunction must be false and heretical, yet according to
the common sense and meaning of the words it is not in very deed, and according
to our English phrase such a pure and absolute disjunctive proposition, but it
is a conditional disjunctive, which imports a free choice to take which part
of the disjunction we please, which conditional disjunctive proposition is
equivalent to a copulative, or which is all one, follows the nature and
conditions not of an absolute and common disjunctive proposition, whereof the
Logicians treat, but of a copulative proposition, to the verity whereof
according to the Logicians rule, it is contrariwise required, that both parts
of the copulative, or conditional disjunction, be true, and to make the whole
proposition false and heretical it suffices that one only part be false and
heretical: And that therefore in this conditional disjunctive proposition it
makes all one sense, for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood of the
proposition, whether the conjunction copulative [and] or the disjunctive [or]
be used, although the force of the proposition be by the vulgar sort more
easily perceived, if the conjunction copulative [and] then if the disjunctive
[or] be used.

43. Wherefore I do not affirm, that the conjunction disjunctive [or] in this
clause of the oath is not an absolute disjunctive conjunction (for I do not
make two sorts of disjunctive conjunctions, to wit, absolute and conditional)
or that [or] in this clause is taken for [and] as my Adversary would persuade
his Reader; but that which I say is, that the proposition is not an absolute
disjunctive proposition, but a conditional disunctiue, and which implies a
free power to take which part of the disjunction we please, and that therefore,
for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood of the proposition, it is
equivalent to a copulative proposition, and follows the nature and condition
of a copulative, and that it has the same sense, whether the conjunction
copulative [and] or the disjunctive [or] be used.

44. Secondly, it is too too clear, that I did not argue in that absurd and
childish manner, as my Adversary would make his Reader believe I do, It is
sometimes so, therefore it is always so; or thus, the conjunction disjunctive
[or] is sometime taken for the copulative [and] therefore in this clause of the
Oath it is taken so. But I argued thus: The conjunction disjunctive [or] when
it follows the verb [may] is not only sometimes, but usually and commonly
(I did not say taken) but equivalent to the conjunction copulative [and] for
that then the proposition according to the common sense and understanding of
the words is not an absolute disjunctive, but a conditional disjunctive
proposition, which includes a free condition of the will to choose either part
of the disjunction, and therefore has the same sense, whether the conjunction
disjunctive, or the copulative be used: therefore in this clause of the oath,
Princes may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, it ought so to be taken,
for that by an express clause we are bound to take the Oath and every part
thereof plainly and sincerely, according to the common sense and understanding
of the words. That it is in common sense a conditional disjunctive
proposition, implying a free election to take either part of the disjunction,
and consequently equivalent to a copulative proposition, I proved by very many
examples both in common speech, and in the laws of this Realm: and in the end
I added, that in infinite such like examples the verb [may] implies a free
power to choose either part of the disjunction we please: neither can there be
scarcely alleged any one example (speaking of affirmative propositions)
wherein the conjunction [or] immediately following the verb [may] is not so
taken.

45 From whence I inferred, that in a disjunctive proposition, wherein is
implied a condition of the will to choose freely either part of the
disjunction, it makes the same sense, whether the conjunction copulative,
[and] or the disjunctive [or] be used: for both of them do import a free
election to take which part one pleases, and so the conjunction disjunctive
has in sense the virtue of a copulative, and the copulative the virtue of a
disjunctive. And this I confirmed both by the authority of the ancient Fathers,
and also of Card. Bellarmine himself, who do confound [and] with [or] and
[or] with [and] in propositions which do imply a free election to choose which
part they will. What good dealing then is this of my Adversaries to frame my
argument in that absurd, and ridiculous manner, it is sometimes so, ergo it is
always so, and also to corrupt my words and meaning, as you have seen he has
done?

46. And albeit I do remit the Reader to Felinus Azor, and Salas, where they
may see some examples, that a conjunction disjunctive, even in absolute
disjunctive propositions is sometimes taken for a copulative, and a copulative
for a disjunctive, it was not to draw an argument from thence, that therefore
either always, or in this clause of the Oath, it was so to be taken, but it
was only to show, that seeing it is not strange, even in absolute disjunctive
propositions, whereof those Authors did chiefly treat, that [and] should not
only be equivalent, but be also taken for [or] and [or] for [and] therefore
they ought not to marvel, that in conditional disiunctiues [or] should be, I
do not say taken, but equivalent to [and] and [and] to [or]. But the argument,
which I brought to prove, that in this clause of the Oath, the conjunction
disjunctive [or] is equivalent to the copulative [and] was taken from the
plain and usual sense of our English phrase, and from the common
understanding of our English laws, wherein the conjunction disjunctive [or]
following the verb [may] does commonly imply a free election to take which
part of the disjunction we please, and which consequently is equivalent to a
copulative, therefore in this clause of the Oath, which I am bound to take
according to the common sense of the words, it ought so to be taken: This was
my argument.

47 Thirdly, observe how inconsiderately M. Fitzherbert brings here four
examples of propositions to confute my answer, which nevertheless do most
clearly confirm the same. For in all of them the conjunction [or] is
equivalent to the copulative [and] and it makes all one sense whether [and] or
[or] be used. As for example, God may be denied or blasphemed by his Creatures.
A Priest may eat or drink before he say Mass. A man may travel by Sea or by
land without money. A Soldier may yield or fly upon small occasion. In all these
four examples, wherein my Adversary himself grants a freedom of election
to choose whether part of the disjunction a man will, to be employed, the
conjunction disjunctive [or] for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood of
the Propositions, is equivalent to the copulative [and], and the propositions
have all one sense: whether the conjunction [and], or the conjunction [or] be
used: And so it is all one sense whether we say that God may be denied or
blasphemed by his Creatures, or that God may be denied and blasphemed by his
Creatures, that a Priest may eat or drink before he say Mass, or that a
Priest may eat and drink before he say Mass, and so of the rest: For the
sense of them all is, that they may choose this part or that part of the
disjunction, or this part and that part of the disjunction, as they will: And
so the sense of the first proposition is, that it is in the free power and
choice of Creatures to deny, or blaspheme God, or to deny God and also to
blaspheme him if they will: and of the second that it is in the free power of a
Priest to eat or to drink, or to eat, and, if he please, to drink before he
say Mass, and so of the rest. By which it is evident, that in all of them it
makes the same sense, whether the conjunction [and] or the conjunction [or]
be used: and so in all of them the conjunction disjunctive is equivalent to a
copulative, and the copulative to a disjunctive.

48 Lastly albeit that which M. Fitzherbert does specially observe for his
purpose, be true, to wit, that in all those four examples, which he has
brought, whatsoever is affirmed of the one part of the disjunction is also
affirmed of the other, notwithstanding that there be also free election to
choose which part of the disjunction a man will: as for example, it is impious
and heretical whether soever a man hold that God may be denied, or that he
may be blasphemed by his Creatures, it is as unlawful to teach that a Priest
may drink as that he may eat before he say Mass, and so of the rest: from
whence he would infer the like, that also in this clause of the Oath, the
doctrine of deposing Princes is no less abiured as heretical then the
doctrine of murdering them: nevertheless this his observation makes nothing
at all for his purpose, unless it be to bewray his own ignorance, and want of
Logic, whiles he does not perceive what is truly affirmed of both parts of
an hypotheticall proposition by virtue of the form, and what by virtue only
of the matter. For although in all those four propositions, which he has
brought, it be true that the same impiety, heresy, unlawfulness, folly or
shame, which is affirmed of the one part of the disjunction, be also affirmed
of the other, yet this is not true by virtue of the form of the proposition
consisting of a disjunctive conjunction, which implies a choice to take which
part of the disjunction a man will; but it is true by reason only of the
matter, for that the same thing which is affirmed of the whole or entire
disjunctive proposition, may be also affirmed severally of either part of the
disjunction: For it is heretical to hold, that God may be denied by his
Creatures, and likewise it is also heretical to hold, that God may be
blasphemed by his Creatures, and so or the rest. But let him alter the matter,
and keep the same form, that is the same disjunctive conjunction, which
implies a free choice to take which part of the disjunction a man will, and
then he will quickly perceive how fowly he is mistaken, and how
insufficiently he has confuted my Answer.

49 As for example, let us alter the matter of his four propositions, and
keep the same form, that is keep the same disjunctive conjunction implying a
choice to take which part of the disjunction one will, and say, that it is
impious and heretical to hold, that God may be honored or blasphemed by his
creatures. It is not lawful to teach that a Priest may sleep or eat before
he say Mass. It is folly for a man to think that he may travel by Sea or
by Land with the like danger. It is a shame for a Captain to say, that he may
fight or fly, when his Band is assaulted by the Enemy. All these and infinite
other such propositions (which might be added if it were needful) are true by
reason of one only part of the disjunction: And the reason is general and
common to all conditional disjunctive propositions: for that a disjunctive
proposition which implies a free election to take which part of the
disjunction one pleases, is, I do not say sometimes, but always equivalent
to a copulative, and follows the nature of a copulative, to the verity
whereof, as I have showed before, it is required that both parts be true, and
to make the whole or entire proposition to be false and heretical, it
suffices, that one only part be false and heretical: and that therefore it
does not follow by force of the form, nature, and conditions of a conditional
disjunctive proposition, but only by reason of the matter, that whatsoever is
affirmed of the one part of the disjunction is also affirmed of the other.

50 Seeing therefore that this proposition, Subjects may depose or murder
their Prince being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, implies a free
election to choose which part of the disjunction we please, and it is
heretical to affirm, that Subjects may murder such a Prince, I may truly,
lawfully, and without any perjury abjure that proposition as heretical,
although the doctrine only of murdering such Princes should be heretical,
and not the doctrine of deposing them, whereof nevertheless we will treat
beneath Nu. 106. and seq.
. So as you see, that none of all M. Fitzherberts examples makes for him, but
all are flat against him, and that it is not true, that I do argue in this
ridiculous manner, It is sometimes so, therefore it is always so, or therefore
it is now so, which were to argue ex puris particularibus, from pure particular
propositions, which kind of arguing all Logicians account to be very vicious:
But I argue thus: The words are commonly taken so, therefore I, who am bound to
take the oath, and every clause thereof according to the common sense of the
words, am bound to take this clause of the oath so, which manner of arguing to
be good, I am sure he will not deny for shame.

51. But my Adversary little perceives, how he himself falls into that
vice of arguing, whereof he untruly accuses me to wit, It is sometimes so,
therefore it is always so, or therefore it is now so. For he pretends to
prove, that because in those four conditional disjunctive propositions, and
many such like, whatsoever is affirmed of the one part of the disjunction, is
also affirmed of the other, notwithstanding that there be also free election to
choose whether part of the disjunction a man will, which is only true in some
particular propositions, and that only by reason of the matter and not by
virtue of the form and quality of the conditional disjunctive proposition,
therefore in this clause of the oath, because heretical is affirmed of the
doctrine to murder Princes, it must also be affirmed of the doctrine to depose
them, which is to argue ex puris particularibus, from pure particular
propositions, and is all one to say, it is sometimes so, therefore it is now
so. But my manner of arguing is from a universal proposition to infer a
particular, to wit, that because in every conditional disjunctive proposition
implying a choice, etc, by virtue of the form, it is sufficient to make the
whole proposition false and heretical, that one only part of the disjunction
be false and heretical, and consequently it is sufficient, that heretical be
affirmed of the one part, and not of the other, although sometimes by reason of
the matter it may be affirmed of both, therefore in this particular disjunctive
proposition, Princes being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other, it is sufficient to make
the whole proposition heretical, that one only part of the disjunction be
heretical, and that therefore the doctrine to murder such Princes may be
abiured as heretical, without abiuring as heretical the doctrine to depose
them.

52. And what man is there so simple, who may not presently perceive, that in
the very same manner, and by the same four examples which my Adversary
brings to impugn my interpretation of those words [deposed or murthered] he
might argue, if the words were, [deposed and murthered] and in those his four
examples of propositions [or] were changed into [and] whereby they would be made
copulative, and not disjunctive propositions? For then also whatsoever is
affirmed of the one part, would also be affirmed of the other: As it is impious
and heretical to hold, that God may be denied and blasphemed by his creatures.
It is unlawful to teach, that a Priest may eat, and drink before he say
Mass, and so of the rest: And yet if he have any skill in Logike, as in truth
I think he has but little, he will be ashamed to infer from thence, that
therefore in copulative propositions, whatsoever is affirmed of the one part is
also affirmed of the other: for that in a false and heretical copulative
proposition, it suffices, according to the Logicians rule, that one only part
be false and heretical: which plainly shows how viciously he confuteth my
interpretation of those words [deposed or murthered] ex puris particularibus,
from some particular examples of propositions, which are only true by reason
of the matter, not regarding what is generally, and always required by virtue
of the form, and nature of the conditional disjunctive proposition to make
the whole proposition true, or false, of faith or heretical, howsoever truth,
falsehood, or heresy may be affirmed severally of one only, or of both parts of
the disjunction.

53. And whereas M. Fitzherbert affirms, that Card. Bellarmine, and Capellus
were in the translation of those words [deposed and murthered] deceived by the
error of him, who translated the Oath out of English into Latin, I am content
to take it at this time for an answer, for that I do not rely upon their
authority in this point, but upon the common understanding of all men, who in a
conditional disjunctive proposition make [or] equivalent to [and] and [and] to
[or]. Nevertheless this I must needs say, that it might be perchance an error
of the Printer, which also if it had been, me thinks that Card. Bellarmine,
Capellus, or Fa. Suarez would have noted it among the errors, if they had
accounted it for any great error, or to have clean altered the sense of the
proposition, as this man would make it; but that it should be an error of the
Translator I can hardly be persuaded. And my reason is, because it seems,
that there was but one only translation of the Oath out of English, which is
extant in public writings, from which all those writers, who have set down
the oath in Latin, have taken it, as first the Pope in his Breue, then Card.
Bellarmine, Fa. Gretzer, Capellus, and now lastly Suarez. For that in none of
all these Writers the translation of the Oath is in any point different, either
so much as in any one word, or the placing of a word, except in those words
[deposed or murthered] which is morally impossible, if there had been diverse
translations. Now in the Popes Breue, and likewise in Gretzer, and in one
Edition of Card. Bellarmines book against his Majesty's Apology, we read
[deposed or murthered] but in other Editions of the same book, in Capellus,
and now lastly in Suarez, we read [deposed and murthered] which is a sign,
that is was an error rather of the Printer, then of the Translator, and also
that the error was not great, and much regarded by them, for that the sense of
the proposition is all one whether we read [deposed or murthered] or [deposed
and murthered] it being a conditional disjunctive proposition, implying a free
choice to take both parts of the disjunction, which therefore for as much as
concerns the truth or falsehood of the proposition, has the same sense,
whether the conjunction copulative [and] or the disjunctive [or] be used, as I
have showed before.

54 But now forsooth M. Fitzherbert will clear all this difficulty, and make
it manifest out of my own grounds, that the doctrine of the d^position of
Princes, is abiured in the Oath as impious and heretical, no less then the
doctrine of murdering them; for hitherto he has so cleared the difficulty, as
you have seen, that I could not have desired more clear and fit examples of
propositions, to confirm my interpretation of those words [deposed or
murthered] then which he himself has brought to impugn it. Thus therefore he
writes. Nu. 14. 15 16.


55. But to clear all this difficulty, and to make it manifest, that the
doctrine of the deposition of Princes is abiured in the Oath as impious and
heretical, no less then the supposed doctrine of murdering them, I shall
need no other testimony or proof thereof, then such as may be taken from the
Oath it self, considered even according to those rules, which Widdrington
himself has laid down for the interpretation of it in the very first chapter
of his Theological disputation, Nu 7.
where he professes to approve, and follow the doctrine of Suarez Lib. 6. de
leg. cap. 1.
in that point, as being conform to the common opinion of Lawyers and Divines.
Now then he teaches there out of Suarez, that if there be any doubt or
question concerning the sense of a law, or any part thereof, three things are
specially to be pondered for the exposition of it, to wit, the words of the
Law, the mind or intention of the Lawmakers, and the reason or end of the Law;
and the same he says are also to be considered for the clearing of any
difficulty or doubt in the Oath.

56. As for the words of the Law (and consequently of the Oath) he says, that
they are to be understood according to their proper, and usual signification;
and the reason is, says Suarez, because words are so to be used in common
speech, and much more in Laws, which ought to be clear; but it is evident,
that the words of the clause now in question, being taken in their usual and
proper signification, do make clearly for us, wherein I dare bouldly ap^eale
to the judgment of any discreet Reader; for albeit such a sense, as
Widdrington imagines, may be picked or rather wringed out of th^se words, yet
no man at the first sight will, or can reasonably conceive any thing else
thereby, but that either part of the disjunctive clause is abiured alike.

57. For although the conjunction [or] is sometimes taken for a copulative, yet
it is commonly a disjunctive, and has that signification diverse times even in
this oath; as any man may see, that list to observe it: As for example (to omit
all the rest which might be urged to this purpose) the very next words before
deposed or murdered, are excommunicated or deprived, wherein it is clear,
that [or] has the ordinary and proper signification of a disjunctive, giving
to understand, that whether Princes be only excommunicated, or deprived also
of their right to their States by the Pope, it is impious and heretical
doctrine to teach, that they may be either deposed or murdered. Also the same
is to be noted in the words immediately following, to wit, by their Subjects or
any other, wherein it is signified, that neither Subjects, nor yet any other
may depose or murder Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope: and the
like may be exemplified in the other clauses of the Oath, at least thirty
times, for so often I do find the conjunction [or] therein, and always used
properly for a disjunctive, as also I dare say it is used in like manner, and in
the same sense, above a hundred times in the same Statute. Thus M. Fitzherbert.

58 Now you shall see how well he has cleared this difficulty. His Argument if
it be reduced to a syllogisticall form is this. The words of every law (and
consequently of this Oath) are according to Suarez, whose doctrine I approve
herein, to be taken in their proper and usual signification, but those
words, [deposed or murdered, etc.] according to their proper and usual
signification do signify, that the supposed Doctrine of murdering Princes,
and of deposing them, is abiured alike, therefore in the aforesaid clause, I
abhor, detest and abjure, etc. the doctrine of deposing, and of murdering
Princes which be excommunicated, etc. are both abiured as heretical. The
Minor he proves two ways, first by appealing to the judgment of every
discreet man, who at the first sight can reasonably conceive nothing else, but
that either part of that disjunctive clause is abiured alike. Secondly for that
although the Conjunction [or] be sometimes taken for a copulative, yet it is
commonly a disjunctive, and has the ordinary and proper signification of a
disjunctive, and in this oath; wherein it is found at least thirty times, and
in the same statute above a hundred times, it is always used properly for a
disjunctive conjunction.

59 But first observe, good Reader, those words of my Adversary, [the suppos^d
doctrine of murdering Princes:] For a little beneath u he affirms, that
murder implies always an unlawful act, yea and a mortal sin, whereby he
does seem to insinuate, that the Oath speaks only of murder in this sense,
and supposes that some Catholics do teach, that it is lawful to murder
Princes, as murder implies an unlawful act, whereas no Catholic can be so
ignorant as to imagine, much less to teach, that it is lawful to do an
unlawful act, or to commit a mortal sin, seeing that God himself cannot
give authority to murder any man, as murder implies an unlawful act, or a
mortal sin: Neither did his Majesty, and the Parliament take murder only in
this sense; but by the word [murthered] they understood, that all killing of
Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, was directly and absolutely an
unlawful act, and they did suppose, that some Catholics taught this doctrine,
that the Pope, in order to spiritual good, might give leave to take away the
lives of wicked and heretical Princes by all those ways either public; or
secret and unawares, by which temporal Princes, in order to temporal good,
have authority to take away the lives of rebellious subjects, who either cannot
at all, or at least cannot without great prejudice to the public good of the
State, be publicly apprehended or condemned.

60 And I would to God that this doctrine, were only a supposed doctrine, and
had never been taught or approved by any Catholic. But alas it clearly
follows from the doctrine and grounds for the Popes power to deprive Princes
of all their temporal right and authority, as I most evidently did demonstrate
in my Apology nu. 43. and seq.
, to which my Argument D. Schulckenius Page 144 I answer (says he) that so
many words are needless, for whither al these do tend every man sees,
neither is it hard to solue the Arguments, let them pass as not making to the
matter.
only answers with a transeat, or let it pass as impertinent to the matter;
and the same is sufficiently confirmed by the same D. Schulckenius Page 413.
4^0.
in other places of his book, and before him by Gregorius de Valentia Secunda
secundae Disp. 1. q 12. ^unc. 2. assertio secu^da.
, Schioppius In his Ecclesiasticus cap. 42. page 140.
, and now lately by Suarez, In d^f^es. fidei lib. 6. cap. 4. nu. 18. 20.
, for which cause principally his book was by a sollemne decree of the
Parliament publicly condemned and burnt at Paris by the hangman, as containing
damnable, pernicious, scandalous and seditious propositions, tending to the
subversion of States, and to induce the subjects of Kings and Sovereign
Princes, and others, to attempt against their sacred persons; neither is that
Decree which was publ^shed and printed by the Kings authority, as yet recalled,
or Suarez book permitted by authority to be sold at Paris, howsoever some
favorers of the Jesuits do not stick to affirm here among the common
people. Yea and M. Fitzherbert himself, although he will not (forsooth)
meddle with the lives of Princes, yet boldly affirms, Cap. ^. nu. 15. 16. 17.
that the Pope has power to take away my life, and has power over the goods
and lives of all Christians, which words being general, and including all
Christians, and consequently Christian Princes, according to his doctrine, as
you shall see beneath, Part. 3. cap. 9. 10.
do clearly show what his opin on and judgment is in this point, touching
the killing also, or murdering of Christian Princes.

61. Now to his argument. First therefore his Mayor proposition I do willingly
grant, to wit, that if there be any doubt or question concerning the sense of
any law, or any part thereof, (and consequently for the clearing of any
difficulty, or doubt in this oath) three things are specially to be pondered
for the exposition of it, the words of the law, the mind or intention of the
lawmakers, and the reason or end of the law; and that the words of the law, and
consequently of this oath, are to be understood in their proper and usual
signification, as also by a peculiar clause it is expressly ordained therein;
And of this his Mayor proposition no man makes doubt.

62. But his Minor proposition I utterly deny: and to his first proof thereof,
I answer as easily, but more fully with the like words, which he himself
uses. For I affirm, that the contrary is evident, and that the words of this
clause now in question do make clearly for us, wherein I dare boldly appeal
to the judgment of any learned and discreet Reader, for that no man of any
learning or judgment, who knows the difference betwixt an absolute and
conditional disjunctive proposition, which implies a free choice to take
either part of the disjunction, I do not say, at the first sight, but after
mature diliberation, and a diligent examination of all the words of this
clause, and of the natures of an absolute and conditional disjunctive
proposition, will, or can reasonably conceive, that in a conditional
disjunctive proposition, which implies a freedom to choose which part of the
disjunction one will, as is the proposition which is now in question, both
parts of the disjunction must be abiured alike, for that to make the whole
conditional disjunctive proposition to be heretical, or to be abiured as
heretical, it suffices that one only part of the disjunction be heretical:
as I may truly and lawfully abjure this proposition as heretical, God may be
honored or blasphemed by his creatures, or, which is all one, it is in the
free choice of creatures, to honor or to blaspheme God, wherein one only part
of the disjunction is heretical, and the other of faith, and so both parts of
the disjunction are not abiured as heretical, although the whole, and entire
proposition be heretical, and may therefore be truly abiured as heretical.

63. What any learned man, but especially the vulgar sort of Catholics
(considering the different grounds of Catholics, and Protestants in points of
Religion, and that the oath was made by a Protestant Parliament, and that the
title of the Act, wherein the taking thereof is commanded, is for the better
discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants, and such like reasons) may at
the first sight conceive of the lawfulness thereof, as also what they may at
the first sight conceive of the sense of this clause, which is now in question
(considering that the conjunction disjunctive [or] does more usually make an
absolute disjunctive, then a conditional disjunctive proposition, for that
where once it follows the verb [may] and consequently makes a conditional
disjunctive proposition, which is equivalent to a copulative, above a hundred
times at least it does not follow the verb [may] but makes an absolute
disjunctive proposition, and withal not examining the difference betwixt an
absolute and a conditional disjunctive proposition) may, I say, at the first
sight conceive of the esens and meaning of this clause of the Oath, is no
sufficient Argument to prove that this clause or any other of the Oath, is,
according to the true, proper, and usual understanding of the words in very
deed unlawful. For many things may seem to be so at the first sight, which
after a second reuiew, and a more diligent examination of the matter do seem
to be far otherwise.

64 My Adversary following therein Card, Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius and
Suarez, did at the first sight conceive, that the Popes power to excommunicate
the King was denied in this Oath, but at the second sight, and upon better
consideration, he has, as it seems, perceived his error and over sight, for
that being charged therewith by me, he has passed it over altogether with
silence. Many also of our English Catholics did at the first sight conceive,
that the Popes power to absolve from sins, to grant Pardons and indulgences,
and to dispense in oaths, was denied in this oath, taking some color or
pretense from those words, absolve, pardons and dispensations, but after the
second sight they saw that there was no such thing, as at the first sight they
conceived. Many such like exceptions I could allege, which at the first sight
some conceived against the Oath, which upon the second review, and after a more
diligent consideration appeared to have no firm ground to rely upon.

65 But if any learned or discreet Catholic man will make a second review, and
a more diligent examination of the Oath, and of all the clauses and words
contained therein, and will also duly consider (which I observed in my
Theological disputation Cap. 4. sec. 3
) the difference betwixt the opinion, and the intention of his Majesty, and
that although his Majesty, and the Parliament be of opinion, that the Pope has
no power to excommunicate his Majesty, ye^ they did not intend to bind
Catholics to acknowledge so much in this Oath, and that although the title of
that Act, wherein many laws were enacted against Catholics touching points
of Religion, for the which it might well be called an Act for the better
discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants, even for points of Religion,
yet the Preamble or Title to the particular Act, wherein the Oath is
established, is, to make a better trial how his Majesty's Subjects stand
affected toward his Majesty concerning points of their loyalty, and due
obedience: And that his Majesty and the Parliam^nt did also publikly declare,
that they only intended to exact of Catholics by this oath a profession of
that temporal allegiance, and civil obedience, which all Subjects do by the
Law of God and nature owe to their temporal Prince: And to make a distinction,
not betwixt Catholics, and Protestants, touching points of Religion, but
betwixt Catholics and Catholics touching points of opinion; and betwixt
ciuilly obedient Catholics and of quiet disposition, and in all other things
good Subjects, and such other Catholics, as in their hearts maintained the
like bloody maxims, that the Powder Traitors did: And that therefore the
particular Act concerning the Oath it self, might very well have been
entitled, although it was not, An Act for the better discovering and
repressing of Popish Recusants, not in general, but of such, as were carried
away with the like fanaticall zeal, and bloody maxims that the powder
Troitors were. If any man, I say, will duly consider these things, and the
other objections and answers, which I propounded in my Theological
disputation, and in my Appendix to Suarez, I dare boldly appeal to his
judgment herein, for that no man will, or can reasonably (the premises
considered) conceive any forcible or conuincing reason, for which English
Catholics are bound in conscience to refuse the Oath.

66 And as for this clause which is now in question, it is evident (the
difference betwixt an absolute disjunctive, and a conditional disjunctive
proposition being duly considered) that the words being taken in their proper
and usual signification, do make clearly for me, wherein I dare bouldly
appeal to the judgment of any discreet Reader. For albeit such a sense as
this man imagines, may be conceived at the first sight, for the reason
aforesaid, yet no man after due consideration, and who observes the difference
betwixt an absolute, and a conditional disjunctive proposition, and
perceives, that to make a conditional disjunctive proposition, which
follows the nature of a copulative, to be heretical, and to be abiured as
heretical, it is sufficient that one only part thereof be heretical, and
that therefore both parts of the disjunction are not of necessity to be abiured
alike, will or can reasonably conceive, that both parts of that conditional
disjunctive clause [may be deposed or murthered] are by virtue of the
disjunctive conjunction [or] to be abiured alike.

57 To the second proof of his Minor proposition I answer, that he
contendeth, to use his own words, de lana caprina, and labors in vain to
prove that, which I do not deny. For I make no question, but that [or] in
this clause of the Oath [deposed or murthered] is a disjunctive conjunction,
and has the ordinary and proper signification of a disjunctive conjunction,
But that which I affirm is, that although in this clause of the oath it be
truly and properly a disjunctive conjunction, yet because it immediately
follows the verb [may] it makes such a disjunctive proposition, which
implies a free choice to take either part of the disjunction, and which
consequently being not an absolute, but a conditional disjunctive proposition,
is equivalent to a copulative, and not to an ordinary, or absolute disjunctive
proposition.

68 And although the conjunction disjunctive [or] does also more commonly, as I
observed before, make an absolute disjunctive, then a conditional disjunctive
proposition, for that where you shall find it once to follow the verb [may]
and so to make a conditional disjunctive proposition, you shall find it above
a hundred times not to follow the verb [may] and so not to make a
conditional, but an absolute disjunctive proposition, and in this very Oath,
where the conjunction [or] is found to be taken affirmatively about sixeteene
times, and not to follow the verb [may] (for almost in all other places of the
oath it is taken negatiuely, and is all one with [nor] or [neither] yet once
only or twice at the most it follows the verb [may] and makes a
conditional disjunctive proposition: Nevertheless this I say is certain and
not to be called in question, that whenever the conjunction disjunctive [or]
does make a conditional disjunctive proposition, which implies a free choice
to take which part of the disjunction we please, as it does in this clause of
the oath, neither does my Adversary deny, but rather as you have seen,
supposes the same, it is equivalent to a copulative proposition, and follows
the nature of a copulative, to the verity whereof, according to the approved
rule of the Logicians, it is required that both parts be true, and to make the
whole proposition to be false and heretical, it suffices that one only part
be false and heretical, which contrariwise falls out in an absolute, or
ordinary disjunctive proposition.

69, Unless therefore my Adversary can prove, either that the conjunction [or]
when it immediately follows the verb [may] does not commonly and usually make
a conditional disjunctive proposition, implying a free choice to take which
part of the distunction one please, which hitherto he has not proved, but
rather supposed both by those four examples of propositions, and also in this
clause of the oath, as you have seen, that the conjunction [or] implies such
a choice, or else that a conditional disjunctive proposition which implies
such a choice, does not always follow the nature and condition of a copulative
proposition, for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood thereof, which he
will never be able to prove, for that a conditional disjunctive proposition,
implies a free choice to take, if we please, both parts of the disjunction,
and every Logician knows, that the word [vterque, both] supposes
di^tributiuely, and is resolved by the conjunction copulative, as, to take
both, signifies to take this and that, and not only this or that; it is
evident that he says nothing to the purpose, neither does he impugn my
answer, but fights in vain with his own shadow.

70. Wherefore M. Fitzherbert perceiving at last, that this second proof of
his Minor proposition was little to the purpose, and did not confute my answer
concerning the conditional disjunctive proposition, he would now seem to say
something to the purpose, (but in very deed says nothing as you shall see) and
to clean overthrow that distinction, which before he called a frivolous
evasion, and an extrauagant interpretation, and now he calls it a shift,
which nevertheless by his former discourse, and examples of propositions, as
you have seen, and now again he does clearly confirm. For thus he writes.
Nu. 17.
And if Widdrington does fly here to his former shift, and say, that in the
other clauses [or] is an absolute disjunctive, and that in the words [deposed
or murthered] it is a conditional, because the verb [may] going before it,
does denote or signify a free election to choose either part, he is to
understand, that the same may also be said of other clauses in the Oath,
wherein nevertheless it is manifest, that [or] is a pure disjunctive, and that
whatsoever is affirmed of one part of the disjunction, is also affirmed of the
other: As for example etc.

71. But observe good Reader, first how this man still harpeth upon the same
string, to make thee believe that I affirm the conjunction disjunctive [or] in
the words [may be deposed or murthered] not to be a pure, or absolute, but a
conditional disjunctive conjunction, whereas I do make no such distinction of
an absolute, and conditional disjunctive conjunction, but only of an
absolute, and conditional disjunctive proposition. For that which I affirm
is, that although the conjunction [or] in those words [may be deposed or
murthered] be a pure, true, and if we may call it so, an absolute disjunctive
conjunction, yet in them, and whenever else it immediately follows the
verb [may] it makes, as I have often said, according to the common and usual
signification of our English phrase, such a disjunctive proposition, which
implies a free choice to take both parts, or either part of the disjunction if
we please, for which cause I call it a conditional disjunctive proposition,
which in very deed, for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood of the
proposition, follows the nature of a copulative proposition, and not of the
common disjunctive proposition, whereof the Logicians treat, which therefore I
call an absolute disjunctive proposition, for that it implies no such freedom
of election, or condition of the will, to choose, if we please, either part of
the disjunction: the nature and condition of which absolute, or common
disjunctive proposition, is such, that to the truth thereof, according to the
received doctrine of the Logicians, it is sufficient, that one only part of
the disjunction be true, although the other be most false and heretical, and
to make such an absolute disjunctive proposition to be false and heretical, it
is necessary that both parts be false and heretical: As for example, this
disjunctive proposition, God is just, or unjust, is a most true and certain
proposition, although the former part of the disjunction only be true, and of
faith, and the second part be false and heretical.

72 But contrariwise it happens in a copulative proposition, for to make it
true, both parts must be true, but to make it false and heretical, it
suffices that one only part be false and heretical; and therefore this
proposition, God is just, and unjust, is a most false and heretical
proposition, although the former part of the proposition be most true, and of
faith. And if perchance both parts of the copulative proposition be false and
heretical, as in this, God is unjust, and unmerciful, this is not by reason
of the form, or by virtue of the conjunction, uniting both parts in one entire
proposition, but by reason only of the matter, for that both parts of the
proposition being taken severally by themselves in two entyre propositions are
false and heretical, as this proposition being taken it by it self, God is
unjust, is an heretical proposition, and so likewise is this, God is
unmerciful.

73 Now, as I have often said, a conditional disjunctive proposition, whch
implies a free choice to take both parts of the disjunction, if we please,
although it be a true disjunctive proposition, by reason of the disjunctive
conjunction [or] yet, for as much as concerns the truth or falsehood of the
proposition, it follows the nature and quality of a copulative, and not of a
common disjunctive proposition, for which reason, I affirmed that although it
was a disjunctive proposition, yet by reason of the choice, freedom, or
indifferency to take either part of the disjunction, it was equivalent to a
copulative proposition. And therefore this proposition, God may be just or
unjust, speaking of external justice, or injustice, or which is all one, it is
in the power of God, or God has free power to do external acts of justice or
injustice, is a most false and heretical proposition, although the former part
of the disjunction be true. And if perchance it happen that both parts of the
disjunction be false and heretical, as in this, God may be unjust or
unmerciful, this is not by virtue of the form, and by force of the
disjunctive conjunction implying an indifferency to both parts of the
disjunction, but by virtue of the matter, for that both parts of the
disjunction being taken severally by themselves in two entire propositions,
are false and heretical. So that you may see a manifest difference betwixt an
absolute, and conditional disjunctive proposition, and betwixt these two
disjunctive propositions, God does works of justice or injustice, and God may
do works of justice or injustice: for the first is true, and the second
false, the first is an absolute disjunctive, and the second a conditional, and
follows the nature and condition of a copulative, and not of a pure or common
disjunctive poposition.

74 Secondly observe how unlearnedly M. Fitzherbert does insinuate, that in a
pure disjunctive proposition whatsoever is affirmed of the one part of the
disjunction is also affirmed of the other. For if he had but any small skill
in Logic, he would quickly have perceived how grossly he is mistaken, and
that according to the common and approved rule of the Logicians, the most true
and necessary disjunctive proposition is, when the one part of the disjunction
is contradictory to the other, as this proposition, God is just, or not just,
is a most true and necessary proposition, and yet the first part of the
disjunction is of faith, and the second heretical. And if perchance he do
say, that he meant only of such disjunctive propositions, in which both parts
of the disjunction are false, and consequently the whole disjunctive
proposition is false, this also is manifestly untrue.

75 For although to make a pure, absolute, and ordinary disjunctive proposition
to be false, it is necessary, that both parts of the disjunction be false, yet
it is not necessary, that both parts be false in the same degree, or with the
same kind of falsehood; as in these examples, either God is unjust, or Card.
Bellarmine is unlearned, both parts of the disjunction are false, and yet the
first is heretical and impossible, the second not heretical, nor impossible,
but contingent: either London is not, or Jerusalem was not, both be false, yet
the first is only repugnant to humane truth, and the second also to divine.
Likewise either S. Peter was not head of the Apostles, or he was a direct
temporal King of the whole Christian world, both are false, but not in the
same degree of falsehood. So that in these, and infinite others which might be
alleged, it is not true, that whatsoever is affirmed of the one part of the
disjunction, is also affirmed of the other. And therefore no marvel, that in
conditional disjunctive propositions, which follow the nature of copulatiues,
and not of pure, or absolute disjunctive propositions, whatsoever is affirmed
of the one part, is not by virtue of the conjunction affirmed of the other; I
say by virtue of the conjunction, for that both in absolute, and also in
conditional disiunctiues, as likewise in copulative propositions, it may fall
out, that by reason of the matter or of the thing affirmed or denied, the same
falsehood which is affirmed of the one part, is affirmed also of the other: but
this is not, to use the Logicians phrase, vi forma, or vi coniunctionis, by
virtue of the form, or by force of the conjunction, but vi materiae, by reason
or virtue of the matter, as I declared before. So that you see the more M.
Fitzherbert meddleth with these Dialecticall questions, which are clean out of
the sphere of his knowledge, the more he discovers his unskillfulness.

76 But yet he will still go on to bewray his ignorance, and want of Logike.
For mark how unlearnedly he goes about to prove, that what I said of that
clause of the Oath, [deposed or murthered] to wit, that it is a conditional
disjunctive proposition, and did signify a free election to take either part
of the disjunction, may also be said of other clauses of the Oath, wherein
nevertheless it is manifest, that [or] is a pure disjunctive, and that
whatsoever is affirmed of the one part of the disjunction, is also affirmed of
the other: As for example, the Oath binds the takers thereof to swear, that
the Pope has no power or authority to depose the King, which is as much in
effect, as that the Pope may not lawfully do it: Therefore let us make the
proposition so, and lay it down with the other disjunctive clauses, which
follow immediately; and to make the whole like to that clause that is now in
question, let us conceive it thus.

77. I abjure nu. 18.
this doctrine as false, that the Pope may depose the King, or dispose of any
his Majesty's kingdoms, or dominions; Or authorize any foreign Prince to
invade, or annoy him; Or discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance to
his Majesty; Or give license to any of them to bear arms, raise tumults, or
to offer any violence to his Majesty's Royal person, etc.

78. Here now Nu. 19.
it cannot be denied that [or] is disjunctive in all these several sentences
in such sort, that which of them soever any man does teach, he teaches
(according to the intent of this oath) a false doctrine, notwithstanding that
the word [may] goes before [or] and mplieth a free election to choose any one
of them; in so much that if a man should say only, that the Pope may authorize
a foreign Prince to invade his Majesty, he is condemned by the oath, to
speak no less untruly, then if he should say, that the Pope may depose his
Majesty; or give license to any to offer violence to his person.

79. Therefore Nu 20.
if Widdrington apply the words [impious and hereticall] in the other clause to
the doctrine of murdering only, and not also to the doctrine of deposing
Princes, why may not he, or any man else do the like in the foresaid example,
and offirme, that the last member, and part thereof (which denies the Popes
power to give license to offer violence to his Majesty's person) is only
abiured as false, whereby the former parts, or clauses concerning the Popes
power to depose his Majesty, or, to dispose of his kingdoms, or to give
license to foreign Princes to invade, or annoy him (which are principal
points of the oath) would be superfluous, and to no purpose. So as it is
manifest, that the words of the oath [deposed, or murthered] being considered
according to their proper, and usual signification in the clause where they
are, and compared also with the other clauses, parts, and circumstances of the
oath, cannot admit Widdringtons interpretation, who applies the note of
heresy to the Murder, and not also to the deposition of Princes. Thus much
concerning the words of the law, or oath.

80. Behold now, how unlearnedly Mr. Fitzherbert (and yet his ignorance is the
less excusable, for that he might have seen the weakness of his argument in
my Theological Disputation, where the Author of the aforesaid English
Dialogue obiecteth the like argument, but in a contrary manner) argues from
the truth of a conditional disjunctive proposition, which is negative de
dicto, to the falsehood of a conditional disjunctive, which is affirmative de
modo, and frames an oath of his own invention far different in sense from the
oath prescribed by his Majesty, which nevertheless he pretends to have the
same sense and signification with his new devised oath. For the oath prescribed
by his Majesty is a negative proposition de dicto, to wit, that the Pope has
not any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their allegiance and
obedience to his Majesty, or to give license to any of them to bear arms,
raise tumults, or to offer any violence to his Majesty's Royal person, etc.
And all this I must acknowledge to be true, and therefore I called this whole
proposition, negative de dicto, and affirmative de modo. And the sense of this
oath is clear, to wit, that the Pope has not any lawful power to do any one
of these things, so that if the Pope has power to do any one of them, the
whole, and entire disjunctive proposition consisting of those particular
clauses is by virtue of the form of words, and of the conjunction disjunctive
[or] or rather [nor] not true, but false, I say by virtue of the form of
words, for that the negation [not] going before, and having a power to
distribute, to use the Logicians phrase, or to deny all that follows it,
makes all those disjunctive conjunctions [or] which follow, to be equivalent
to [nor] or [neither,] which, as I say, being a distributive sign, is to be
resolved, as every Logician knows, by the conjunction copulative [and] and
not by the disjunctive [or] for which cause some Grammarians do also hold,
that the conjunction [nor] or [neither] is not a disjunctive, but a copulative
conjunction.

81. But the oath, which Mr. Fitzherbert has framed, is a proposition negative
de modo, and affirmative de dicto, to wit, that the Pope may, or, which
according to his own exposition, is all one, that it is in the Popes free and
lawful power to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms,
or dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy him; or to
discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance and obedience to his
Majesty; or to give license to any of them to bear arms, raise tumults, or
to offer any violence to his Majesty's Royal person, etc. and this whole, or
entire disjunctive proposition consisting of all these particular branches M.
Fitzherbert will have to be abiured as false. Now he that has but any small
skill in Logic may easily perceive a great difference betwixt the sense and
meaning of these two oaths, or propositions. For in the oath prescribed by his
Majesty we may by virtue of the words, and from the force and signification
of the disjunctive conjunction [or] which, as I have showed before, is by
reason of the precedent negation [not] equivalent to [nor] necessarily infer,
that the Pope has neither power to depose the King, nor to dispose of any his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, nor to do any other of those things there
mentioned; and therefore he that grants, that the Pope has power to do any
one of those things there mentioned, must consequently grant, that the whole,
or entire oath, or proposition consisting of all those particular clauses is
false.

82 But in the oath invented by my Adversary, although indeed by virtue of the
matter, we may well conclude, that the Pope has neither power to depose the
King, nor to dispose of any his Majesty's kingdoms or dominions, nor to do
any other of those things there mentioned, for that all and every one of those
things which are denied to the Pope in that total oath, or proposition, may
also be denied to him in several oaths, or propositions, yet hy virtue of the
words, and from the force and signification of the disjunctive conjunction [or]
which, as M. Fitzherbert himself does grant, makes there a conditional
disiumctiue proposition, implying a free choice to take which part of the
disjunction we please, we cannot rightly conclude, that the Pope has neither
power to depose the King, nor to dispose of any his Majesty's kingdoms or
dominions etc.

83 For what man can be so ignorant, as to imagine, that these two propositions
make the same sense, or that the first does rightly infer the second. It is
false, that it is in my free and lawful power to do this or that, therefore
it is true, that I may lawfully neither do this nor that. My Adversary can not
deny, but that it is false* that he had lawful freedom to deal sincerely, or
corruptly in this his Reply, therefore by his own manner of arguing he must
grant, that it is true, that he had lawful freedom neither to deal sincerely
nor corruptly in his Reply. Likewise he cannot deny, but that it is false, that
it is in the free and lawful power of creatures to honor or blaspheme God, of
Priests to eat or sleep before they say Mass, of Soldiers to fight or fly
when their Country is invaded by the enemy, and (to exemplify in our own
matter) of the Pope to depose or murder Princes, as murder is taken for an
unlawful Act: Will he therefore infer from thence in that manner as he
argues here, that it is therefore true, that creatures may lawfully neither
honor nor blaspheme God, that Priests may lawfully neither eat nor sleep
before they say Mass, that Soldiers may lawfully neither fight nor fly, when
their Country is invaded, and that the Pope may lawfully neither depose Princes
nor murder them, as murder is taken for an unlawful act? Wherefore if my
Adversary will but keep still the same form, and the same disjunctive
conjunction [or] and alter but a little the matter, by adding only to the end
of the affirmative oath, framed by himself, this clause, [ or to murder his
Maiesty] he will quickly perceive his error, and he will not deny, but that the
oath with that addition is very false; and nevertheless he dare not from
thence conclude the truth of the negative, or that therefore it is true, that
the Pope has not any power neither to depose the King, nor to dispose etc. for
that he grants, that the Pope has lawful power to depose the King, and to
dispose etc. only he denies, that the Pope has power to murder him, as
murder is taken for an unlawful act.

84. But the causes of M. Fitzherberts error are manifest. First, for that he
for want of Logike does not, as it seems, consider the difference betwixt the
form, and the matter of an hypothiticall proposition, and what is required to
the truth or falsehood of a disjunctive, or copulative proposition, as well by
virtue of the form, as of the matter. For to make a pure, or absolute
disjunctive proposition to be true, it is sufficient, by virtue of the form,
that one part of the disjunction be true, but to make it false, both parts must
be false. Contrariwise it falls out in a copulative proposition, for to make
it true, both parts of the copulation must be true, and to make it false, it
s^fficeth by virtue of the form, or by force of the copulative conjunction,
that one only part be false, although by reason of the matter both parts also
may be false, but this is impertinent to the form. Secondly, he does not
consider, that a conditional disjunctive proposition, which implies a free
choice to take which part of the disjunction we please, follows the nature of
a copulative, and not of a pure, common, or absolute disjunctive proposition.
Thirdly, he does not consider, that whatsoever is taken, or to use the
Logicians phrase, supposes distributiuely, as every negation does distribute,
and deny whatsoever follows that negation, is to be resolved by a copulative,
and not by a disjunctive conjunction.

85. Fourthly, he does not consider, that to make a copulative proposition, or
such a disjunctive, which is equivalent to a copulative to be heretical, it
suffices that one only part be heretical. Fifthly, he does not consider, that
although to make a pure, common, or absolute disjunctive proposition to be
false, it is necessary that both parts of the disjunction be false, yet it is
not necessary that both parts be false in the same degree of falsehood, for that
the one part may be impossible, the other not, the one part heretical, and the
other not, and that therefore the same kind of falsehood which is affirmed of
the one part, is not necessarily affirmed of the other. Lastly, he does not
consider, how vicious a kind of arguing it is, from the falsehood of an
affirmative conditional disjunctive proposition to conclude the truth of a
negative, whereby he would make his affirmative oath, invented by himself, to
have the same sense with the negative oath prescribed by his Majesty. And his
ignorance herein is the less excusable, for that the insufficiency of this
his argument he might have seen declared in my Theological disputation, where
I clearly showed, as you have seen before, how unsoundly the Author of that
English Dialogue urged the like argument, which my answer to that argument is
also here altogether concealed by M. Fitzherbert. And therefore I will give him
this charitable advise, that if he have any care of his credit and reputation,
he do not hereafter so bouldly adventure to meddle with these questions
belonging to Logike, except he have the help and furtherance of some of his
company more skillful herein then himself, least that by granting one
inconvenience, he fall, according to the ancient proverb, into a thousand
absurdities.

86. By this it is evident first, that although the Oath ordained by his
Majesty, and the Oath framed by M. Fitzherbert contain the same disjunctive
clauses, and so they do both agree in the matter, yet they differ greatly in
the form, and in the sense and understanding of the disjunctive conjunction
[or.] For in the Oath, prescribed by his Majesty, that which by virtue of the
form, and by force of the conjunction [or] which in all those particular
sentences is equivalent to [nor] I do acknowledge to be true, is, that the
Pope has not power to do any one of all those things mentioned in those
disjunctive clauses, and that which I acknowledge to be false, is, that the
Pope has power to do any one of all those things, as either to depose the
King or to dispose of his Dominions, and so forth: And therefore although to
those clauses were added also this clause [or to murder his Maiesty] yet my
Adversary cannot affirm, that it would change at all the truth, or falsehood of
the whole oath, or entyre proposition, but if the oath were true before, it
would also be true now, and if it were false before, it would also be false now.

87 But if the oath, which M. Fitzherbert has framed, that which by virtue of
the form, and by force of the conjunction [or] which as he himself
confesses, implies a free election to chose any one of those several
sentences or clauses, I acknowledge to be true, is, that the Pope has not
power to do all those things mentioned in those clauses, or, which is all
one, to do which of all those things he shall please, and that which I
acknowledge to be false, is, that the Pope has power to do all those things
mentioned in those clauses or which is all one, to do which of all those
things he shall please. And therefore if to those clauses of M. Fitzherberts
new devised oath, should be added also this clause [or to murder his Maiesty]
he cannot deny, but that his oath, or entyre disjunctive proposition, which
before in his opinion was false, is now by adding that clause made true, and
therefore that it is false, that the Pope has power to murder his M^iestie.
The adding of which clause does clearly show the manifest difference betwixt
the form of these two oaths, and the different signification of the
conjunction [or] in both of them, albeit in the matter of all the particular
clauses, and propositions, they do both agree.

88 Secondly, by this also it is easy to answer the demand, which M.
Fitzherbert propounds, to wit, wherefore the word [hereticall] in the
doctrine and position of his Majesty's oath, may be referred to the doctrine of
murdering Princes, and not of deposing them, and the word [false] may not with
the like reason in the oath or entire disjunctive proposition, which my
Adversary has framed, be referred to the last member, and part thereof, which
denies the Popes power to offer violence to his Majesty's person, and not to
the former concerning the Popes power to depose his Majesty. For if we regard
the form of both propositions, and the virtue, or force of the disjunctive
conjunction [or] which implies a free choice to take which part of the
disjunction we please, and therefore to make the whole disjunctive proposition
to be false and heretical, it suffices, that one only part thereof be false
and heretical, as they both agree in the form, and in the sense of the
disjunctive conjunction [or] as it is sufficient by virtue of the form, to
make that affirmative position, Princes being excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other, to be
heretical, so also to make this affirmative proposition, which my Adversary
has framed, The Pope may, or which is all one, it is in the Popes free and
lawful power to depose the Kings Majesty, or to offer violence to his Royal
person, to be false, it suffices, by virtue of the form, and by force of the
disjunctive conjunction [or] that one only part of the disjunction be false:
But the only difference is in the matter. And therefore if the doctrine of
deposing Princes, be not so clearly and properly heretical, as is the
doctrine of murdering them, the word [hereticall] may with better reason be
referred to the doctrine of murdering, then of deposing: But because the
doctrine which teaches, that the Pope may depose his Majesty, as also that he
may offer violence to his Royal person, are false, (although perchance the
latter be false in a more high and manifest degree of falsehood, then is the
fotmer) therefore the word [false] may, by virtue of the matter, but not by
force of the conjunction disjunctive [or] in the oath, framed by my Adversary,
be referred to both.

89. I say, in the oath framed by my Adversary, for as these two particular
propositions are set down in the oath ordained by his Majesty, both of them
are, not only, by virtue of the matter, but also by reason of the form, and
by force of the conjunction [or] which is equivalent to [nor] affirmed to be
false, as I declared before. So that it is manifest, that these words of the
oath [may be deposed, or murthered] being considered according to their proper
and usual signification in the conditional disjunctive clause where they are,
and compared also with the other clauses, parts, and circumstances of the oath,
may very well admit the interpretation, which I have made; and the application
of heresy (taking heresy in a strict sense) may be applied only to the
murder, and not also to the deposition of Princes, although it may also in a
proper sense, and wherein many learned Catholics do take the word heresy, be
applied to both, as I will show beneath. Nu. 106. et seq.
And thus much concerning the words of the law, and oath.

90 Now for his Majesty's meaning, or intention in that clause (which was the
second rule assigned for the interpretation of the oath) the same, says M.
Fitzherbert, Nu 12.
according to the doctrine of Suarez, which Widdrington approves, is to be
gathered principally by the words, and which, as you have seen, being to be
taken in their proper and common sense, do show, that his Majesty's meaning
was no other, but to ordain the abiuration of both parts of that clause alike,
that is to say, as truly impious and heretical.

91 But contrariwise I have clearly showed before, that according to the
proper and usual signification of the words, the common understanding of men,
and the received doctrine of the Logicians, to make a copulative proposition,
or a conditional disjunctive, which follows the nature of a copulative, to
be heretical, it suffices that one only part thereof be heretical. Seeing
therefore that his Majesty's meaning only was to bind his Catholic Subjects,
to take this clause of the Oath in that sense, which the words according to
their true, proper, and usual signification do bear, and that according to
the true and common sense of the words, it suffices to abjure this clause of
the Oath, as heretical, if one only part thereof be heretical, it is
manifest that his Majesty's meaning was not to ordain that both parts of this
clause should be abiured alike, unless from the common sense and
understanding of the words it can be rightly gathered, as I have proved it
cannot, that both parts must of necessity be abiured alike.

92 But if it be well considered, says M. Fitzherbert nu. 21.
, what reason Widdrington has to condemn the aforesaid doctrine, as truly
heretical, in respect of one part of the clause (to wit, that part which
concerns violent attempts upon the persons of Princes) it will easily
appear, that his Majesty pretends as much, if not more reason, to condemn
it in like manner in regard of the other part, which concerns the deposition
of Princes. For whereas Widdrington has no other reason for his conceit, but
because he thinks that all doctrine prejudicial to the lives of Princes is
repugnant to the holy Scriptures (whereby he consequently holds it for
heretical) his Majesty is persuaded also that he has the same reason to
condemn the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes for heretical, as
it may evidently appear by the manifold places, and texts of Scripture, which
he alleges for the proof of his own Ecclesiastical Primacy, and the
obligation of his Subjects to yield him civil obedience, whereon he groundeth
the lawfulnes of the Oath, and the abiuration of the doctrine condemned therein.

93. And therefore omitting Nu. 23.
to examine, how well the Scriptures alleged by his Majesty, serve for the
proof of the matter in question, as also to note, how impertinently
Widdrington applies the precept, non Occides, to his purpose, by occasion of
the word murder in the oath (which precept being indeed understood of murder,
and consequently implying always an unlawful act, yea a mortal sin, was
never held by any to be lawful, and therefore does not in that sort and sense
belong to our question, as Widdrington knows well enough) but omitting, I
say, to speak further of this, that which here I affirm is, that his Majesty
alleges much more Scripture to condemn the doctrine touching the deposition
of Princes, then Widdrington does for the condemnation of violent attempts
against their persons; Whereby it is manifest, that he has no reason to say,
that his Majesty meant, that the latter part of that clause should be abiured,
as heretical, and not the form^r, especially seeing that the express words of
the oath, (according to their most usual, and proper signification) together
with the circumstances thereof, do prove both alike, as it appears by the
premises. And this I hope may suffice for the confutation of his first, and
best answer.

94. But first, as it appears also by the premises, the express words of
this clause (according to their most usual, and proper signification) together
with all other circumstances, do clearly prove, that both parts of that
disjunctive proposition are not of necessity to be abiured alike, for that to
make a conditional disjunctive proposition, as is the doctrine, and position
abiured in this clause, to be heretical, it is sufficient, that one part of
the disjunction be heretical, and that therefore both parts of the disjunction
are not of necessity to be abiured alike, as by the form of my Adversaries
own examples I have evidently convinced: and therefore his premises do no
way prove his conclusion in this point.

94 Secondly, that his Majesty had far greater reason to be more vehement
against the practice of murdering Princes being excommunicated, or deprived by
the Pope, then of deposing, or thrusting them out of the possession of their
kingdoms, and to have the former being the more heinous, impious, damnable and
detestable crime, and more plainly and expressly forbidden in holy Scriptures,
to be abiured in a more high and eminent degree, then the latter, it is
plainly convinced by the great and manifest inequality of the crimes, by the
irrecuperable, and not recompensable damage, which proceeds from the former,
and not from the later, and yet the former being the more easily and suddenly
to be performed then the latter, (for that the latter cannot be accomplished
but by a mighty power, which also may fail, the event of war being
uncertain, but the former by the aduenturous boldness only of one villain
may be effected) together with the known practices of the late murders of
the most Christian Kings of France, and the execrable conspiracy of the
Pouder-Traytors, which was the chief occasion of the ordaining of this Oath.
And therefore his Majesty has neither more reason, nor as much reason to
condemn that part of this clause, which concerns the deposing of Princes
being excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, for heretical, taking
heretical for that which imports a plain, manifest, and confessed heresy,
or falsehood clearly repugnant to holy Scriptures, as either he himself, or I,
or any man else may have to condemn that part for heretical, which concerns
the murdering of such Princes.

95. But to reduce Mr. Fitzherberts whole discourse to a compendious form of
arguing; That, which he chiefly labors to prove against me in this
chapter* is, that this position, Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by
the Pope may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other whatsoever,
^s by the oath condemned for heretical, in regard as well of the deposition of
such Princes, as of the murdering of them. And this he endeavors to prove
by two ways: first by the common sense, and understanding of the words, which
do signify, says he, that both parts a^e abiured alike, to which purpose
he brings four examples of propositions, which, as you have seen, make
nothing for him, but are flat against him, and he frames an oath of his own
invention, to parallel it with the oath ordained by his Majesty, which
nevertheless is far different from it in sense, as I have showed before.

96. Secondly, he pretends to prove the same by his Majesty's meaning, or
intention, which was, says he, that both parts should be abiured as
heretical. And this also he pretends to prove by two ways. First, by the
proper and common sense of the words, by which his Majesty's intention is
principally to be gathered. But this proof is all one with the former, and
therefore with the same facility it is denied, as it is affirmed; for that the
proper and usual sense of the words do not import, that both parts of the
disjunction are of necessity to be abiured alike, by reason of the conditional
disjunctive proposition, as I have often repeated before. Secondly, he would
seem to prove the same by this argument. His Majesty is persuaded, that the
doctrine, not only which allows the practice of deposing Princes being
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, but also which speculatiuely
maintains, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, is heretical, and
repugnant to the holy Scriptures, as may evidently appear by the manifold
places, and texts of Scripture, which he alleges, etc. yea, and he
talledgeth much more Scripture, to condemn the doctrine touching the
deposition of Princes, then Widdrington does for violent attempts against their
persons, therefore it is manifest that according to his Majesty's intention
both parts of that clause should be abiured as heretical.

97 But first, this consequence of my Adversary: (His Majesty is persuaded,
that not only the doctrine which teaches, that the Pope has power to murder
Princes, but also to depose them, is heretical, therefore his Majesty's
meaning, or intention was, that in the aforesaid clause of the oath, both parts
should be abiured, as heretical, taking heretical in that strict sense,
whereof I will speak beneath Nu. 106. et seq.
) M. Fitzherbert might have seen, if it had pleased him, in my Theological
disputation Cap. 4. sec. 3.
, to be very insufficient; where I did clearly show, that there is a great
difference to be made betwixt his Majesty's persuasion or opinion, and his
meaning or intention. For his Majesty does, according to the grounds of the
Protestant Religion, defend diverse opinions, which nevertheless he does not
intend to bind his Catholic Subjects by this oath to defend and profess.

98 As for example. His Majesty is persuaded, that he is the supreme Lord and
Governor, in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as temporal, and yet he
does not intend that his Catholic Subjects shall by those words of this oath
[our Sovereign Lord King Iames] profess and maintain the same. Neither does
he ground the lawfulnes of this oath, and the abiuration of the doctrine
condemned therein, upon his Ecclesiastical Primacie, as my Adversary here
seems to insinuate, for that the Oath of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as
his Majesty himself affirms, In his Apology page 46.
was devised for putting a difference between Papists, and Protestants, but
this oath was ordained for making a difference between the ciuilly obedient
Papists, and the perverse disciples of the Powder Treason.

99 Also his Majesty is persuaded, that the Pope has not power to
excommunicate his Majesty, and yet he does intend by those words of the oath
[notwithstanding any sentence of excommunication etc.] to bind English
Catholics to profess the same; See my Th. Disp. cap. 4. sec. 1.
howsoever Card. Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius, and Suarez without sufficient
proof, and M. Fitzherbert without any proof at all, do affirm, that the
Popes power to excommunicate is denied in this oath. For although the lower
house of Parliament, as his Majesty also affirms In his Premonition page 9.
, at the first framing of this oath made it to contain, that the Pope had no
power to excommunicate his Majesty, yet his Majesty did purposely decline that
poi^t, In the Catalogue of the lies of Tortus. nu. 1.
and forced them to reform it, only making it to conclude, that no
excommunication of the Popes can warrant his Subjects to practice against his
person, or state, as indeed taking any such temporal violence to be far
without the limits of such a spiritual Censure, as Excommunication is.

100 Likewise his Majesty is persuaded, that all reconcilings of his Subjects
to the Pope, and all returnings of English Priests made by the Popes authority,
into this Realm etc, are truly and properly treasons, although not naturally,
and forbidden by the law of nature, unless they be repugnant to true,
natural, and civil alleagiance, yet positive and forbidden by the laws of
the Realm, nevertheless by those words of the oath [to disclose all treasons
etc.] he did not intend to bind his Catholic Subjects to reveal and disclose
such kind of treasons, unless they be truly and properly unnatural
treasons, and repugnant to natural alleagiance. For that his Majesty was
careful, as he himself also writes In his Premonition page 9. natural.
, that nothing should be contained in this oath, except the profession of
natural allegiance, and civil, and temporal obediednce, with a promise to
resist all contrary, unnatural, and uncivil violence.

101 Wherefore seeing that his Majesty does bind the swearer to take this
oath according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the words,
although his Majesty be persuaded, that it is heretical to hold, that the
Pope has power to depose princes, yet from thence it cannot rightly be
concluded, that therefore by this oath he intended to bind his Catholic
Subjects to acknowledge and profess the same, unless the words of the oath,
according to their proper and usual signification do imply the same.
Considering therefore, that as I have clearly convinced, to make that
proposition, Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other, to be heretical, it is
sufficient, according to the common sense of the words, and the approved
doctrine of Logicians, that one only part of the disjunction be heretical, as
without doubt the latter part of this disjunction is, it is evident, that his
Majesty's mtaning was no other, then to bind the swearer to that sense, to
which the words being taken in their proper and usual signification do bind.
And thus much concerning the consequence.

102 Now touching the antecedent proposition, although it be true, that his
Majesty is persuaded, that not only the doctrine, which allows the practice
of deposing Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, but also
the speculatiue doctrine, which teaches, that the Pope has power to deprive
Princes, is a false doctrine, and repugnant to holy Scriptures, and
consequently heretical, taking heretical for that which implies an untruth,
contrary to the word of God revealed in holy Scriptures, in which sense also
all those Catholics, who do hold this doctrine of the Popes power to deprive
Princes of their kingdoms, to be false, do hold also, that it is contrary to
the word of God, and consequently also heretical; yet if heretical be taken
for that which imports a known and manifest untruth repugnant to holy
Scriptures, and so acknowledged also to be by the common consent also of
Catholics, my Adversary will hardly prove, that his Majesty is persuaded,
that the speculatiue doctrine, which holds, that the Pope has power to
deprive Princes, or to depose them by a iuridicall sentence, is heretical in
this sense, or repugnant to holy Scriptures in the opinion of all, or of the
most part of Catholics, albeit he be persuaded that the speculatiue doctrine,
which approves the Popes power to murder or to take away the lives of
Princes, be in this sense heretical, as in very deed it is: And therefore all
those Priests, who then were Prisoners in Newgate, and the Gate House, and now
are in Wisbeech, being examined by his Maiestses Commissioners upon certain
articles, and did directly answer to the questions which were propounded, did
agree in this, that it was directly and absolutely murder for any man to take
away the life of his Majesty, and that the Church could not define it to be
lawful for any man to kill his Majesty, although for the point of deposing,
some of them answered otherwise, some others declined the question, and many of
them did insinuate, that as yet this point touching the Popes power to dedose
Princes is not defined by the Church.

103 And although his Majesty does allege much more Scripture to condemn the
doctrine touching the deposition of Princes, then I do for the condemnation of
violent attempts against their persons, yet it cannot be denied, both that his
Majesty might have brought more plain and pregnant places, against the
doctrine of murdering Princes, if he had thought it needful, and not
supposed it to be a manifest untruth, and condemned by the common coesent also
of Catholics, and also that all those places, which his Majesty brings to
prove, that Subjects owe civil obedience to temporal Princes, and against the
Popes Ecclesiastical power to deprive Princes of their temporal kingdoms,
do more forcibly conclude against violent attempts against their sacred
persons, and against the Popes Ecclesiastical or spiritual power to murder
kill, or deprive them of their lives, which bloody punishments Ecclesiastical
mildnes does so much abhor.

104 Neither do I take the word [murthered] in that clause of the oath, as it
does formally signify an unlawful act, and a mortal sin, and in that sense
apply the precept, Thou shall not kill, to this clause of the oath, as my
Adversary would persuade the Reader, but I take murdered in that clause, as it
does denote materially the killing of Princes, which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope: And I affirm, that the killing of such Princes is
directly and absolutely a mortal sin, and is that murder, or killing, which
is forbidden by the law of God, and nature, revealed to us in the holy
Scriptures, and especially in those two places which the Author of the English
Dialogue, whose objection against that clause of the oath I took upon me to
answer, did allege. The first place 1, Reg. 26. Kill him not, for who shall
extend his hand against the Lords anointed, and be innocent? does more
particularly belong to Princes. The second place Exodus 20. Thou shall not kill,
is common also to private men, and therefore much more to be ayplyed to the
killing of Princes.

105. Neither is it necessary as I observed in my Appendix part 2. sec. 5. nu.
4.
against Suarez, to make that position contained in the Oath to be heretical,
and repugnant to Gods commandment, that the Scripture should have added, Thou
shall not kill Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope. It is
sufficient that all killing both of private men, and much more also of
temporal Princes, (who have in their hands the material sword it self, and
supreme power to kill or save) is unlawful and forbidden by this precept,
which is not warrantable either by other places of holy Scripture, or declared
by the Church to be lawful, and to have sufficient warrant. Now it is
manifest, that neither the Church, nor any one Catholic Doctor ever taught,
that the Popes sentence of excommunication or deprivation, although we should
grant, that the Pope has power to deprive Princes by way of sentence, does
give sufficient warrant or authority to Subjects to kill their Prince, for that
the Popes sentence of deprivation does at the most by the consent of all
Catholics, deprive a Prince of his right to reign, but not of his corporal
life, or of his right to live. And thus much concerning the antecedent
proposition.

106 Lastly to say something also concerning the consequent, although as you
have seen, I do utterly deny, that to abjure this doctrine and position as
heretical, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may
be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other, it is necessary by
virtue of the form of words being taken in their proper and usual
signification, and by force of the conjunction disjunctive [or], that both
parts of the disjunction be abiured as heretical, nevertheless I do
willingly grant, that by virtue of the matter both parts of that disjunctive
proposition may be truly abiured as heretical, if we take the word
heretical, as by many learned Catholics it is taken in a true, proper, and
usual signification. For the better understanding whereof we must observe out
of Alphonsus de Castro Lib 1. aduershaereses cap 8.
, Didaecus Couerruuias Lib. 4. varia^. resolut. cap. 14.
, and others, that although the Catholic Church can determine of heresy, yet
an assertion is not therefore heresy, because the Church has defined it, but
because it is repugnant to Catholic faith, or which is all one, to that which
is revealed by God. For the Church by her definition does not make such a
position to be heresy, seeing that it would be heresy, although she should
not define it; but the Church causes this, that by her censure she makes
known, and manifest to us, that to be heresy, which before was not certainly
known, whether it might justly be called heresy, or no.

107. For the whole Church (excluding Christ her principal head) has not
power to make a new Ariicle of faith which nevertheless she might do if she
could make an assertion to be heretical: But that the Church has not power to
make a new Article of faith, it is convinced by manifest reason. For every
assertion is therefore called Catholic, for that it is revealed by God: Seeing
therefore that divine reu^lation does not depend upon the approbation, or
declaration of the Church, the declaration of the Church does not make that
Catholic, which is revealed by God. The Church therefore does determine that
this is reuea^ed by God, but she does not make that which is revealed by God
to be true: for if such a verity be called Catholic, for that it is contained
in holy Scriptures, seeing that such a verity to be contained in holy
Scriptures, does not depend upon any humane will, but upon God alone, the
Author of those Scriptures, it is manifest by this reason, that the Church can
do nothing at all, that such a truth does belong to faith: For the holy
Scriptures have this of themselves that we are bound to believe them in all
things. Wherefore the Church defining any thing to be of faith, although she
does certainly define, and cannot err, yet by her definition she does not make
that truth to be Catholic faith. For she did therefore define that truth to
be Catholic, because that truth was Catholic, and if it had not been
Catholic, the Church defining it to be Catholic should have erred, therefore
it was Catholic and revealed by God before the Church defined it. Wherefore
the Church cannot make a new Article of faith, but that which before was true
faith, but not certainly known to us, the Church by her definition makes it
known to us.

108 In like manner we have this from the Church, to know certainly which is
divine Scripture, and we are bound to account that to be divine Scripture,
which the Church has defined to be divine. And although she does certainly
define, and cannot err, yet she does not make by her definition, that
Scripture to be divine: for therefore she has declared it to be divine,
because it was truly divine, and if it had not been before divine Scripture,
the Church would not have declared it to be divine. Wherefore although that
assertion which is condemned by the Catholic Church to be contrary to
Catholic faith, and to b^e accounted heresy, was also heresy before the
definition of the Church, yet before the Church did define it, the maintainers
of that opinion were not called heretics, because it was not known, whether
that opinion was contrary to Catholic faith: but now after the definition of
the Church they shall be called heretics, whosoever shall approve and
maintain that opinion, not for that their opinion was not before false,
contrary to Catholic faith, and heresy, but because this name of heretics
being infamous, and appertaining to that most heinous crime, does require a
certain pertinacy, and rebellion departing from the definitions of the
Catholic Church, which could not truly be accounted at that time, when it was
doubtful and disputable, and the Church had not defined, whether that opinion
was repugnant to Religion and faith.

109. In this sense therefore it may be said, that the Church has power to
declare an assertion to be Catholic, and to appertain to Catholic faith, to
this effect, that after the definition of the Church, the said assertion is so
manifestly of faith, that he is to be accounted an obstinate heretic, who
defending the contrary shall depart from that definition, although before the
definition of the Church, the said assertion albeit was most true and
Catholic, yet by reason of the doubt, and controversy touching that point he
could not justly be called an heretic, who should allow, and follow the
contrary position. And what has been said, if there be any doubt, or
controversy touching any text of holy Scripture, and the true sense thereof,
is proportionally to be understood, if there be any doubt, or controruersie
touching any definition of the Church, and the true sense thereof; as we see
there is now a controversy betwixt the Divines of Rome, and Paris, touching
the definition of the Council of Constance concerning the Superiority of the
Church, or a General Council above the Pope, and among many other Catholics
touching the decrees and declarations of diverse other General Counsels, and
now lately touching the sense of those words of the Council of Lateran, Si
vero Dominus temporalis, etc. But if the temporal Lord, etc. Which some
Catholics of late have greatly urged to prove the Popes power to depose
Princes, whereof beneath Part. 3. cap. 9. and seq.
we will discourse at large.

110. From this doctrine, which neither Mr. Fitzherbert, nor any other can
prove to be improbable, it clearly follows, that heresy being a falsehood
repugnant to holy Scriptures, or divine revelation, with the same certainty, or
probability, wherewith one is persuaded, that such a doctrine, or position, is
false, and repugnant to holy Scriptures, or divine revelation, with the same
certainty, or probability he may abhor, detest, and abjure that doctrine
for heretical; And consequently it follows, that if it be lawful to
abhor, detest, and abjure for impious, damnable, and false doctrine repugnant
to truth contained in the word of God, this Doctrine and position, That Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be deposed or murdered by
their Subjects or any other, (which position for that it concerns practice,
and not only speculation, is in very deed false, impious, damnable, and
repugnant to truth contained in holy Scriptures, and ought so to be accounted,
not only by those, who are of opinion that the Pope has not power to deprive
Princes, but also, so long as this question remains undecided and in
controversy, by those who do speculatiuely think that he has authority to
deprive them) it is lawful also to abjure it for heretical. And this I hope
may suffice for the defense of my first, and principal answer, and for the
confutation of M. Fitzherberts Reply thereunto.

111. The Second answer, which I have heard many Catholics give to the
aforesaid objection of the Author of that English Dialogue against the word
[hereticall] contained in this clause of the oath, and which Answer Mr.
Fitzherbert labors in vain to overthrow, I related Cap. 5. Sec. 2. nu. 28.
29
in these words. The second principal answer, which some of our Countrymen
do make to the aforesaid objection, is gathered from the doctrine of Card.
Bellarmine, who expounding Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 12.
that sentence of Pope Gregory the first Lib. 1. epist. 24.
I confess, that I do receive the four first Counsels, as the four books
of the Gospel, affirms, that the aduerbe [as] does import a similitude, and
not an equality, as that of Matthew. 5. Be you perfect, as your heavenly Father
is perfect. For in like manner these Catholics do answer, that those words,
I do abhor, detest, and abjure as heretical, etc. do not import an
equality, but a similitude, and that in common speech they do only signify,
that I do exceedingly detest that doctrine. And so we usually say, I hate him
as the devil, I love him as my brother, not intending thereby to affirm, that
the one is in truth a Devil, or the other my brother.

112 Now to omit the word [murthered] as though there were no mention at all
made in the oath, concerning the murdering of Princes, and to speak only of
deposing them; these men affirm, that the aforesaid position, Princes, which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed by their Subjects, or
any other, supposing that this question concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes, is not yet decided, is in their judgments a false, and seditious
proposition, and that it has some similitude with heresy, not for that they
think it to be in very deed heretical (taking heretical in that strict
sense, as some Catholics do take it) but for that they do constantly hold it
to be of such a nature, that it may be condemned by the Church for an
heretical proposition (and then the maintainers thereof to be p^operly
heretics) if deposing be taken in that sense, as it is in this branch of the
oath distinguished from depriving. For to deprive a Prince, is to take away by
lawful sentence his Regal authority, and in this branch is referred to the
Pope, but to depose a Prince is to thrust him out of the possession of his
kingdom, and in this branch is referred to Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

113. The falsehood therefore of the aforesaid position, may be gathered partly
from holy Scripture, Mat. 22.
Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's: which precept is plainly
understood, not only of rendering to Caesar that which is Caesar's, but also of
not taking away from him that which is his, and which he lawfully possesses:
as also contrary wise the plain meaning of that precept of the Decalogue, Thou
shall not steal, Exodus 20.
is not only that we must not take away unjustly, that thing which is our
neighbors, but also that we must render to him that which is his own. And
partly it may be gathered from the most true principles of the Divines, and
Lawyers, to wit, that no man is to be put out of his lawful possessions,
until the right of the adverse part be sufficiently decided.

114 Seeing therefore that this question concerning the Popes power to deprive
Princes is not as yet sufficiently decided, for that as yet the Judge has not
determined the controversy, as Trithemius In Chron. Mon^st. H^rsa. ad annum
1106.
well affirmed, and we also above Cap. 3. sec. 3
have showed, so long as it is in question among Catholics, and probably
disputed on both sides, whether the Pope has such authority to deprive Princes
or no, they cannot by virtue of any Excommunication, or sentence of
deprivation, made by the Pope against them, be deposed by their Subjects, or
any other whatsoever, or, which is all one, be violently by their Subjects, or
any other, thrust out from their Kingdoms which they do rightfully possess.
By this therefore which has been said it is manifest enough, that according to
both these answers, although many do like best the former, that the aforesaid
position, Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever, may truly, lawfully, and
without any danger of perjury be abiured as impious and heretical doctrine.
Thus I answered in my Theol. Disputation.

115 Now against this Answer M. Fitzherbert obiecteth thus: Th^s second
answer says he Cap. 4. nu. 25.
, is sufficiently confuted by the words of the law or oath, which as I have
signified ought to be taken, and understood in their most proper and clear
sense; in which respect the aduerbe [as] being joined to impious and
heretical, must needs denote and signify, not a similitude, nor yet an
equality, (by the way of comparison) but a realitie of impiety, and heresy in
that doctrine, for so, no doubt, does every man take it that reads the said
clause.

116. But to this it is answered, first, that M. Fitzherbert abuses his Reader
in corrupting and concealing those rules, which I related out of Suarez, and
others, for the understanding of the words of every law, and consequently of
this oath. For neither did those Authors affirm, that the words of every law
ought to be taken, and understood in their most proper, and most usual sense,
but only in their proper and usual sense, taking proper, as it is opposed to
improper, or metaphorical, and not to that which is somewhat the less proper,
and usual, as it is opposed to unusual, and not to that which is somewhat the
less usual: Neither did they also affirm, that the words of every law, are
always to be understood in their proper and usual signification: but the
matter also of the law, the will of the lawmakers, and other circumstances are
to be regarded. Wherefore if at any time, says Suarez Lib. 6. de Leg. cap. 1.
nu. 17.
, the words taken in their proper signification should argue any injustice, or
like absurdity in the mind of the Lawmakers, they must be drawn to a sense
although improper, wherein the law may be just and reasonable, because this is
presumed to be the will of the Lawmakers, as it has been declared by many
laws in ff. tit. de legibus. For in a doubtful word of the Law, says the
Law, that sense is rather to be chosen, which is void of all default,
especially seeing that by this the will also of the Lawmakers may be gathered.
For it ought not to be presumed, that the Lawmakers did intend to command any
absurd or inconvenient thing, unless the contrary do evidently appear.

117 But if it chance, says Suarez Cap. 1. nu. 11.
, that a^y words of the Law have together many proper and usual
significations, then we must observe that rule, which in all ambiguous and
equivocal speeches, is wont prudently to be observed, to wit that the matter
of the Law with other circumstances be diligently considered, for by them the
meaning of the words will be easily determined. For the words must especially
be agreeable to the matter, according to that rule of the law, Leg. Quoties ff.
de regulis Iuris.
whenever the same spech has two senses, let that especially be taken, which
is more agreeable to the matter. And therefore if the words be ambiguous or
doubtful, they must be drawn to that sense, as I said before, which
contains no injustice or absurdity: And a benign and favorable
interpretation, if there be no other let, is always to be preferred, according
to that approved rule of the law, Leg. Benignius ff. de legibus.
Laws are to be interpreted in the more favorable sense, that thereby their
will and meaning might be conserved: and doubtful speeches, as Emanuell Sa.
affirms, Verbo Interpretatio nu. 17.
are to be taken in the better sense, and which is more profitable to the
speaker. This, and much more to the same purpose did I there at large relate,
which my Adversary here concealeth, and which if he had set down, would
plainly have satisfied his chiefest exception, by which, contrary to the
aforesaid rule, he labors to draw the words of this oath, which he may
favorably, and commodiously expound, to contain in his opinion, an unlawful,
and inconvenient sense.

118. And from this, which I have now related, it is answered secondly, that
the Aduerbe [as] being an Aduerbe of similitude, does most properly, most
commonly, and most usually denote a similitude, or some equality by way of
comparison, and not an identitie, or reality: and it sometimes it does signify
an identitie, or reality, as many times it does, although seldom in comparison
of the other, this is by reason of the matter, and not by virtue of the word,
or by force of the Aduerbe of similitude [as.]. Wherefore to know, when the
Aduerbe [as] does signify a similitude, and when a reality, or identity, we
must regard the matter, to which it is applied. Seeing therefore that this
doctri^e or position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be deposed, or thrust out of the possession of their kingdoms by
their subjects or any other, so long as this doctrine concerning the Popes
power to deprive Princes remains questionable, and not decided, is truly
impious, and although it be not truly heretical, taking heretical for that,
which to maintain makes one a formal heretic, yet it has a great
affinity, and similitude with this heretical, for that it is a false, impious,
and damnable doctrine, repugnant to moral justice, injurious to Sovereign
Princes in a most high degree, and contrary also to the word of GOD revealed in
holy Scriptures, which therefore may by an authentical definition of the
Church be declared to be properly and strictly heretical, for this cause it may
well be said, that according to the aforesaid rule, that doubtful or ambiguous
words of a law are to be taken in the more favorable sense and wherein they
contain no injustice, or untruth, the Aduerbe [as] being, according to his
most proper, and most usual signification, an Aduerbe of similitude, may in the
word [impious] by reason of the matter, and not by force of the word, denote,
and signify an identitie, or reality of impiety, and in the word [heretical]
only a similitude, or some equality of heresy by the way of comparison,
taking heresy in the aforesaid rigorous manner: Neither ought any man that
reads the said clause, the aforesaid rules being observed, understand the
Aduerbe [as] in any other sense, especially which is thought to be false, or
inconvenient.

119. But besides that this difference may be noted, says Mr. Fitzherbert 1
Nu. 6.
, betwixt the examples, which Widdrington gives, and this clause of the oath,
that in the examples, to wit, I love him as my brother, and, I hate him as the
Devil, and such like, the word [As] has relation to two diverse subjects, and
therefore must neede^ be understood comparatively, whereas in the clause of the
oath, there is speech only of one subject, to wit, of the doctrine, and
heretical being an adjective is affirmed also of the said doctrine, as
praedicatum de subjecto, and therefore the word [as] being referred to
heretical, which is affirmed of the doctrine only, cannot be understood
comparatively (as it is in the examples where there are two different subjects)
but must needs denote a reality of heresy in the doctrine.

120. But first it is untrue, that in the examples, which I brought, the
Aduerbe [as] must of necessity have relation to two diverse subjects, or
persons? for it may be referred to one and the same subject or person; as if
one should be blamed for not loving his brother, or for not hating the Devil,
he might very well answer, and say, in truth I love him as my brother, or I
hate him as the Devil: where the Aduerbe [as] by reason of the matter does
signify a reality of brotherhood, and a true Devil, and not only a
similitude, or an equality by the way of comparison. And therefore to know when
the Aduerbe [as] does denote a real^ty, and not a similitude, we must regard
the matter, to which it has relation, for that most commonly, and according to
the most proper signification, and force of the word, it being an Aduerbe of
similitude, does denote only a similitude, and if perchance it does signify a
reality, it is not by force of the word, and by the most common signification
thereof, but by reason of the matter, to which it is applied.

121. Secondly, it is also untrue, that the Aduerbe [as] when it connecteth the
predicate with the subject, or the adjective with the substantive, does always
deuote a realitie, and not only a similitude, or an equality by the way of
comparison, as by infinite examples contained in the holy Scriptures I could
convince. As Psalm. 37. Ego autem tanquam surdus non audiebam, etc. and I as
deaf did not hear, and as dum be opened not my mouth. Isa. 53. Et nos
putauimus eum quasi leprosum. And we accounted him as leprous. Isa. 57. quia
tacens et quasi non videns. For I houlding my peace, said almighty GOD, and as
not seeing. Isa. 59. palpauimus sicut c^^i parietem. We as blind groped the
will. Job. 12. errare eos faciet quasi ^brios, he will cause them to err as
b^ing drunken. Mat. 28. Et facti sunt velut mortui. And they became as dead.
Mar. 9. Factus est sicut mortuus. He became as dead. 1 Cor. 15. tanquam
abortiuo visus est et mihi. And he appeared to me also as an abortiue. 2 Cor.
11. ne quis me putet insipientem, alioquin velut insipientem accipite me, Let
no man think me to be foolish, otherwise take me as foolish. Apocalyp. 1.
Cecidi adpedes eius tanqu^m mortuus. I fell at his feet as dead.

122. In these, and infinite other examples, which might be alleged, there
is speech only of one subject, and the Aduerbe [as] does connect the adjective
or predicate, with the substantive or subject, and yet it does not denote a
reality, but only a similitude. And if perchance any one should reply, and
say, that in those examples, although one only substantive or subject be
expressed, yet there may be understood not the same substantive or subject,
but an other: as I fell at his feet as a dead man, take me as a foolish man,
and so of the rest: so likewise we may say that in this clause of the Oath
there may be also understood an other substantive or subject, as, I abhor,
detest and abjure as impious and heretical doctrine, this doctrine and
position etc. Wherefore whether there be one subject or two, whether the
adjective be affirmed of the substantive, as predicatum de subject, or no,
the Aduerbe [as] by the proper signification, and force of the word being an
Aduerbe of similitude, does most commonly, and usually denote a similitude, and
if at any time it signify a reality, or identitie, it is not so much by force
of the word, as by virtue of the matter, to which it is referred.

123 And this is the reason, why the Aduerbe [as] being referred to impious in
this clause of the Oath, does denote a reality, and truth of impiety, and being
referred to heretical does only denote a similitude of heresy, taking
heresy in that strict sense before declared: because although it being an
Aduerbe of similitude, does by virtue and force of the word only denote a
similitude, both in the word heretical, and also in the word impious, yet by
reason of the matter, to which it is referred, for that the doctrine contained
in this clause is truly impious, and it is heretical only by simili ude and
comparison, taking heretical in that rigorous sense before mentioned,
therefore according to the aforesaid rule, that the sense of the words of
every law is to be understood according to the matter, and that the sense and
meaning of the words of every law, (and consequently of this oath established
by a public law) ought to be drawn to that sense, if there be no other let,
which contains no untruth, injustice, or absurdity, and that the Aduerbe [as]
in common sense, and understanding of men, to which common and usual sense his
Majesty does in express words bind the takers of this oath, does only denote
a similitude and not a reality, unless the matter which is treated of does
enforce us thereunto, there is great reason, that the Aduerbe [as] should in
the word impious, by virtue of the matter, and not by force of the word, being
taken in his most proper and usual signification, signify a reality, and in
the word heretical, taking heretical in that rigorous manner so often
repeated, should denote only a similitude, or some equality by the way of
comparison.

124 And by this which has been said, that also which M. Fitzherbert lastly
adds, is easily answered. Furthermore, says he nu. 27. 28.
, it is evident, that the Aduerbe [as] being considered as it is joined with
the word [impious] does clearly imply the reality whereof I speak, signifying
that the said doctrine is truly impious, and wicked, and not only to be
esteemed so by the way of similitude, or comparison, as it is manifest by the
words before and after, which are, I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine, etc. Whereby it is
clear, that his Majesty's meaning was to cause the takers of this oath to
condemn that doctrine to be truly impious, seeing that he will have them to
swear, that they abhor and detest it from their heart, and calls it also a
damnable doctrine.

125 And this being so, I would gladly know of Widdrington, what reason he can
have to take the Aduerbe [as] in one sense as it is referred to heretical, and
in an other, as it is joined with impious, seeing that is referred to both
alike with a copulative conjunction, the one immediately following the other:
will he say that it is to be taken properly in the one, and improperly in the
other? How can that stand with his former rules out of Suarez touching the
clear and perspicuous sense, which is required in Laws and Oaths (especially
in this oath, wherein there is an express clause afterward to exclude all
equinocatio^?) therefore he must needs grant, that if the doctrine be abiured
as truly impious, it is also abiured as truly he^eticall, or else he must
make such a Gallimaufrey, as was never made in any law or oath, within the
compass of four words only.

126. But this is easily answered by that which I have already said. For
first, if the word [hereticall] be taken in that sense, as Alphonsus de Castro,
Couerrnuias, and many other learned Catholics do take it, for every false
doctrine, which is repugnant to the word of God, or divine revelation, which is
a proper, and usual signification of the word [hereticall] and in which sense
also, as I conceive, his Majesty, and other Protestants do take that word, and
not for that doctrine which is made heretical by the definition or declaration
of the Catholic Roman Church, then the aduerbe [as] both in the word impious,
and also in the word heretical does by virtue of the matter, and other
circumstances, denote a reality of impiety, and heresy, although not by force
of the word being taken in the most proper and usual signification, which
being an aduerbe of similitude, would only denote a similitude both of
heresy, and also impiety, unless the matter, with other circumstances, did
imply the contrary.

127. But if the word [hereticall] be taken for that doctrine, which is made
heretical by the Church, and which before the declaration; or definition of
the Church is not accounted heretical, although it be in very deed a false
doctrine, and contrary to the word of God, revealed to us in the holy
Scriptures (which signification of the word, heretical, whether it be the more
proper, and the more usual then the former, or no, I will not now contend, it
being sufficient, and over sufficient for my purpose, that the former sense is
proper and usual among Catholics, and not metaphorical and unusual) then
the reason, which a little above I alleged, is very sufficient, and my
Aduersarie's demand is clearly satisfied, to wit, why the aduerbe [as] should
by virtue of the matter, and by the approved rules of Divines and Lawyers, for
the interpretation of the words of every Law, being referred to impious,
signify a realitie of impiety, and being referred to heretical, should only
denote a similitude of heresy, taking heresy in that rigorous sense (although
by virtue of the word, and proper signification of the aduerbe [as] it being an
aduerbe of similitude, both in the word impious, and also in the word
heretical, does only signify, as I have said, a similitude of impiety, and
heresy) Neither then should the aduerbe [as] be taken properly in one, and
improperly in the other, as my Adversary would seem to infer, but it is
taken properly in both, for that the aduerbe [as] does properly, and usually,
by reason of the matter sometimes denote a realitie, and sometimes a
similitude, although most properly and most usually, it being an aduerbe of
similitude, does by force of the word denote only a similitude.

128 Secondly, to that which M. Fitzherbert obiecteth touching equinocatio^,
which by an express clause is excluded in this oath, I answered also in my
Theological Disputation Cap. 8. Sec 2.
, that his Majesty by those words [without any equiuocation] did not understand
and mean, that in the oath, no equivocal word, or sentence was contained, for
this is almost impossible, seeing that most words are equiuo^all, and have
diverse, yea and sometimes also proper and usual significations: But his
Majesty's meaning was, that the swearer should not equivocate, that is, deal
vnsincerely, but he should deal plainly, and sincerely, without any fraud or
guile, nor take the words in an other sense, then the common meaning and
understanding of them do bear. And so those words [without any equivocation
etc.] are only a declaration of those former words [And all these things I
do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear etc.] For it is one thing to
use equivocal words, which may be called a material equivocation, and an
other thing to equivocate, or to use formal equivocation. For to equivocate
properly, or to use formal equivocation, as it is commonly understood in this
Kingdom, is to use equivocal words, or some secret reservation of purpose to
delude the hearer, so that he, who hears the words, understands them in an
other sense, then he who utters them; and it imports an insincere manner of
dealing. If therefore in this oath there be perchance many common senses of the
same word, sentence, or proposition, all circumstances duly considered, we
ought to take it in that common sense, wherein we are persuaded his Majesty
would have us to take it, for this is his principal meaning and intention,
that we should deal plainly and sincerely with him, without any fraud,
guile, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

129 And if it should so fall out that we cannot be assured of his Majesty's
meaning and intention, when any difficulty concerning the sense of any word or
sentence contained in the oath shall arise, then we must recurre to those
general rules, which Divines and Lawiers assign for the interpreting of the
words of every law, for this we may with just reason presume to be the
general intention of his Majesty, as also of every lawmaker. And if perchance
there be any Catholic so scrupulous, that by applying the aforesaid general
rules to any ambiguous and doubtful word, or sentence in the oath, he cannot
yet quiet his conscience, yet he may avoid all danger of equiuocating, by
publicly declaring in what sense he takes that word or sentence, which has
diverse proper and usual significations: as by declaring in what sense he
takes the Aduerbe [as] both in the word impious and also in the word
heretical, and likewise in what sense he takes the word heretical, and so of
others, and this declaration will both avoid all danger of equiuocating, and
also without doubt satisfy the Magistrate, so that his declaration be not
known to be against his Majesty's meaning and intention.

130 And truly it is strange, that whereas the oath is by his Majesty, and the
Parliament propounded, and expressed in such manner of words, that according to
the approved rules assigned by Catholic Divines and Lawyers for the
interpreting of laws, it may be expounded in a true, lawful, and commodious
sense to the swearer, which sense also is agreeable to the proper and usual
signification of the words, yet M. Fitzherbert, and other impugners of the
oath, (for which English Catholics are to give them little thanks) will needs
have them, contrary to the aforesaid rules, understand in that sense, which
they account to be false, unlawful, and to be an utter ruin to the refusers
of the oath, whereas, according to the aforesaid rules, they ought to draw the
words, to a metaphorical and improper sense, if the proper sense should argue
in the law, (and consequently in the oath ordained by a public law) any
falsehood, injustice, absurdity, or other inconvenience.

131 Seeing therefore it cannot be denied, that the proper and usual
signification of the Aduerbe [as] it being an Aduerbe of similitude, is to
signify a similitude, and often times also by reason of the matter, but not by
force of the word, being taken in the most proper and most usual
signification, a reality: and of the word [hereticall] as it is taken by many
Catholic Divines, for every falsehood repugnant to divine revelation, it is
manifest, that whether we affirm, that the Aduerbe [as] does signify only a
similitude, or also a reality both in the word impious, and also in the word,
heretical, or a reality in the first, and a similitude in the second in the
manner before declared, it is no gallimaufre, but a true, and plain declaring
of the common sense, and understanding of the words according to the approved
rules prescribed by Catholic Divines and Lawyers for the interpreting of
doubtful and ambiguous words in every Law. And thus much concerning the
second Answer, and M. Fitzherberts Reply against the same.

132 Now then to make an end of this Chapter, upon these premises I will draw
four conclusions contrary to those which M. Fitzherbert here collecteth.
First, says he nu. 29.
, whereas Widdrington charge me to have affirmed falsely, that the doctrine
of the Popes power to depose Princes, is manifestly abiured in the oath, as
impious and heretical, he charge me falsely in two respects, the one because
I affirmed no such thing, and the other for that albeit I had said so, yet I
had said truly, as it evidently appears, not only by the plain words,
substance and circumstances of the oath, but also by his Majesty's meaning and
intention therein.

133 But contrariwise I conclude, that whereas I charged him to have falsely or
untruly affirmed, that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes is
manifestly abiured in this oath, as impious and heretical, I charged him truly
in two respects: the one because it is true, that he affirms so much as I
have clearly convinced by his own words, and I wonder that he is not ashamed
to affirm such a palpable untruth: the other for that this assertion of his is
false, as evidently appears both by the plain words, substance, and
circumstances of the oath, and also by his Majesty's meaning and intention
therein, which is to be gathered principally by the words, which, as you have
seen, being taken in their proper and common sense, do clearly show that
both parts of that disjunctive proposition, Princes which be excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, are not of
necessity to be abiured as heretical, although by virtue of the matter, if
heretical be taken for every false doctrine which is repugnant to truth,
containe^ in holy Scriptures, whether the Church have declared, or not declared
it to be so, both parts of that posi^ition, which allows the practice of
deposing or murdering Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be truly abiured as heretical, as I have abundantly showed before.

134 Secondly, it appears, says M. Fitzherbert nu. 30.
, how different Widdringtons doctrine and belief concerning the Popes power to
depose Princes, is from his Majesty's, yea from the whole substance of the
oath, seeing that according to Widdringtons opinion, the said doctrine is
probable, (and consequently may be held, taught, and sworn) whereas his
Majesty by this oath condemns it for detestable, damnable, impious, and
heretical, whereby it may appear also what good service he does to his
Majesty with this his probable doctrine, See Preface nu. 25. 26. and 27.
as I have noted before in the Preface.

135. But whether my doctrine, and belief concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes be different from his Majesty's, or no, (which my Adversary, if he had
been pleased to have diligently perused my writings, might quickly have
perceived) it is impertinent to the present question conncerning the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of the oath; and therefore I need not at this
time to speak more expressly thereof, for not giving my Adversary occasion to
wrangle about impertinent questions, and to decline the chief point, which is
controversy about the lawfulness of the oath. For to prove the oath to be
lawful, or unlawful, we must not so much regard what his Majesty's belief,
or opinion is, touching any point of controversy, which may seem to be any
way insinuated in the oath as it appears by his opinion concerning his
Primacie in spiritualls, and the Popes power to excommunicate him, and such
like, which nevertheless he does not intend, that his Subjects shall be bound
to affirm or deny in this oath; we must not I say, so much regard his
opinion, as his intention, and what is the true sense, and meaning of the oath
according to the plain and common understanding of the words, to which his
Majesty does bind the taker, and what by virtue of the words we must
acknowledge, profess, detest, and abjure in this oath: Now it is evident, as I
have showed before, that my opinion is not different from the substance of the
oath, nor from that which his Majesty intends to bind the swearer to
acknowledge, or abjure in this oath.

136. For I affirm two things, which are the whole substance of the oath; The
first, is that any Catholic may lawfully, and with a safe conscience declare,
testify, and acknowledge, before God, and in his conscience, that the Pope
has no power to depose his Majesty, nor to dispose of any his king^omes, or
Dominions, and so of the other clauses, which do follow from this doctrine.
And my reason is, for that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes,
I will not say at this present, is a false doctrine, and repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, and to the ancient Fathers, but it is not certain, and a point of
faith, (as Master Fitzherbert, and some others of his company will needs have
it to be) and the contrary is probable and consequently may with a safe and
probable conscience be acknowledged and maintained by any Catholic. But
whether it be probable, that the Pope has power to depose Princes or no, I do
not at this present dispute, neither do I either grant it, or deny it, or
meddle at all therewith, as being unnecessary to prove the oath to be lawful.
That which I affirm at this time is, that it is probable, that the Pope has
no such power. Let us first agree about this point, that it is probable, that
the Pope has no such power, and then we will dispute, how probable it is, that
he has such a power. In the mean time all Mr. Fitzherberts cunning, turning,
and winding shall not draw me to so great a disadvantage, as to take upon me
to prove that to be certain, which he, and the rest of my Adversaries will not
grant to be so much as probable.

137. The second thing, which touching practice I do affirm, is, that this
doctrine and position, That Princes, which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, may be deposed by their Subjects or any other, to omit now the word
[murthered] is an impious and damnable doctrine, and in what sense it may be
called heretical, as also whether by virtue of the words both parts of that
disjunctive position contained in the oath are abiured alike, and whether there
be the same reason, that the deposing, and murdering of Princes should be
abiured alike, I have sufficiently declared before. Whereby it may also
appear, that my doctrine brings no danger at all to his Majesty, as that of
my Adversaries does, but gives great security both to his Majesty's person and
State, as also I have noted before in the Preface nu. 61. and seq.
, which the Reader would quickly have perceived, if Mr. Fitzherbert had not
guilfully, to disgrace me with his Majesty, concealed the chiefest part of my
answer and doctrine touching the security, which it gave to his Majesty, for
which cause he has labored so much to have my books forbidden, that the
Reader may not see my answeares and doctrine, but after that mangled, and lame
manner, as he is pleased to curtoll and disfigure them.

138. Thirdly, it is evident, says Mr. Fitzherbert, nu. 31.
that neither Widdrington, nor any man that follows his doctrine, can
lawfully swear this clause of the oath, whereof we treat: for no man can with
safe conscience abjure, as impious and heretical, any opinion, which he
houldeth to be probable, as Widdrington grants our opinion to be.

139. But on the contrary part I say, that it is evident, that any man who
follows my doctrine, may lawfully swear this clause of the oath, whereof we
treat: for any man may with safe conscience abjure, as impious and heretical,
that doctrine and position, which is truly as impious and heretical: Neither
do I grant, that the doctrine and position contained in this clause of the
oath, which, as you see, belongs to practice, is probable, as my Adversary
untruly affirms, but I acknowledge, that it is a false, damnable, impious,
and heretical doctrine, and that therefore it ought by all Catholics to be
abhorred, detested, and abiured so from their hearts, as I have clearly proved
before: and as for the speculatiue doctrine of deposing Princes. I neither
grant, nor deny it to be probable, nor meddle at all therewith, as being
impertinent, as I have often said, to prove that the oath may lawfully be taken.

140 Lastly, I conclude, says M. Fitzherbert nu. 32.
, that albeit there were no other thing in the oath to make it unlawful, yet
this only clause might suffice to do it yea and ought to move all Catholics
to refuse it. For surely he must be a Catholic of a strange conscience, that
can persuade himself to detest, abjure, and abhor from his heart, a doctrine
that is taught by the best Catholic wri^ers, ancient and modern, and
confirmed by the practice of the Catholic Church, and the authority of diverse
General and Provincial Counsels, as experience has showed for many hundreds
of years. So as thou see, good Reader, what Widdrington gains by his
wrangling, seeing that the further he goes, the further he intangleth himself
still in an inextricable labyrinth of absurdities, whiles he seeks to
entangle the consciences of Catholics in the snares of his pretended
probabilities. And this shall suffice for this point.

141. But contrariwise I conclude, that this clause is not sufficient to make
the oath unlawful, or to move any Catholic to refuse the same. For surely he
must be a Catholic of a strange conscience, and carried away with the like
fanaticall zeal and bloody maxims that the Powder-Traitors were, that can
persuade himself, that the murdering of Princes, being excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, and the doctrine thereof, which is a part of that
conditional disjunctive proposition, abiured in this clause of the oath, ought
not to be detested, abhorred and abiured from his heart: Neither was this
doctrine ever taught before in the Church of God by any Catholic writer,
ancient or modern, or confirmed by the practice of the Catholic Church, or
authority of any General or Provincial Council.

142. And although the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes by way of
sentence has been taught by many Catholic writers, and also practiced by
diverse Popes, only since the time of Pope Gregory the seventh, who was the
first Pope, says Onuphrius, that contrary to the custom of his ancestors,
durst, I do not say excommunicate, but also deprive Caesar himself (by whom
if he was not chosen, he was at least confirmed) of his Kingdom and Empire: A
thing not heard of before those times See above part 1. cap. 6. nu. 24.
, yet considering that this doctrine has not as yet been defined by the
Church, and consequently is not a certain and decided point of faith, but has
ever been, and is even to this day vehemently impugned by many learned
Catholics, truly that Catholic must be a man either of a strange conscience,
or of a weak understanding, who considering the question touching the Popes
power to depose Princes, to be disputable, and as yet not decided by the
Church, for that there has ever been, says Azor Azor.
, a great controversy betwixt Emperors and Kings on the one part, and the
Bishops of Rome on the other, touching this point) can persuade himself, that
it is lawful to depose, or thrust a King out of his Kingdom, which he
lawfully possesses, so long as the controversy betwixt the Pope, and
temporal Princes, touching this point remains undecided.

143. For it is manifest, according to the known, and approved rule of the
law, which is also grounded upon the light of reason, that no man can lawfully
be thrust out from the possession of that thing, which he rightfully and
lawfully possesses, until the controversy betwixt him and his Adversary
touching that thing be decided by the Judge. And for this reason, as I
conjecture, Card. Bellarmine, and some few others of his Society have of late
years been so vehement to make this doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes to be a Point of faith, and not to be called in question by any
Catholic, foreseing belike that if they granted it to be disputable, and a
thing in controversy among Catholics, they must consequently grant, that the
Popes power to depose Princes, is only titulus sinere, and can never be
lawfully put in practice, much like to the title which one has to a fair
Palace, whereof an other man is in possession, which nevertheless he shall
never by dispossessing the other lawfully enjoy, until the Judge has decided
his title. And therefore the practice not only touching the murdering of
Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, but also touching the deposing
them, or thrusting them out of the possession of their kingdoms, and the
doctrine thereof, may and ought by all good Catholics to be detested,
abhorred, and abiured from their hearts, although by virtue of the words, and
by force of the disjunctive conjunction [or] following the verb [may] it
suffices, as I showed before, to abjure the whole disjunctive position, as
heretical, that one only part of the disjunction be abiured as heretical.

144. So as thou see, good Reader, both that the probability, which I
mainetaine, is not only pretended, but true and real, and also to render
back Mr. Fitzherberts words, what he gains by his wrangling, and concealing
the chief points of my opinion and doctrine, seeing that the further he
goes, the further he bewrays his want both of learning and sincerity, and
intangleth himself still in an inextricable labyrinth of absurdities, whiles
he seeks to entangle the consciences of Catholics in the snares of his
pretended new Catholic faith; which for that it is, end ever has been even
from the very first broaching thereof, impugned by learned Catholics, as a new
invented doctrine, prejudicial to the Sovereignty of temporal Princes, and
not acknowledged by any one of the ancient Fathers, clearly conuinceth, that
it is not Catholic. Neither can that man be accounted a true Catholic, who
with Catholic faith, which cannot be subject to error, believes that
doctrine, which is doubtful, disputable, uncertain, and not Catholic, as is
this, which teaches that the Pope has power to depose Princes. And truly if
I should perceive my Catholic faith to rely and depend upon so weak a ground
and foundation, as is the Popes authority to depose Princes, or any other such
like disputable question, I should scarce think my self to be a true
Catholic, and to have a true Catholic and supernatural, but only a
pretended Catholic, and supernatural faith.

145. By which also the judicious Reader may easily conjecture, what manner of
exceptions Mr. Fitzherbert can take against the other clauses of the oath,
seeing that these objections, which he has made against this clause, which he
only impugneth, notwithstanding that he vaunted in the beginning of this
chapter, that he would prove my explication of this clause, to be a frivolous
evasion, an extrauagant interpretation, and also absurd even by my own grounds,
I have evidently convinced to be weak and unsound, and himself by handling
the matter so insufficiently, guilfully, and bitterly, as he has done (but
far more spitefully itself former chapters, charging me with ^cogging,
scoffing, (...) gibing, for being absurd ridiculous, foolish, malicious
^^^pious, impudent, heretic and no good child of the Catholic Church, and
using such like slanderous and disgraceful terms) to be void of learning,
sincerity, charity, and also Christian modesty. And this may suffice also for
this point.

FINJS.
Faults escaped.
IN the Epistle, number. 9. l. 20. there. p. 14. l. 37. I confess p. 19. l. 24.
write. p. 20. l. 23. reasons. p. 39. l. 4. Parisioners, p. 55. l. 20. Secular.
and l. 34. the cause. p. 67. l. 9, laws. p. 78. l. 12. to none. p 80. l. 34.
S. Dominick. p. 90. l. 4. Eisengrenius. p. 100. l. fifth. p. 140. l, 5, had had.
p, 144, l, 25, although. p. 145. l. 31. put out the comma. p. 148. l. 13. add
in the margent m cap. 6. p. 158. l. 22. that Christian. p. 164. l. 25.
intention. p. 175. l, 14. subject to the. p. 179. lin. 10. 11. the spiritual
power.

In the Adioynder p. 13. l. 26. heretical. p. 38. against the 18. line, add
in the margent. n number. 23. p. 41. l. 29. sense. p. 57. l. 21. but in the. p.
76. l. 35. may be.

COurteous Reader, In the Appendix to my Supplication to the Popes Holiness.
Page 123. L. 15. I affirmed M. Wilson, who made the English Martyrologe,
wherein Fa. Garnet, and Fa. Holdcorne, are put for Martyrs, to be a Jesuit:
for that I was so informed by two credible persons. But because I have heard
since that one confidently auerre, that although he does wholly depend upon the
Jesuits, and is directed by them, yet he is not as yet a Jesuit in habit, I
desire that the word [Iesuite] in that place thou will account for not written,
and I have caused it to be blotted out in the Book which I sent to his
Holiness. But wherefore the Jesuits are desirous to have certain persons,
who either by vow, or promise do wholly depend on them, and are at their
dispose, not to take their habit for a time, but to live in the world like
Laymen, or Secular Priests, I shall perchance have occasion to declare
hereafter.


