AN EXPOSITION OF THE 13. CHAPTER OF THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST. By John
Wilkinson.

Revelation 14. 9. ANd the 3. Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If
any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead,
or in his hand,

V. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb:

V. 11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever.

Imprinted in the year, 1619.

IT was the purpose and desire of the Author of this Treatise to have
published his Judgment of the whole book of the Revelation, But through the
malice of the Prelates who diverse times spoiled him of his goods, and kept him
many years in prison; he was prevented of his purpose. After his death some of
his labors coming to the hands of his friends, in scattred and unperfect
papers; they labored with the help of others that heard him declare his
judgment herein, to set forth this little treatise, wherein they have not
varied from the Authors Judgment, but only in one opint in the 3. verse,
which is concerning the wounded head, wherein for the clearing of the matter,
they have added the lines thus " marked. Which a little differs from the
Authors understanding of it; the which should not have been altered, if the
work had been left perfect.

AN INTERPRETATION OF THE 13. CHAPTER OF THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST.
THE Eternal (whose power is over all) from the beginning has put enmity
between the Serpent and the Genesis 3. 15.
Woman, and between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent,
whereupon it has come to pass in all ages, that the seed of the woman has
labored to break the serpents head; that is, to destroy his works, tread him
under foot, and triumph in victory over him: He on the contrary has labored
as earnestly to resist God; to deceive the Nations, and to bring all into
condemnation and destruction with himself. And amongst the manifold ways and
means, which Satan has devised and practiced, to manifest his malice against
God and his Saints, none has been more dangerous, nor more availeable to
further iniquity and cause destruction; then the Antichristian generation,
which under the title of the Church and Spowse of Christ, and Ministers of the
Gospel, have corrupted the earth and brought the Nations into miserable
bondage and slaverie.

In this 13. chapter is declared the state, policy and proceeding of the
Antichristian Dominion and Kingdom, as the same was signified and foreshewed
to John the servant of Jesus Christ in a threefold form.

First by a beast rising up out of the sea, having 7. heads and 10. horns.
verses 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.

Secondly by a beast coming up out of the earth, having two horns like the
lamb, but spoke like the dragon. verses 11. 12. 13. 14.

Thirdly by an image of the first beast, which the second beast caused them
that dwelt on the earth to make, as in verse. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.

As the Dominion of the Medes Persians and Grecians (which persecuted Dan. 8.
and destroyed the holy people of God the Jews) were signified and foreshewed
to Daniel, in a vision under the forms of several beasts, according to the
qualities of those dominions; so here the Antichristian dominion which
persecuted the Churches and people of Christ, was foreshewed to John under the
forms of such beasts as are here described, whereby we may learn that as
reason and judgment is not to be expected in a beast, so equity and right is
not to be expected in this dominion, but the contrary.

Concerning the first of these beasts, John says. That as I stood upon the sea
sand, I saw a Beast rise up out of the sea having 7. heads and 10. horns, and
upon his horns 10. Crowns, and upon his heads the names of Blasphemy. And the
Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a Bear,
and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and
his seat and great authority.

That by this first Beast was signified and represented some state of people
and body politic, I presume no reasonable man exercised in the Scriptures
will deny, because (as it has been said) it is there to be seen that such
States and Dominions as God has used as rodds and scourges to chastise and
correct his Church and people withal, have been represented by beasts. States
and Dominions they are of two sorts, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, but of
which sort the State here meant is, there has been and is great opposition.
Many understand it to be the Roman Empire, to which I cannot consent, because
the Roman Empire is ordained of God, and is therefore a lawful Dominion. But
the Dominion here represented, is said to be from the Dragon that old Serpent
the Devil, who is said to give his power and his throne and great authority
unto it, and therefore unlawful: neither can I conceive it to be any other
civil dominion for the same reason. But to be short I understand it to be an
Ecclesiastical Sat or Dominion, and in particular that dominion which is
called The Catholic Church representative consisting of the Prelacy and
Preisthood of many Nations, as Patriarchs Cardinals Archbishops Bishops, with
diverse other elected persons, who being called and gathered into counsels or
synodes (usually called general Counsels) did usurp and take on them the
office of Christ Jesus in making Laws and Canons, erecting Courts, instituting
offices and officers in matters of Religion, (as for the government of the
Church and for the worship of God) to be of all men observed and obeyed. These
general counsels (or as the Catholics call it) the catholic Church
representative, have challenged and exercised spiritual authority and
dominion (according to the text) over all kinreds toungs and Nations. By their
laws and canons they have guided and governed them as one universal or
Catholic Church, and made them also to observe their decrees and
commandments for doctrine. This they have done both before and also since the
Pope was exalted to his dignity, as all histories of the Church do testify,
So that it has been and is a great question among the Catholics, whether the
authority of the Pope, or the Catholic Church in cases of Religion be the
greater. And whereas it is said in the 12. verse. that the second Beast
exercised all the power of the first Beast before him, thereby is confirmed the
truth of this exposition. For the second Beast being the Pope (as hereafter is
showed) has exercised the whole power of the Catholic church or general
counsels, and not of any other State or Dominion.

Further that this is the first beast here presented that which follows
(thorough Gods help) shall make manifest and apparent. But before I do
proceed I desire the Reader to observe that I do not condemn all use of
Counsels or Synods, but do hold that diverse men of diverse churches may
lawfully be assembled together, to consult and advise of matters concerning
Religion, and the worship of God, for their instruction and better information
of their Judgments, and so a good and holy use may be thereof. But that any
counsels have such power over the churches of Christ, as to impose upon them
thrir commandments for doctrine, and to vsurp the government of the Churches,
and to rule and reign over them by their laws and canons, and prescribe rules
and forms how God will be worshipped, as these general counsels have done,
that I do deny, as being contrary to the perfection of the holy 2 Timothy 3. 17.
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Revel. 22. 18.
Scriptures, and the practice of the Apostles and Elders of the Church of
Jerusalem, who being assembled together did profess it to be Act. 15. 10.
a tempting of God to lay such a yoke on the disciples necks, as the observing
of the Jewish ceremonies, which being unlawful to do it is much more
unlawful to devise and impose any other, and therefore the said assembly of the
Apostles and Elders, concluded to lay no greater burden upon the disciples then
to absteyne from such necessary things as either were simply evil in
themselves, as fornication, or else evil in respect of Act. 15. 18. 19. etc.
offense, as meats offered to Idols, blood and things strangled.

Now to proceed, First it is said of this Beast, That he did rise up out of the
sea. By his rising up was foreshewed that the Antichristian policy should
arise from a poor and mean estate to great riches and honor in the world,
which we and former generations have seen to the uttermost fulfilled, For
days there were when the Churches of Christ both Ministers and people were
hated despised and persecuted in the world, syoyled of their goods, made
gazingstocks and wonders, and afflicted with all kind of cruelty, as
histories both sacred and humane do abundantly specify and declare. The
Apostle Paul says of himself and his fellow brethren the Ministers of the
Gospel, that they were as men appointed to death: and in the account of the
world as the filth, refuse and ofscouring of all things. But since this beastly
generation has succeeded the church, and under the titles of Ministers of the
Gospel, and the Bishops over Gods people, have found means by little and
little to rise up and to exalt themselves over the Nations, and to bring the
multitudes and peoples, and Nations and Tounges under their Jurisdiction rule
and Reu 18. 3. 2. These. 2. 7.
Dominion, and they have so risen up that they are become the great men of the
earth, and are waxed rich through the abundance of their delicacies. This
mystery of iniquity was working in the Apostles time, for there were then
crept into the church those that desired worldly pomp and promotion, and were
not contented with the portion of the Lords heritage, but their ambicious
desires could not then be satisfied, there was a let in the way that hindered
it, which let being removed their purposes (soon after) took effect, fitly
therefore is this generation said to rise up (in respect of those whose
successors they, boast themselves to be) The former hold no certain dwelling
places but were exposed to hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, buffetings etc.
But these latter have their Lordly Houses, warrelike Castles, and Prince like
Palaces, they have their rents, revenues, and abundance of riches, in great
excess, they are pompously arrayed in stately robes and rich apparel, they
rule like lords over the people, and have power to afflict all that will not
bear the yoke of their Dominion, thus is this generation risen up and exalted
as all may see that list to mind it.

The place from whence this Beast is said to rise up, is the sea. The Natural
Sea we know is the gathering together of many waters, Genesis 1. 9. 10. A like
thing must that be out of which this Beast was to rise, But in the 17. chapter,
Multitudes, and nations, peoples and Toungs are resembled by waters, therefore
the gathering together of such into one body politic may rightly be resembled
by the Sea. Thus then the truth stands; By the rising up of this beast out
of the Sea was foreshewed, That those many waters (that is the people and
multitudes and Nations and Toungs, not only under the Roman Empire, but most
nations and people of the world) being gathered into one sea or ecclesiastical
State, should breed and bring forth this Monster.

For they being of two contrary sorts, the seed of the Serpent and the seed of
the Woman, children of the kingdom, and children of the wicked, unto the one
sort the word of God (in the administration thereof) is the savor of life unto
life, unto the other sort it is the savor of death unto death, The one sort
fear God and will obey him rather then man, The other fear and reverence the
arm of flesh, more then they do the living God. These (as light and
darkness) being contrary one to another; the one being of Christ, the other of
Belial: how therefore should they in things concerning God and Christ, Faith and
Religion, agree together? Those which be of God, cannot but witness against
those that be of the world, because their deeds are evil. Those which are of
the world, are heady high minded, proud boasters, wise in their own conceit,
and therefore scorn to be rebuked, and hate to be reformed. These being
together in the world as Wheat and Tares in one Field; and as Sheep and goats
in one Flock, the true end of the administration of the word of God had been
to call and separate the one from the other, the precious from the vile,
believers from insidells. But notwithstanding this generation thought it to be
wisdom to take a contrary course, namely to bring all people of all sorts to
be one Church, and likewise unto uniformity in Religion. And because it could
not be effected by the power of the Word of God (that sword of the spirit) they
procured the help of worldly governors to bring it to pass by their power
and command. By which devise and policy these many waters, that is the
Nations and people have been gathered into one Church and eccleasticall body
politic, here represented by the Sea, and have been brought to use all one
order of worship, service and government. But this conformity not being
procured thorough love, but constrained by fear, was but an humane devise and
worldly policy, and no divine Institution, And therefore could not be upholden,
maynteyned and continued by the word of God, and the administration of a
serviceable Ministry; but by the overruling power of a Lordly Prelacie,
whereupon it was thought meet that Synods or Counsels of the chiefest of the
Prelates and Clergy of diverse dominions should be gathered together to make
laws and canons, which all men should be constreyned by penal laws to
observe and yield obedience unto, that so peace and unity might be preserved
and kept amongst them. And in short time it came to pass, that whatsoever
these Synods or Counsels did agree upon and set down, (how false soever,) was
to be held canonical, and those that contradicted the same, were therefore cast
out and condemned as Heretics. This was the manner and the occasion of the
rising of this Beast out of this turbulent Sea. And here by the way observe,
That * Every good giving and perfect gift is from above James 1. 17.
from the father of lights: But this beast is from the Sea beneath not from
above, and therefore not belonging to the kingdom of Christ, but an adversary
and enemy thereof.

Of this Beast it is said, that he had 7. heads, a thing which is monstrous in
nature, And therefore by this was foreshewed that the dominion represented by
this Beast should be a monstrous dominion.

Concerning these heads, let this be considered, That the whole state or
society of the Antichristian Sea, is of two sorts of people, the one sort,
they call the Clergy, the other sort, the Layetie. Of these the Clergy are as
heads and guides to direct and go before, And the Layetie as the body or
rather the tail to follow after. Again by the same policy, their clergy are
sorted into 7. orders or degrees, namely (to speak in their language) 1.
Ianitores seu ostiarij. 2. Lectores, 3. Exorcistae: 4. Acolithi, 5. Subdraconi.
6. Diaconi, 7. sacerdotes. These are the 7. orders of the Antichristian Clergy.
As for Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Arch Bishops, Bishops, Arch deacons etc.
they are titles of dignity, and not of orders. For the Pope is but a Priest
concerning his orders, and when he stands at the Altar and says Mass, he does
that as a Priest, and not as a Pope, and so of all other degrees. This
considered, it way well be said of the Antichristian Sinagogue and State, that
it is as a Monster with 7. heads. As for the Ministers which God has ordained
to be in his Church, they are first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers etc. 1 Cor. 12. 28. etc. See also Romans 12. 6. 7. 8. and Ephesians. 4. 11.
12. 13. And these only were given for the gathering together of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ.
Not some to have a bunch of keys with a charge of the doors of this or that
Temple or Cathedral Church, Another to have a book to read to the people
things which neither he nor they did understand. A third to have a book of
Coniurations or Charms, with charge to read them or say by heart to such as
were distracted of their wits, or possessed with divills, and to put their
hands upon them. A fourth to have a Taper or wax candle with a candlestick to
carry before the priests and deacons in doing their service.

A fifth to receive of the people oblations and offerings, and to deliver them to
the Deacon to carry to the Altar, To read the Epistle and to stand by the
Priest while he was saying the Mass.

A sixth to be the Bishops spy and intelligencer to inform him of such as be
irregular, and observe not their orders, To read the Gospel, attend the priest
at the Altar etc.

A seventh to consecrate the Host as they call it, and then to offer it as a
sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and dead.

These are not they which God has given to be in the Church; But these are
they whereof the Antichristian clergy consists, for whosoever is one of that
clergy, is one of these 7. orders, be he Pope Prelate or else whatsoever, and to
note and foreshewe this point of policy, this Beast which John saw had seven
heads.

If any shall think this to be a vain, frivolous, and strange interpretation
to understand by the 7. heads of the beast, these 7. orders of the Clergy, as
thinking those heads to betoken things of greater note and importance: Let
such consider what account and reckoning is made of such persons as have
received the Sacrament of Orders, and holy tonsure in the kingdom of the
Beast, and they shall find the interpretation not impertinent, but very
agreeable. For a time there was since the writing of this prophecy, * when the
meanest shrimpe that was within these holy orders (as they call them) was held
to be of that dignity, that Vide Council. Matisconen. secundum. Canon. 9. 10.
the chiefest and worthiest secular Judge in a kingdom was held unworthy to
judge or censure them for any trespass or fact, how notorious wicked and
manifest soever, because they had received holy Tonsure, and were thereby
consecrated and set a part unto God, to be his portion and heritage, and to
pray for the people, and therefore were exempted from all secular jurisdiction
and power, such was their dignity accounted to be, and still is where that
kingdom prevayleth and has the dominion: yea, even in this land that quarrel
has cost the King his Crown: as is to be seen in the Historyes of the Reign
of King John, and not his Crown only, but his life also. Now if the meanest
of them be above the dominion of any King or secular Judge, and secular Judges
be the heads of the people, whom God has appointed to bear rule over them,
well may these be said to be as heads in the kingdom of the Beast, wherein
these shavelings are holden to be so holy and high in dignity and degree.

As this Beast which John saw had 7. heads, so likewise it had 10. horns,
whereby was foreshewed that as the kings of the Medes and Persians were showed
and represented to Daniel, by the 2. horns of the Beast which he saw in his
vision, so the kings of many kingdoms should be as guarders and defenders of
the Antichristian kingdom and state. And that this scripture has been
fulfilled to the uttermost by the kings of the Nations, is so manifest, that
none can be ignorant of it, that are of judgment and experience. And it was
just with the Lord to make the Kings of the earth vassels to this Beast,
because they received not the love of the truth, but took pleasure in
unrighteousness; they would not forsake their sins to live godlily,
righteously, and soberly (as all must do that will attain salvation) but they
would live after their lusts, and for their sins they would make satisfaction
by building of Churches and Monasteries, etc. and endowing them with lands,
rents, and other revenewes, by means whereof those which traded like Merchants
in those many waters, the kingdom of the Beast grew rich and wealthy, and
became the great men of the earth.

Furthermore, John says of the Beast, which he saw that it was like a
Leopard, etc. By the resemblance and likeness of a Leopard was signified that
this Beast should be foul and full of spots, as is showed in the 18. Chapter:
Babylon is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of foul spirits, and
the cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. The filthiness of this Beast is
apparent, in that he does by force and Arms compel all sorts of wicked and
ungodly people to be of his society, and refuses none but the godly,
therefore fitly was he thus prefigured.

Secondly, by the quality and disposition of the Leopard was signified that
this generation should be subtle and crafty in getting their prey. They
boast themselves to be the Church and Spouse of Christ; but if it be so,
whence then had they that infinite store and abundance of worldly wealth and
riches wherewith they exceed in deliciousness of living? This was not the
condition of Christ and his Disciples, the Lord himself had not whereon to lay
his head, but in that respect was more destitute then Foxes which have holes,
and then Birds which have nests: his Disciples wanted gold and silver, and had
no certain dwelling place; whence therefore had this generation their lands,
livings, and Lordships? Their Castles, Manors, Houses and Princely Palaces? It
will be said of the donation and gift of Emperors, Kings, and other great
States, and of the charitable devotion of all sorts of people: But how were
people brought to be so full handed to this generation? To bring this about
much slight, craft and nimblenesse of wit was used; first, people were made to
believe, that what they gave to the Church was to the maintenance of the
Ministry of the Gospel, and for the comfort and relief of the poor, and
therefore should be a sacrifice so well pleasing to God, and meritorious, as
that it should receive great reward at his hands, herewith the minds of
religious and devout people were so much moved, that they thought nothing too
much to give to the Church, by means whereof Churches began to grow rich.
Secondly, people were made to believe that the worshipping of Images and
relickes of Saints, and building of Churches, Chapels, Oratories, etc. and
endowing them with Lands, Tenements, Parsonage and Vicarage houses, etc. was an
effectual way to have favor with the Saints, and to procure their prayers and
intercession for them: By these, and such like means this wily and crafty
generation deluded the people, and made themselves rich, and robbed Christ of
his honor, who only is our Advocate to God. And furthermore, they gathered in
heaps of wealth, by Masses, Pilgrimages, Pursse-pennance, Offerings, and such
like Marchandises, wherein their subtilty and craft was prefigured by a
Leopard; a beast subtle by nature, whose property is to lie in wait for her
prey, and slily to catch it as the Cat does the Mouse, and in that respect
does well resemble the Antichristian Clergy, that subtle generation.

But further it is added, that the feet of this Beast were as the feet of a
Bear.

The Leopard is more nimble to catch then the Bear, but the Bear is more
strong and eager to hold fast that which he has seized upon, then is the
Leopard: both these properties this generation has; nimble to catch, and
greedy to hold: they catch by slight, but hold by force, and therefore in
catching resemble the Leopard, but in fast holding the feet of a Bear.

To this it is added, that the mouth of this Beast was as the mouth of a Lion:
And by this another property of the Antichristian Clergy was foreshewed: for
as the Lion when he has taken his prey roareth upon it, at whose roaring the
beasts tremble: So this Generation being thus exalted and made rich, and having
gotten their prey, they terrify the small Beasts of their Forest, roaring
with curses and excommunications against any, be he Prince or Pesant, that
shall presume to part stakes with them, or meddle with their prey, or diminish
their portion but an Egg or an Onion. That these be the properties of this
Generation needs no proof, it is manifest by daily experience.

Here therefore we may learn what to esteem and judge of the Antichristian
Clergy, together with those Multitudes, People, Nations and Tongues, out of
which they have sprung, and over which they are set and supported; namely, that
they are a monstrous and beastly generation, excelling in craft, covetousness,
pride, cruelty, and all iniquity; and therefore not to be esteemed, as they
boast themselves to be a holy Catholic Church, and Spouse of Christ which
cannot err, etc. And by this we may see how lamentably the Nations have been
deluded and led into error and ungodliness by their Guides and Leaders.

Now it follows, that unto this Monster the Dragon gave his power, and his
Throne, and great authority.

Here is declared of whom the Prelates and Clergy have received their
spiritual Lordships, power, authority and jurisdiction, to devise and make
spiritual Laws and Canons, to erect spiritual Courts, and create Officers to
bear rule and exercise dominion over the Nations, even from the devil: they
have not any lawful authority from God, but an usurped authority from the
devil, whose instruments they are to advance his kingdom, and to persecute
the Saints, which obey God rather then men.

And here we may observe that they are rightly called spiritual Lords,
because originally they proceed from that Prince that rules in the air, the
spirit that works in the children of unbelief: but withal, in stead of
spiritual Lords, Laws, Courts and Officers, call them spiritual
wickednesses, and so we give them their right title: and being such, if we
will fight the good fight of faith, we must by witnessing what they be,
wrestle against them, and not submit unto them, but stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and not be entangled with any yoke of
bondage: and that we may wrestle and prevail, we must take unto us the whole
Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.

Further John says, that he saw one of the heads of the Beast as it were Ver.
3.
wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered
after the Beast.

By this Head, which was as it were wounded to death, was signified the
reviving of Priesthood, the mystery whereof, in few words, is this. The
workers of iniquity in this Antichristian Kingdom, having ordained this order
of ministry called Priesthood (whether it were in imitation of the Jews or
Heathen it is doubtful) but certain it is, that because it wanted external
sacrifices, it came short both of the Jewish Priesthood, and also of the
Heathen, so that it was a lame and wounded Priesthood, and was not respected.
In time it came to pass that they found out a sacrifice (as is to be seen in
their Masse-booke) which was the transubstantiating of bread and wine, into the
very Body and Blood of Christ, really and substantially (as they use to speak
and teach) and being so transubstantiated to offer it up unto God a sacrifice
propitiatory both for quick and dead. Thus the wounded head of Priesthood was
cured and revived, and so became the worlds wonder, as now it follows to be
declared, according as John here witnesses:

And all the world wondered after the Beast. That is, The people of the Nations
having this Priesthood set over them, and commended unto them to be of such
power and dignity, as that they could make them a visible God, not only to
behold with their eyes, and look upon, but also to eat, and that their maker
and redeemer to their everlasting salvation: And being so effectually deluded
as that they believed these lies, hereupon they wondered and followed the Beast.
Well might they wonder to see bread, and taste bread, where was no bread, and
to see wine, and taste wine, where was no wine (for so were they made to
believe) and to eat flesh, and drink blood, and yet neither to see nor taste
flesh nor blood: this was a wonder to wonder at; and who would not follow him
for a guide that had power to work such wonders?

But they did not only follow the Beast, as the Jews did Christ when they saw
his miracles, But they worshipped the Dragon which gave Ver. 4.
power unto the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, saying who is like unto
the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? To worship, is to hear and
obey, and by worshipping the Dragon was showed, that they wholly addicted
themselves to be directed and ruled by the Beast whom the Dragon used as his
instrument to work his will, and to whom he had given authority and power to
that end: thus orginally they worshipped the devil. Secondly, they worshipped
the Beast, as being the instrument of the devil, and they became subjects in
all things obedient unto the Beast, as being of such holiness and truth as
that it could not err, nor deceive others, and of such power as what they
loosed on earth was loosed in heaven, and what they bound in earth was bound in
heaven, and therefore such a power as had no match or peer, so that they
boasted, and said of it, Who is like unto the Beast? As David considering the
power, Psalm. 71. 77.
and wonderful works of God, says; Who is like unto the Lord? So do the
Nations boast of this Beast, saying; Who is like unto the Beast? And further
they said of him, Who is able to make war with him? As if they should say,
This our holy Mother has power to excommunicate, and deliver to Satan, all (of
what estate condition, and degree, soever they be) that will not hear her
voice, bear her yoke, and be ruled by her: Who therefore is able to make war
with her? that is, make his party good against this our holy Mother. Of such
admiration was this Beast in the earth; thus has the world thought, and spoken
of her.

And moreover, there was given unto this Beast a mouth speaking great things
and blasphemies, and power was given him to make 42. months. Ver. 5.


As the mouth is the means and instrument whereby men do declare their minds,
so this Beast had a mouth to declare and utter her mind; by which mouth was
signified a Ministry of false Prophets, and lying Spirits, namely, Doctors,
Schoolmen, Monks, Frvars, and all sorts of their Preachers, who teach for
doctrines the commandments of the Beast, and declare and utter the mind and
will of the Beast as being equal to Gods Word, this their Canons, Laws, Books
and Monuments, do manifestly witness: The effect of that which this mouth
utters is noted to be, great things, and blasphemies. They boast of this
Beast that she is the holy Catholic Church Militant, the Mother of all true
believers, the chaste Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and ground of Truth, that it
cannot err, etc. And that all which will have God to be their Father, must
have her to be their Mother; Finally, that out of her lap and communion there
is no salvation. These, and many other such great things speaks the mouth of
this Beast, which are indeed great things, and being so spoken are great
blasphemies: For is it not great blasphemy to call that Holy, which is most
abominable? To call her the Mother of all true Believers, which is the Mother
of fornications, and of all abominations? To call that the Pillar and ground of
Truth, which has corrupted the earth with her errors and fornications and
caused all Nations to drink of the wine of the wrath thereof? To say there is
no salvation but in her followship whose end and judgment is to go to
destruction? Beware of false Prophets, and teachers of lies, for such are the
mouth of this Beast.

And it is further to be minded, that it is said of this Beast, that the mouth
which she had was given her; for had this Beast no more to maintain this
mouth, then she has of her own by descent and heritage, she could not have so
many to speak for her as she has: But Emperors and Kings, Princes and Nobles,
and other great sinners became benefactors to this Beast, giving unto her Lands
and Tenements, rents and revenewes to maintain this mouth to utter great
things and blasphemies, and more then this, Power was given him to act, or make
two and forty months.

For the better understanding of this point, let this be considered: In the
Antichristian Kingdom they have a rule how to proceed in every cause, but not
given them of God, but of their own making, which they commonly call the Canon
Law, concerning which Law here we may learn by whom it was made, and how
long it was in making. These makers usurp the name of the Church of Christ, but
the true Church is the Kingdom of Christ, and being the Kingdom of Christ it
has him only for lawgiver, they therefore which under the title of the Church
presume to make laws, are fitly and worthily resembled by a Beast: For what is
more unreasonable then for those whose greatest dignity, glory and happiness,
consists in hearing, obeying, and administering of Gods Word, to fall from
this, and Lucifer-like to exalt and oppose themselves against their Maker, as
though they were vviser and iuster then God; and to add unto his Testament
which is sufficient to instruct us in all wisdom, and to make the man of
God perfect in every good work; and to take from the same 2. Tim. 3. 17.
Testament at their pleasure, which is not lawful to do to any man's
testament, without great offense and injustice, as the Apostle shows, Gal.
3. 15. yet this is the way wherein those great doers, the authors of the Canon
Law have vvalked. It is said of those Actors, that Power was given them, etc.
Where first we may observe, that of themselves they had not this power, for
then it could not have been said to be given them, but given them it was; it is
therefore to be considered who was the giver. Not Christ, he gave his
Disciples no power to make laws, but gave them charge to teach believers to
observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, it is certain therefore
that this power was given them, not by God but by men; namely, by Kings and
Princes, for the states and degrees of men considered, it is plain, that none
can give power to make laws but such as be Sovereigns; by such therefore this
power to make laws was given unto this Beast. But what should move
Sovereigns to give power to Bishops and Ministers to make laws for the
Church? Nothing verily but blind devotion; for they being ignorant of God, and
of his Word, thought it the best way to keep peace and unity in the Church,
vvheras indeed it was the cause of strife and dissension, and at length by
that means iniquity was established for a law, and Gods Word wholy rejected
and cast aside as unmeet for Laymen to use. Now as in all lavvfull
proceedings, Princes are Gods ministers, in Gods stead unto their subjects and
people, so in giving this power to this Beast, they are the Dragons ministers,
and instruments. Whereas it is said that power was give^ unto the Beast to make,
but it is not noted what should be made, it argues that the things made are of
that nature and quality that they are not worthy of any name, the makers
themselves use to call their Acts, Canons, Constitutions and Laws, but falsely;
for if they were such indeed, then men might have some good use of them, but
that no man can have, therefore it is but falsehood and deceit so to name them:
It is like the calling of one carved Image, S. Peter, another S. Paul, another
S. John, etc. that is to name things that which they be not, and that is to lie.

In that it is said, that power was given unto the Beast to make 42. Months,
It shows that the beasts time is limited. And seeing that the time is limited,
we must find that the time of making of the Catholic church agrees with this
stint, before we can be sure that it is the Beast, here represented, wherefore
consider that the ecclesiastical state began to make about the year of our
Lord, 304. (the Ancyran counsel being the first, whose constitutions took the
effect and force of law,) And made not an end of making until the year 1564.
the Counsel of Trent being the last wherein the beast acted the last act of
this making, and fulfilled the measure of that iniquity, and therefore is now
to receive judgment and condemnation from the Lord, as is hereafter in this
prophecy declared. So that if we account a year for a day, and thirty days
for a month, it will amount to 1260. days, which is the just some of 42.
months, that this beast was a making, which is a strong argument, that by this
beast was signified the ecclesiastical estate, or Catholic church, as is
showed before page 1.

Further it is said of this Beast, that he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven.

In that this Beast, by the ministry of false Prophets and Teachers, as by
her mouth has seduced the Nations, and made them believe, That God by the
Ministry of his holy Apostles and Prophets, has not left us a sure and
sufficient rule of faith, in the holy Scriptures, but that the want thereof must
be supplied with unwritten verities, the writings of ancient fathers,
determinations of counsels, and the Popes decretals, otherweise all people
would run into confusion, it may truly be said, that she has opened her
mouth unto blasphemy against God. First it makes the eternal who has
created all things, and for whose wills sake all things are and were created,
To be but a rude and gross beginner of a work, which he has left and given up
for vain man to finish and make perfect. Secondly if there be particular laws
left out of the Scriptures, for want of which all people would run into
confusion, then God has not showed himself to be a God of order. Thirdly the
word of God is not sufficient to make the man of God perfect, in every good
work, as the Apostles says. But thus to think, is a horrible error, Thus to
speak, is wicked blasphemy, and thus to teach, is hellish iniquity. For how
will it stand with the glory of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to give
unto his people a perfect Law and sure Testimony, whereunto they might trust,
and wherein they might rest and live by faith, but must depend upon other men,
to see as it were with their eyes, and not with their own, and so to hold
their faith in respect of other men's persons, to believe as they believe etc,
as though Gods people (their leaders excepted) were not reasonable creatures,
but as beasts without understanding: But blessed be our God, we have a sure
word of the Prophets, which is as a light shining in a dark place, whereunto we
shall do well if we take heed. Gods people have no need of unwritten verities,
men's precepts and traditions; They have surer lights to walk by then the
writings of the School men, and other writers of ancient times; They have
surer Rules and righter Testimonies, whereby to decide and end controversies and
doubts, then the determinations of counsels, and Popes decrees, and they which
speak to the contrary, open their mouth to blaspheme against God. Concerning
blaspheming the name of God, amongst other attributes or titles whereby he is
set forth unto us, he is called the Holy one of Israel, and the high Priest in
Israel did bear this inscription upon his forehead graven in gold, Holiness
to the Lord. First therefore we may truly and boldly say of the Lord, that Holy
is his name, Secondly we may likewise truly and boldly affirm, that to give
the title of Holiness unto any unholy profane and abominable thing, is to
blaspheme the name of God: But thus the Beast has done many and sundry ways.
They ascribe Holiness unto their Antichristian orders, and preisthood, to their
Idolatrous Mass, to their exorcised or conjured Bread, Water, Oil, Tapers,
Ashes, Vestures, Vessels, and many other implements in and by all which they
blaspheme the name of God.

And as they blaspheme the name of God; So likewise they blaspheme his
Tabernacle, That is to say, the true visible Church of Christ under the Gospel,
which is the place of Gods presence, which he has chosen to put his name
there, Math. 18.
where two or three or more are gathered together in the name of Christ, there
is Christ present, and where Christ is present there has God put his name,
there he is to be sought; and there he may be found, and there is his
Tabernacle. To come together in the name of Christ, is when Gods people join
themselves together in a spiritual body politic, separated from the common
multitudes of known unbeleevers, to the end to meet together for the mutual
edification and comfort one of another, by doctrine, breaking of bread and
prayer, and to practice all other Ordinances of Christ set down in his
Testament, as they shall have occasion: and to companies of Believers, having
such fellowship and communion one with another, the title of the Churches of
Christ does (in our use of speech) properly and of right belong: but for
believers to do this apart by themselves is adjudged contempt of authority,
factious, novelty, making of Conventicles and unlawful Assemblies, dangerous
to the State, and not to be suffered in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, and so
they blaspheme the Tabernacle of God in a high degree, as if Gods people were a
company of ungodly rebels, and wicked conspirators; but the righteous Lord will
in due time visit his people, and rebuke his enemies.

And on the other side, for Gods people now to deny the kingdom of the Beast;
that is, (as they call it) the holy Catholic church Militant, to be the true
Church of Christ: To refuse to partake and communicate with them in their
abominations, delusions, and unfruitful works of darkness, is adjudged
disobedience, schism and contempt of the power and authority of the Church:
To speak against their proceedings, sedition, disturbance of the peace of the
Church, heresy, impiety, and what not? Thus they adorn the Harlott, which
corrupts the earth with her fornications, with the title of the Church, and
spouse of Christ, and Tabernacle of God, And so blaspheme the Tabernacle of
God, as if it were not a communion of Saints by calling and profession, but an
habitation of Devils, an hold of Foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean
and hateful bird.

Further it is said of the Beast, that it did blaspheme those that dwelt in
heaven, that is the Saints departed this life.

Those that dwell in heaven, are then blasphemed when it is said of them, that
they take it as honor done unto them, when we make them our Patrones, build
them Temples, set up their images, offer and pray unto them, and make them
Mediators between Christ and us, for by this they are made not only idols,
but also favorers and chief maynteyners of idolatry: They are also blasphemed
when the doctrine which they taught and practiced is condemned for heresy, or
when erroneous doctrines, vain traditions, superstitious rites, ceremonies and
customs are fathered upon them as received from them by Tradition, as
unwritten verities, but the world has been brought to believe that Saints in
heaven might by these means be as it were bought and fold, between Priest
and people, wherein they have been highly blasphemed.

Moreover it is said, that it was given to the Beast to make war with the
Ver. 7.
Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all Kindreds, and
Tongues and Nations.

War is made with the Saints when they are accused to Rulers and Governors
to be Heretics, Schismatics, wicked and ungodly persons; and they may then be
said to be overcome, when their accusers are justified and they condemned,
according to this, this Scripture has been fulfilled and verified. Great and
of long continuance have been the wars which the Beast has made with the
Saints, and many have been the victories of this kind which the Beast has had
against them: as the Histories, and other records of the Nations do plentifully
witness. It was given to the Beast to make war with the Saints, when Rulers
and Governors gave way to the Beast to devise and make laws at their own
pleasure, concerning Religion and the worship of God, and then to condemn for
delinquents and evil doers all that would not observe those laws. How free
and forward Rulers and Governors have been to give such power unto the Beast,
they themselves have felt by long and woeful experience: for much woe has the
Beast wrought (not to the poor and meaner sort of the Saints only, but) even
to Emperors and Kings and all degrees of people, and therefore it is said in
the words following, that power was given unto this Beast over every Kindred,
Tongue and Nation: So that the exaltation thereof was such, as to be as a
father above all fathers to every Kindred; a Lord above all Lords to every
Tongue; a King above all Kings to every Nation. Thus was this Beast exalted,
and sat as a Queen triumphing over them, having all of all degrees brought in
bondage unto her dominion, which was a just recompense upon their heads that
gave such power unto this Beast: yet see how the world was herein deluded, they
were not as captives against their wills, but in blind devotion, had this
Beast in most high reverence, as being a Divine Power, ordained and given by
God, and not from the Dragon. Thus did the Lord give them over to be deluded
by this Beast, as a just reward of their ungodliness, in that they received
not the love of the truth, but took pleasure in unrighteousness.

Further it is declared in the words following, That all that dwelt upon Ver. 8.
the earth shall worship him (that is the Beast) whose names are not written in
the Book of the life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.

By those that dwell on the earth is meant those that have set their habitation
there, and choose rather to enjoy the prosperity of the world and the
pleasures of sin, together with the Beast, then to suffer affliction for the
truth, and for witnessing against the Beast: These are they that worship him,
that is, receive their precepts and rules, for doctrine and wholesome
instruction, and observe their ordinances and laws as perfect rules of equity
and righteousness, casting the Word of God, declared in the holy Scriptures,
behind their backs, and treading his Ordinances under their feet, making
far more conscience not to eat an Egg on a Friday, then to steal, or
commit adultery. But of such it is said, that their names are not written in
the Book of life of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world:
That is, they are not of the number of Gods Elect and Chosen in Christ, and
given unto him for his portion and heritage, whose condition is to be hated,
despised, persecuted, and afflicted in the world, for righteousness sake; in
whom the Lamb Christ Jesus, as in his members has been slain since the
beginning of the world: which condition, those which cannot brook and endure,
but count it a pleasure to live deliciously for a season, and take delight to
enjoy the pleasures of sin, may thereby be discerned, not to have their
names written in the Book of Life.

Concerning these things it is added, If any man have an ear let him hear.
Ver. 9.


As if it should be said, few there be which have an ear to hear these
things: For who can endure to hear that Catholic Church, which they account
to be spiritual, holy, and heavenly, to be compared to a Beast, ugly in
form, and horrible and monstrous in nature? Who can endure to hear that
Power, that Throne, and that authority which they believe to be of God, to be
said and affirmed to be of the Dragon that old Serpent the Devil and Satan?
Who will believe that a righteous God would give way to his enemies, the
workers of iniquity, so far to prevail, and so long time, as for many
hundred years together, to delude the Nations, to bring them into bondage, and
to keep them in slaverie? And that a few poor despised people of no reckoning
in the world, here one, and there another, should see more, and be wiser then
all the great Clarks, wise Counselors, mighty Princes, and all the Nobles of
the earth? Who (I say) has an ear to hear these things, and not be moved to
fret in himself, and to gnash his teeth at the hearing of them?

Yet notwithstanding all this, and more, let him that has an ear hear, for
times and seasons will change; a time will come (as the verse following does
declare) when these great workers of iniquity shall be subdued and trodden
under foot.

He that leads into captivitiae shall go into captivity, he that kills
with Verse. 10.
the sword must be killed with the sword, here is the patience and faith of
the Saints.

Here is showed the justice of God, who will recompense unto the wicked
according to the works of their hands, as they have measured unto others it
shall be measured unto them again; they shall reap the fruit of their
unrighteousness to the full: Therefore the Saints and servants of God should
here learn with patience to bear the Cross, because the Lord will take their
parts, and avenge their blood upon their enemies, and those which with patience
rest upon the Lord, are here recorded for Saints, Here is the patience and
faith of the Saints. As if it were said, those which patiently endure
affliction for the truth, and commit their cause unto God, resting faithfully
upon him, are thereby tried and made manifest to the world, to be the Saints
and Servants of God, that in sure hope of a time of refreshing, choose to endure
captivity and the sword, rather then they will (to have peace with the world)
together with the world worship the Beast.

Thus much concerning the first part of this Chapter, and of that power and
promotion which the Prelates and Clergy crope up unto before the exaltation
and supremacy of the Pope. The mystery of whose iniquity is next to be
considered; To God be glory for ever. Amen.

The second part of the 13. Chapter of the Revelation, beginning at the 11.
Verse.
VERSE 11. And I beheld another Beast coming up out of the earth, and he had
two horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon.
AS in the former part of this Chapter, the Prelacie and Clergy in general,
who under the title of the Catholic Church Militant, exalted themselves to
work iniquity, and bring the Nations into captivity and bondage to their
traditions, were resembled by a sevenheaded Beast: so here, after much striving
amongst themselves who should be the chief and greatest, not being content
with their former riches, honor, and earthly promotion, but aspiring higher,
at last the Prelate of Rome in particular, attained to this title and dignity,
to be Christ's Vicar, Peter's successor, and universal Bishop; and under that
Title pretended a fullness of power and supremacy over all persons and causes,
and therefore is here resembled and fore-shewed by a Beast, etc.

First, whereas it is said of this Beast that it came up out of the earth,
thereby is signified, that the high degree and dignity whereunto the Prelates
of Rome have aspired, and exalted themselves, is not from heaven, it is of the
earth, earthly; it is a plant which our heavenly Father has not planted, and
therefore shall in the end be rooted out.

Concerning the coming up of this Beast, it is to be minded, that the
Ministers of the word of God (of which rank of men this Beast boasts
himself to be the chief) if they were in their right kind should be as the
Stars of heaven, lights and guides unto others: But at the opening of the
Rev. 6. 13.
sixth Seal John saw the Stars fall from heaven to the earth, as a fig tree
casts her green figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind; whereby was
signified, that the Ministers of the word of God would in time degenerate and
go out of kind; they would, contrary to the Apostles rule, set their
affections on earthly things, they would for filthy lucre make Merchandise of
the people and Word of God; they would gather riches, and grow wealthy by the
wages of unrighteousness, and so become the great men of the earth: all which
is fulfilled and come to pass, as all may see that are not wilfully blind.

Among the rest of the fallen Stars, to one was given the key of the
bottomless pit, Rev. 9. 1. whereby was signified that power and pre-eminence
should be given to one of the fallen Stars above the rest: which thing was
effected and came to pass, when Phocas being Emperor he promoted Boniface
then Prelate of Rome to be universal Bishop, and to have power and
jurisdiction over all other Bishops: Which thing when Phocas had done, this
Abaddon King of Locusts, with the rest of the brood of the bottomless pit
that succeeded him, who had the opening and shutting of Purgatory at their
pleasure, so prevailed in time, that they exalted themselves above Emperors
and Kings; which thing they could never have done, had they not first besotted
the Nations in blind devotion to impoverish themselves to feed these Locusts
under the title of the Church, and in hope of meriting thereby, and to be
released from their sins, and from the supposed pains of Purgatory: For had
the Pope, that Prelate of Rome, been as destitute of worldly wealth, and as
well furnished with spiritual grace, as Peter and John were when they went up
into the Temple to pray, Acts 3. 1. 6.
and healed the lame man, he had never set his foot upon the Emperors neck.
For as much therefore as the Romish Prelate from a mean and lowly estate and
degree in the world, has crept up and been exalted above Kings and Emperors:
and seeing worldly wealth and riches have been the means whereby he has got
the pre-eminence, very significantly was this upstart resembled and prefigured,
by a Beast coming up out of the earth.

Again, it is said of this Beast, that it had two Horns like the Lamb: By
Horns in the Scripture is usually signified power and authority, and by the
Lamb is meant Christ Jesus, who had all power in heaven and earth given to him,
Math. 28. 18. So that hereby was showed, that the Prelate of Rome would
challenge and usurp great power and authority which he persuades the world
does belong unto him, as being Christ's Vicar, and under this pretense usurpeth
a twofold power and jurisdiction, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, not in
earth only, but in heaven also; what he binds in earth, is bound in heaven,
and whom he will he can release from the pains of Purgatory, and place them
in heaven: Therefore in token of this his power he is armed with two swords,
which thing was plainly signified by the two Horns which he had like the
Lamb. But though the Beast would be the Lambs equal, and resemble him in
power, yet his voice bewrayes him to be but a counterfeit, and a dissembling
hypocrite: he speaks like the Dragon, he pretends property to that which is
not his own, and exalts himself against those unto whom he should submit and
give honor: Even as the Dragon said of the Kingdoms of the world; All these
are in my power, I give them to whom I will? So likewise says this Luke 4. 6.
Beast his Vicar, the Prelate of Rome: The Empire and Kingdoms of the earth
are in my power, and at my disposition, and to me it belongs to depose and
set up Emperors and Kings at my pleasure, as shall be behoofull for the peace
of the Church. And thus may the Beast in this be known by his voice, likewise
in diverse other particular blasphemous speeches and divelish doctrines.

Further it is said of this Beast, That he exercises all the power of the
first Beast before him, and causes the earth, and them which dwell therein, to
Verse. 12.
worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

In that this Beast is said to exercise, All the power of the first Beast
before him, thereby was signified, That what the first Beast could do by her
motherly authority and power under the usurped title and name of the holy
Church, the same could this Beast do, by the authority and power of his
fatherhood under the title and pretense of Christ's Vicar, Peter's successor,
universal Bishop, etc. But that this Beast may yet further be discerned, it is
said of him, That he caused the earth, and those which dwell therein to worship
the first Beast, etc. By causing the earth to worship the first Beast, was
foreshewed, that the Pope would exact of the earth the tenth part of the fruits
thereof for the maintenance of the holy Church, and this is indeed to worship:
For as the paying of Tithes in the time of the Law was a part of the true
outward worship of God, so this is the worship of the Beast. And further, by
causing the Inhabitants of the earth also to worship the first Beast, was
showed that he would carefully see due homage, service, and obedience to be
yielded and performed to the holy Church: so that though the Prelate of Rome as
a son of perdition, did exalt himself above measure, yet still does he
maintain the power and dignity of the Catholic Church; the estimation of her
Motherhood must still be maintained, her voice must still be heard and obeyed;
not to come when she calls is contumacie and contempt not to be endured; they
that dare so far to despise her authority, as not to obey her Paritors
Process, are by her doom to be accounted cursed children, and worthy of no
less censure and punishment then to be struck with that terrible Thunderbolt
of her Excommunication, the violence whereof is such, as who can endure it? Who
will not rather ride, run, dance attendance, crouch, kneel, pay, pray, or
do any thing else which Master Official or his Register will enjoin them,
then undergo so heavy a burden as the censure of Excommunication? Thus will
the Pope have the magnificence of this Diana to be maintained, The earth and
those which dwell in it must yield unto her the Tithe of all their increase, as
also Mortuaryes, Offerings, and many other Church duties which she requires of
them; for she is a goddess and must be worshipped. And this diminishes the
Popes glory never a jot, the two estates of the Whore and false Prophet, can
well agree and stand together, as father and mother in one family, and
therefore the second Beast, as father of all, will have the first Beast
worshipped, that is, obeyed and maintained in glory, as mother of all. And
further observe, in that the Pope has executed all authority of the Catholic
Church, thereby is confirmed the truth of the exposition, that the first Beast
was the Catholic Church, and the second Beast the Pope, as has been before
observed.

And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from Verse. 13.
heaven on earth in the sight of men.

First, by the wonders which he did, was foreshewed what wonderful things the
Prelate of Rome, that false Prophet should bring to pass, as namely, under the
title of the servant of the servants of God (which indeed all Ministers of the
Word, and other Church Officers ought to be) to creep up and exalt himself
above Emperors and Kings, and all other estates in the earth, which being
considered, is indeed a thing wonderful: for first, the Prelacie and Clergy
in respect of the pretended holiness of their Orders were exempted and freed
from being subject to any secular jurisdicton and power, the meanest of them
might not be produced before any secular ludge, for any crime or offense how
Vide Consilium Matis. Can. 9. 10.
havnous soever, yet unto this Beast, they must be obedient in all things, as
servants to their Lord; upon him they must depend with all observation, as
children upon their fathers: And as for Emperors and Kings, and other worldly
States, it is plain to be seen that though they stand highly upon their
titles and dignities, not to have them empayred, or in any thing diminished,
which is a thing which they will withstand to the shedding of abundance of
blood; yet to be made such vassals to this Beast, as to hold his stirrup, to
lead his horse by the bridle, to kiss his feet, they thought it no
abasement, but an honor: And notwithstanding that very many of that beastly
rank have been notorious wicked men, and abominable livers, yet have they the
craft so to delude and besot all people of all degrees in the world, as to
bring them to believe that the truth is so infallibly annexed to that seat of
the Beast, that it is not possible for him to err in judgment; yea, he made
the world to believe it as an Article of faith, that his determination and
judgment of any controversy or point of doctrine, is a more indifficient and
infallible rule of faith then is the holy Scriptures: That these and the like
gross doctrines are believed and received, are great wonders.

Further, He makes fire to come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of
men; etc.

By fire in this place was fore-shewed the punishment which should be inflicted
on the Saints, which was burning with fire: And in that the fire was said to
come from heaven, thereby was foreshewed, that the Judges of the earth, Who are
Psalm. 82. 6.
called Gods, and their seats as the Throne of God in heaven, should be so
corrupted by the Pope, as that they should believe the Saints and Servants of
God which refused to obey the Pope and his Laws, to be therefore Heretics,
Schismatics, refractarie, rebellious and disobedient persons, and therefore
should condemn them to be burnt to death: This they have done, thinking they
did God therein good service, and that it was the just judgment of God upon
them. Thus he made fire to come down from heaven: For true it is, that the
judgments rightly pronounced by the lawful Magistrates are the judgments of
God, and their punishments, Gods punishments, and therefore it is that
Maigistrates are called Gods: but seeing Magistrates have been thus corrupted
by the Pope, and made to pronounce unrighteous and unjust judgments, we are
to esteem them as the judgments of the Dragon; and yet nevertheless their
authority and power lawful and ordained of God. Thus the Beast deceives them
that dwell on the earth, by means of those Miracles (falsely so called) which
he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, as is showed in the verse
following.

And he deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles
Verse. 14.
which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast.

Those which the Beast deceives are said to dwell on the earth, that is, have
their affections fet upon earthly things, and not upon heavenly, so that they
will not for love of the truth forsake their earthly possessions and pleasures:
these are they which are deceived by these lying wonders of this Beast; but
those that are strangers and pilgrims in this world, whose affections are set
upon heavenly things, and not upon earthly, these are not deceived nor deluded
by him: these making trial of him by Gods word have found him to be a liar and
a deceiver, and believe him not, but taking their lives in their hands, witness
against him to the death, that his power and working is of Satan, and that his
wonders are lies.

And whereas it is said, that he had power to do these miracles in the sight
of the Beast: thereby is confirmed and made manifest that which before is showed
page 23, that this son of perdition, the chief darling of his holy catholic
Mother, is present with her, and in her bosom, and for her sake and in her
behalf exercises his power, she retayning still her former authority without
any diminishing thereof, as is evident unto all that are acquainted with the
acts of that Church. Thus much for the second part of this chapter.

The 3. part of the 13. Chapter of the Revelation: Wherein is foreshewed a third
Beast, which was set up by the commandment of this second Beast the Pope, who
said to them that dwelt on the earth, that they should make an Image to the
Beast which had the wound with a sword and did live.
HEre we may see that the Pope by his commanding power, was the cause of
setting up this Image, and for the better and more clear understanding, what
this Image is; Let us consider a little the pattern whose image and likeness it
bears, namely the first Beast.

The first Beast, as has been showed was the representative body of the
Catholic Church Militant, consisting of the selected Prelacy and Preisthood
of sundry Nations gathered together into one Council, or Synod, with
authority to make laws and canons for the universal Church, to be observed
uniformely of all Nations, under pretense of the insufficiency of the Scripture
for the government of the Church, and the worship of God. In like manner the
Pope (in his wisdom seeing it necessary for the good government, maintenance,
and upholding of his kingdom, and the rooting out of Heretics, and seditious
persons (as they call them,) which daily increased in every Country,) did
ordeyne and command Vide conciliu^ Lateran secundum, Can. 6.
that in every Province there should yearly be held and kept a Provincial
counsel or Synod consisting of the Prelates and diverse other selected persons
which should look to those matters, to which Synod he also gave power to make
laws and ordinances, to which the people should be conformable and obedient:
This is the Image which he caused the dwellers on the earth to make of the
Beast, which had the wound with a sword and did live.

Further it is said, Verse. 15. And power was given him to give life unto the
Image of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and Ver. 15.
cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be
killed.

In this verse we may observe: first, that a gift was given to the Pope to
bestow upon this Image: secondly, what this gift was, viz. to give life or
breath to the Image: thirdly, the end and effects of the gift, which was, that
the Beast should speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Beast
should be killed: As there was given by the Dragon to the first Beast great
power and authority, and also a mouth to speak blasphemies and to make war
with the Saints, in like manner by the same Dragon was this gift given to the
Pope, to give life or breathe to this Image: By life is here meant authority,
which is the life of a Synod, without which it is of no force, and so this
Image should have been no more then a very image or picture, and set up to no
purpose, but the Pope having received it, gave authority to the Image that he
should speak, that is, make and set forth Canons and Laws; for to speak is
so understood: as for example: A King is said to speak to his subjects when he
sets forth his Laws and Proclamations: so this Beast having made Canons and
Decrees, speaks to her vassals and subjects by them. Moreover, the Image
caused that as many as would not worship him should be killed: Here the pride
and cruelty of this Image is set forth, to be answerable to the first Beast,
and therefore rightly is he called her Image: for as the first Beast made wart
with the Saints and overcame them, and all that dwelled on the earth worshipped
him, etc. so whosoever would not worship this Image, that is, hear his voice
and keep his commandments, there was no way for him but death. All the worship
that the Lord requires of his servants, is * That they fear him, walk in all
his ways, love him, and serve him with all their Deu. 10. 12. 13.
hearts, and with all their souls to keep the commandments of the Lord, and
his ordinances. And this is indeed the true worship of God, In like manner this
Image will be worshipped, his laws must be observed and his canons obeyed without
examining and trying of them, be they never so unholy and unjust: They that do
not observe and obey them, be they never so upright and holy men, they shall be
therefore indicted, araigned, judged and condemned to death, as being in their
estimation Heretics, Schismatickes, disobedient and rebellious persons,
contemners of God and of the Church, yea as the filth and ofscowring of the
world, and unworthy of the society of men.

And he causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand and in their foreheads.

This Image challenging worship to be performed unto him, of all people of all
sorts and degrees, according to the authority given him by the Pope, was by
some contradicted and despised, wherefore the Image in policy for the better
trial of those that were his trusty subjects and slaves, ordained: that all
his Ministers should receive a mark, at the receiving whereof, they should
vow and swear to be of his dominion and under his Banner, to fight against
Christ and his Saints. What this mark is, and what is the manner of giving
and receiving of it, is now to be declared.

The For proof of this look no further then in the 36. Canon of the Church of
Eng. made An. 1603.
Prelacye and Clergy being as has been before showed, assembled with authority
to make laws, did ordeyne that every Bishop in his diocese should carefully
observe that none should preach or execute the function of a parish Parson,
Vicar or Curat in any parish, but he that would swear to observe their Laws
and Canons, and thereupon should receive the Letters of Orders of the Bishop of
the Diocese, which Letters of Orders signed and sealed by the Bishop, is the
Mark of the Beast here mentioned, and does testify in the behalf of the
Bearer thereof that he is their sworn servant, under holy orders, either a
Priest, a Deacon, or half Priest etc, and that he is a man found capable and
meet for the cure and charge of souls, and therefore to what parish soever
these tried Lads are sent to do service, upon sight of this Mark they must be
received without any opposition, upon penalty of the Law upon those that shall
refuse them.

Here may be objected, that this Mark is only received by the Clergy, and
not by the people of all sorts, rich and poor, bond and free, according to the
Text. I answer, that all persons which receive these false Priests do likewise
receive, and submit to that authority which sent them, and also the Mark by
which they are sent, as is evident, when a Priest comes to take possession of
a Parish to which he is by the Bishop appointed; he is not received upon his
word, nor because he tolleth the Bell, and puts on the Surplice, and uses
other Ceremonies enjoined him by the Prelate: But, showing the foresaid Mark
of the Beast they receive both him and it, and communicate with him: Thus all,
both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, that receive and submit
unto their appointed Priest, receive a mark in their foreheads, or in their
right hands, by receiving and submitting to him: For as our Savior Christ
says of his Apostles and Ministers, He that receives you receives me, he
that hears you hears me: Luke 10. 16. Joh. 13. 20.
So those that receive, hear, and join in fellowship with these false
Ministers, do hear, receive, and join to the false power which sent them,
and the mark by which they are sent.

Whereas it is said, that they received this mark in their foreheads, or right
hand, thereby was showed that this mark should be an apparent testimony that
they were servants of the Beast, and that they were of that Band which had
joined hands, and made a league to walk in the ways of destruction.

Further it is said, Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell save he that
had the mark of the Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name.

Here are propounded three conditions, and whosoever had not one of them,
thereby to be known to be of that Kingdom, might not buy or sell, or have
any thing to do amongst them. For the better understanding hereof let us
mind, that although these three Beasts in respect of their several power and
jurisdiction did differ one from another, The Catholic Church being the
chief, and the Pope inferior to her, and the Image of the Beast as it were a
servant or handmaid inferior to them both, yet notwithstanding they were one
body, being joined and knit together by the power of the Dragon, and have so
far prevailed over the Nations as that they have brought all, both small and
great, rich and poor, bond and free, to be in subjection to their kingdom,
which bears the name of the holy Catholic Church or Sea of Rome, but the
Holy Ghost calls it Reu. 14. 8.
Babylon the great City: for as the material Babylon was a City which
dwelled Esa. 51. 13.
upon many waters, which caused her to abound in riches and treasure: so this
mystical Babylon, this great City of Rome, I mean the Ecclesiastical State,
is said also to sit upon many waters, which the Holy Ghost expounds to be
People and Nations, as in the 17. Chapter and 15. verse: The waters on which
the Where sits are Peoples and Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues: And
these waters have been the means of the flowing and increasing of the wealth
and riches of this City, so that their Merchants, that is, the Prelates have
grown rich and become the great men of the earth, by traficking in them; also
the Ship-masters (which are the Parish Priests) and all Ship men and Mariners
(which are the inferior guides, and Ecclesiastical Officers) have gathered
crummes and waxed rich thereby, and therefore at the destruction of this great
City shall stand a far off and howl to see the desolation thereof, and
their own gain taken away, for from thence-forth no man will buy their
commodities any more. Here note, that these foresaid spiritual prrsons are the
sellers, and the Lay People are the buyers, and the wares which are bought and
sold in this kingdom are all called spiritual, as pardons for sin, and
indulgences of diverse sorts, which is a special commodity, and brings in
abundance of treasure; also their Pistling, Gospeling, Canting, Homeling,
Massing, which must be maintained with the Tithes, or Tenth of all things,
which they usually call the maintenance of the Ministry; also the Sacrifices
(unacceptable to God and well-pleasing to the devil) which are daily offered
at their Altars, and at diverse Images of Saints; also the body of their Maker
and Savior: besides Marrying, Baptizing of children, Churching of women,
Houseling the sick; burying the dead, these, and many such like, are the
spiritual wares sold in this kingdom which have particular prizes set on them:
Now so it is, that these wares are privileged that none may either buy or sell
them save he that has the mark of the Beast, or the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name. What the Mark of the Beast is, has been before showed:
Secondly, the name of the Beast is to be considered, For the manifestation
whereof let us consider and mind, that those which did preach and profess
Christ and his doctrine, are said to have and to bear his name. The Lord
Christ Jesus said unto Ananias in a Vision concerning Paul, That he was a
chosen Vessel to Acts 9. 15.
bear his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel: By
the name of the Lord, here was meant that Paul should preach the doctrine of
Christ, and those that believed by his Preaching were said to believe in the
name of Christ, and were therefore baptized into his name, and called
Christians: Acts 11. 26.
The Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch. Also the disciples and
followers of Christ are said to have the Lambs Fathers name written in their
forehead: According to this is the meaning of the name of this Beast, which the
Holy Ghost sets down in a mystery in the 17. chapter and 5. verse, Babylon
the great, the mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth: But the
Papists call it, not Babylon the great, but the great universal or Catholic
Church; not the mother of Harlots, but the mother of all true Believers; not
the mother of all abominations of the earth, but the Pillar and ground of
Truth, that cannot err: This is the difference betwixt the name which God
gives them, and which they take and attribute unto themselves: But let them
speak the best of themselves, and let us consider and answer them in their own
language, they call themselves the Catholic Church, and their professed
vassals and subjects are therefore called Catholics, and whatsoever they be,
that do either preach or profess the Catholic faith, that is, believe as this
Catholic Church believes, that it is mother of all true Believers, that it
cannot err, etc. they are Catholics, such persons wheresoever they live, if
they thus believe (although they never received the mark of the Beast, nor can
receive it) yet this profession is enough to entitle them in the right of
buying or selling these foresaid wares, such persons have the name of the
Beast, and therefore they may buy pardons of the forgiveness of part or all
their sins, and use any of these things which they suppose necessary for
their souls health (but indeed destruction) yea, after their death they may,
for a sum of money given to the foresaid Merchants by their charitable
successors, be released out of Purgatory: thus, by their own description we
have found out the name of the Beast, and who they are that have received it.

The third condition is the number of his name, as the Beast had one general
name (which the Catholic Church) whereby he was known from all other States
and Kingdoms in the world, so it has a number of names belonging to the
particular parts and members thereof to distinguish one from another, as in the
17. Chap. and third verse, The Beast was full of names of blasphemy. As the
true Church, which is that body whereof Christ Jesus only is the Head, is
complete and furnished, when it is coupled and knit together by every joint
and member which Christ Jesus has given for the furniture thereof; namely,
Apostles, Prophets, 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. 11.
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers: So this false Church being furnished with
those parts and members which that great red Dragon has invented and set up
under the title of Ministers of Christ, to work upon the children of
disobedience, namely, the Pope, Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, Abbots, Priors, Prebends, Canons, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Registers, Doctors, with the rest of the selected Synod or
Council: so (I say) this Church or Beast, being furnished with these his parts
and members, is an entire body, and these members are the full number of his
name; that is, they are the number of whom the Catholic Church consists, and
from them all inferior power and offices of Ministry, as Monks, Friars,
Parsons, Vicars, Curats and Jesuits are derived. This I understand to be the
number of his name, and this exposition agrees with that in the verse
following, where it is said, let him that has understanding count the Number
of the Beast. By the number of the Beast what can be understood but the Number
of the particular parts whereof he consists? And where it is said, For it is
the number of a man: What can be understood but that it bears the
resemblance and likeness of a man? as follows to be declared. Thus we see
who may buy and sell in this Kingdom, and who may not.

Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the
Verse. 18.
Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.

Here is showed, first, what is required in searching out this mystery, and
that is wisdom and understanding, not such as is from beneath, but from above,
which comes down from the Father of lights, from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, he it is that gives wisdom to the simple, and the
understanding of his secrets to those that fear him, which should teach those
that desire to know the Mysteries of his will to labor to be such as to whom
he has promised to reveal them, then, whatsoever we ask we shall receive of
him, for to such he gives liberally and upbraideth not.

Secondly, here is showed a direction how to employ a man's wisdom in finding
out this Mystery, and that is by counting or reckoning the number of this
Beast.

Thirdly, a reason why the number of the Beast is to be counted, Because it is
the number of a man; that is, it agrees with and is answerable to the parts of
a man, and so is the more easily to be found: for as we know the true Church
of Christ is compared in the Scriptures to the natural body of a man, as in 1.
Cor. 12. 12. For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members
of that one body being many are one body, so also is Christ Jesus: And in the
27. verse, the Apostle speaking of the church of Corinth, he says: Ye are
the body of Christ and members in particular, etc. So in the Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
Christ is given to be head over all things, to the Church which is his Body.
Thus as the true Church is called and compared to a body; so the catholics
affirm that they only are that church and that body, and that the particular
parts and members of their church are the full number thereof. Now whereas they
say they are the church, let us say they are the Beast; and whereas they say,
their particular parts and members make up the number of the Church, let us say
their particular parts and members make up the number of the Beast, and so we
find the true interpretation of this Scripture.

Further, here is set down the number of the Beast, which is 666. By this
number I do not understand any set number, and that the parts and members of
the Beast are no more nor less, but thereby I understand is meant a full and
complete number, as before was showed. As all the parts and members of a man
joined together make a whole perfect man, so do the particular parts and
members of the Beast make a perfect and entire Beast. Thus briefly, according
to the ability which God has given me, I have gone over this chapter, wherein
is briefly set forth the workers of iniquity which have, and yet still do
prevail over Gods people, under the title of Ministers of the Gospel and
Church of Christ, as they were represented under the form of three several
Beasts: The first Beast representing the General Counsels, or (as the Papists
call it) the Catholic Church. The second Beast representing the Pope. And the
third Beast the Provincial Councels which were established by the Pope.

The which three Beasts bearing rule and dominion in these times whereinto we
are fallen, and being enemies and opposers of Christ and his Kingdom, it does
behooue us to know them, to end that we may eschew them and their evil ways,
and seek after the truth, making straight steps unto the Kingdom of God.

Now that we our selves may make particular use hereof, it is necessary for us
to examine the National Synod, or Convocation, confisting of the Prelacy and
clergy of this Land, who whilst they remained under the yoke and bondage of
the church of Rome, and whilst they exercised their power which was first given
them by the Pope, for, and in the behalf of that church and dominion, they
were they very Image of the first Beast before mentioned: But being now
separated from the Pope, and Church of Rome, they think (as it should seem)
that their spiritual Pontifical power and authority which they exercise is
lawful and warrantable, and to be submitted unto: They being gathered
together boast themselves to be the representative body of the Church of
England, and the true Church of Christ, and that they have power to make Laws
and Canons for government thereof, and for the worship of God, which all men
ought to yield obedience unto, as appears by diverse of their books of Canons.

But we are not to take this upon their word, but to make trial thereof by
the word of God, whether it be true or false. If the word of God did give them
such power and authority, then indeed we were bound in conscience to yield all
ready obedience to their Laws and Canons: But the most wise God and disposer
of all things, who knows the vanity of men's minds, would not have his people
to hold their faith in respect of men's persons, and at their pleasure to alter
and change the same, and therefore did not give to any of his Ministers power
to make Laws in matters of Religion and for the worship of God, but gave them
power only to teach the Nations to observe the things which he had commanded
them, as in the eight and twentieth chapter of Matthew, the nineteenth and
twentieth verses. And the Apostle Paul bids the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. 1.
to be followers of him as he followed Christ: And in the same Chapter he
also says, That which he had received of the Lord, he delivered unto them.
Acts 15.
Also the Assembly of the Apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, they
would not impose any yoke of bondage upon the Churches of Christ, but held it
to be a tempting of God so to do, as before has been showed: And this agrees
with that in Deutr. 12. 32. Whatsoever I command you take heed you do it; Thou
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom: By which Scriptures it is
plain, that the chiefest Ministers of the Gospel had no such power as these
Prelates presume to have, as we shall find by examining their particular
Canons and Constitutions, of which, for examples, I will only note some few of
their late and best reformed Book, made An. 1603. in the first year of the
Kings Majesty's reign, by which it will be apparent that they pass the bounds
of the subjects of Christ, and that they have no power from him to make such
laws; but by so doing they usurp the place of God to reign in men's
consciences, for unto him only it does belong to make Laws in matters of
Religion and for the worship of God, to which, men are only bound to yield
obedience, without adding, or detracting, and that for this their presumption
they are liable to the curse of God, being indeed the Image of the Beast here
spoken of, that is originally sprung from the Dragon, and has received power
of Law-making from him. Concerning the first and second Canons wherein they
pretend their zeal for the abolishing of all foreign power repugnant to the
jurisdiction of the Kings Majesty over the Ecclesiastical estate, he being
the highest power under God to whom all men owe most loyal obedience; and that
his Majesty has the like authority in Causes Ecclesiastical as the godly
Kings had amongst the Jews. To these I do^ most willingly assent and agree:
And further do desire, that (as the Pope) so the Prelacie with all their
Antichristian Adherents which usurp spiritual power and superiority, above the
Majesty of Christ Jesus, being a strange and foreign generation, brought in
and established in this Land by the Pope of Rome, may also be abolished and
cast out after him: for by them the Pope lives in hope hereafter to be served,
as he has been heretofore, to the great vexation of the Kings and Princes of
this Land, yea to the loss of their Crown and lives.

But to be short, I will proceed to mention some few of their canons, whereby
iniquity is established for a Law, and their beastliness discovered. In the
third canon it is enacted, that whosoever shall affirm the Church of England,
by Law established, not to be a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and
maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles, that person shall be excommunicated,
ipso facto. That there are some, yea many doctrines of the Apostles maintained
in the Church of England, I do not deny, so there are in the Church of Rome:
But that the Ecclesiastical state, or spiritual body politic, which is
called the Church of England, which consists of Arch bishops, Diocesan Lord
Bishops, Suffragans, Deanes, Archdeacons, Prehends, Canons, Chancellors,
Commissaries, with the rest of the Clergy, as heads and guides of that body to
go before, and the whole multitude of the Layitie (as they call it) which is as
the Tail to follow those Heads, that this political Body is the Spouse and
church of Christ, as they affirm in their seventh, eigth, and ninth canons,
that I do deny: For first, if it were true, that they are the Ministers of
Christ and members of the Body of Christ which is his Church, we should find
warrant for them in his Testament, wherein is set down the Ministers which he
has set in the Church; namely, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and 1.
Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Teachers, and also their office and administration: But in all the new
Testament, no Archbishops nor Lord-bishops, no Deanes nor Archdeacons,
Prebends, Priests nor canons, no chancellors nor commissaries, and other their
court officers, nor any such administration as they challenge and execute, can
there be found, they are a strange generation that is risen up out of the
earth, for earthly-minded and vain men have invented them, and therefore the
body which consists of them cannot of right be acknowledged to be the Body of
Christ, whose Ministers in respect that they are called according to the
commandment of Christ, are from heaven: But it is indeed the Image of the
first Beast, whose mouth was as the mouth of a Lion, his body like a Leopard,
and his feet as the feet of a Bear, an ougly compounded and deformed
monster. And as their names are strange, and different from the Ministers of
Christ, so is their practice contrary: they are not servants to the Flock and
Church of Christ, and helpers of their joy, but they are authors of their woe,
challenging and exercising Lordship and dominion over their faith; for in stead
of a due administration of the word of God, they have mingled a cup of
fornication for the people to drink, that is, devised a form of
booke-worship, with orders, rites and ceremonies, which they have imposed on
the people under the title of Divine Service, and which they must observe
without adding thereto, or taking any thing from it, as in the 4. 6. 7. 8. and
14. canons.

Further they are not painful preachers, but lazy Lords, they are not
followers of Christ and of his word, but are contemners thereof, casting it
behind their backs, and will not be reformed, nor ruled by it, they are
Lawmakers much like Nebuchadnezar, for as he would destroy all that would not
worship his golden Image; So whosoever does refuse to yield obedience to their
Laws, shall be most severely punished, as is plain by diverse penalties annexed
unto their Cannons.

In consecrating and ordeyning Priests, they are like to Jeroboam, for as he
consecrated whom he would of the basest of the people, to be the Priests of
the high places which he had set up; so do they ordeyne for the most part
ignorant fellows to be their parish priests and inferior Ministers: wherein
though they do most absurdly, yet will they not be contradicted, as we may see
by the 57. Canon, where it is said whosoever shall refuse to comunicate with a
dumb and unpreaching Minister, Let him be excommunicated. And although their
own Doctors complain and cry out against it, yet they will not amend: amongst
the rest it is worthy to be observed what their own great Champion profound
Mr. Hooper says, viz. That both Arguments from light of nature, Laws and
Statutes of scripture, the Canons that are taken out of ancient Synodes, the
decrees and constitutions of sincerest times, the sentences of all antiquitte,
and in a word every man's consent and conscience, is against ignorance in them
that have the cure and charge of souls. If it be so, how unreasonable and
beastly is it for the Prelates to ordeyne allow and approve of such for the
Ministers of Christ, of which there are many hundreds in the land, whom the
Prelates are not ashamed to forbid to expound the Scriptures, as in the 49.
Canon, where it is said, that some of their parish priests shall not take upon
them to expound in their cure or elsewhere, any Scripture, or matter, or
doctrine, but shall only study to read etc. It is greatly to be wondered at,
that so many grave heads as were gathered together and sat consulting about
these matters, should breed and bring forth such absurd and impious Canons. If
there were nothing else, this allowance of dumb Ministers, is sufficient to
show the vanity of their minds and the darkness of their foolish hearts: So
that we may truly say of them, that when they professed themselves to be most
wise, by exalting and making themselves equal with God, in making laws for
the government of his house the Church, even then they became most foolish and
void of judgment.

As for the best sort of their parish Priests which are men of learing and
gifts, they must also be confined within their limitts, they must worship God
according to the rules prescribed them by these their spiritual Fathers, as in
the 38. Canon. If any minister shall omit to use the form of Prayer, or any
of the orders or Ceremonies prescribed in the Communion Book, let him be
suspended, and if he do not conform within the space of a moves, let him be
deposed. The absurdities and blasphemies contained in that Common prayer Book
are many, which having been discovered and laid open by diverse treatises
already published in print, I will omit, only this I will add, that in the
imposing of that service Book, or any other, this great iniquity is committed
by the imposers thereof; That they do exalt themselves both against Christ, who
is ascended into heaven Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12.
and has given gifts to his Ministers, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the Church
his body, and also they exalt themselves against the holy Ghost, who only has
power Romans 8. 26.
to help our infirmities, and to furnish men with gifts to worship God aright.
Further their preachers may not teach against their corrupt Church state and
Ministry, though they know it to be Antichristian, nor against the form of
worship prescribed in the said common prayer Book, nor against the ceremonies,
nor the government of the church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same, nor against the manner
and form of making and consecrating Bishops Priests or Deacons, nor against
the Laws and Ordinances Ecclesiastical established in the said Church,
whosoever transgresses in these things, shall be excommunicated ipso facto, as
is plain in the 4. 6. 7. 8. and 54. Canons. Thus by excommunicating and
cursing they labor to maintain and defend their corruptions, but not one jot
of Scripture dare they show, and no marvel; seeing the whole scriptures are
against men's inventions and traditions, of which nature these abuses are, being
left here by the Pope, and retained and renewed by his Prelates. As they may
not teach against these things, so on the contrary, they may not teach the
true and right way which Christ has prescribed in his Testament, how we must
worship God, nor how the true Church of Christ ought to be gathered and
constituted, the Ministers thereof ordained, nor the manner how it ought to be
governed, as appears in the 9. 10. 11. and 12. Canons. By which we may see in
what bondage their Preachers are kept, they must hide their Talent in the
earth, and put their candle under a Bushel, lest men by the light thereof
should come to the knowledge of the truth and believe it. Also it is to be
observed as a general rule, that none, good or bad, learned or unlearned, can
be suffered to receive their Orders of Priesthood or Deaconship, or be admitted
to preach, or execute a Ministry in their Parish Churches, unless they
swear to conform to the worship and ceremonies prescribed by these Prelates,
and also submit to their Antichristian rule and government, which they
challenge to themselves, as being Lords over all: Thus by swearing they make
their inferior Priests to sell themselves to work wickedness; which trick
they have cunningly devised to bring the Land in subjection to their
Antichristian yoke: And upon the taking of this Oath they receive the Prelates
Mark, which is called in this Chapter, the Mark of the Beast; which is
understood to be the Letters of Orders under the Prelates hand and seal to
testify that they are made Priests or Deacons, according to the order and
canons prescribed in that behalf, in this their Convocation, as we may see in
the 36. 48. and 50. Canons: And for refusing to worship them in these things,
many are put back, and those that formerly have been ordained, for refusing so
to do (which they call revolting) have had their penal Laws executed upon
them, which is Suspension, Degradation, and Excommunication, and after these
many other afflictions in body, goods and name; being accounted factious and
seditious persons, that have no right to buy or sell their wares.

Concerning the people whereof the Church of England consists, it is
necessary that we find them such as the Scriptures do require, otherwise
they cannot be accounted the Church of Christ, and to this end observe these
few places following, Ezeckiel 44. 19. Thus says the Lord, no stranger
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my
Sanctuary: And the people of Israel for suffering such uncircumcised strangers
to enter into the Sanctuary of the Lord, he calls them a rebellious people,
that had polluted his Sanctuary, and broken his Covenant; And in the 23.
verse, The Lord teaches his Ministers to put difference between the holy and
profane, the clean and unclean; And according to this was the practice of
the Apostles in the primitive Age, who by preaching the Word gathered none but
such as believed, and voluntarily submitted themselves to walk according to
the profession of the Gospel; and if any did cunningly creep into the
fellowship of the Saints, and not walk accordingly, they were to be cast out
by the Church, as in the 1. Cor. 5. Likewise the Apostle Paul he separated the
Disciples of Ephesus from those that believed not; so the Apostle Acts 19. 9.
taught the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. 14. 15. etc. Be not unequally yoked
together with unbeleevers, for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness? And what
concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in
them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people; Wherefore come out
from amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you.

Now if we compare the Church of England with these Scriptures we shall find
that the practice and proceedings thereof, has been, and is contrary. The
people thereof (for the most part) are such as visibly and apparently live in
all kind of licentiousness, and in their works deny God, being abominable
and disobedient. For these Lordly Prelates being armed with the sword of Civil
authority, and having the Law of their side, they have not labored by
painful preaching to draw men to the obedience of the faith, and to the
fellowship of the Gospel apart from the profane and wicked, that speak evil
of the ways of the Lord, but they have compelled and enforced all sorts of
people, both religious and profane, not only such as fear God, but also such
as fear him not, by bodily punishments to be conformable to the profession
which is by their Canon Law established in this Church: As if the Word of God,
that sword of the Spirit were not mighty enough in operation for the gathering
together of the Saints. That this is their practice is plain by the 90. and
114. Canons, where it is said, that Ministers and Churchwardens must present
all persons above the age of 13. years, that come not to the Church and
receive the Sacraments; after which presentation, if they do not conform they
shall be excommunicated, imprisoned, and have their goods attached: This is
the means which has been used for the gathering of this Church of England,
whereby they have confounded and mingled them together whom God has commanded
to be separated: wherein what do they less then think themselves wiser and
stronger then God? The Word of God is the seed whereby the Church of God is
begotten, and those that are begotten by any other means are bastards, and not
sons: for as that woman is an Harlot which has children by any but her
lawful Husband: so that Church whose members are gathered by any other way or
means, then by the Word of God, persuading and moving their hearts, the same
is not the Church of Christ: But this has been the manner of gathering the
Church of England, and therefore it is unworthy to be adorned with the title of
the Church of Christ, but ought to be accounted the Image of the first Beast
before spoken of, that is, of great Babylon which is an habitation of devils,
an hold of soul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

And for confirmation hereof by the testimony of their own mouths, let us but
consider the estimation which the members of this Church have one of another:
Some there are amongst them, who for making more conscience of their ways then
the rest, are in derision called Puritans or Precisians; these on the contrary
seeing the ungodly conversation of the rest of their brethren, esteem them as
wicked, profane, carnal and unregenerate men, such as (for the most part) are
mockers, contemners, and evil speakers of the Truth, and in whom is no
appearance of Religion and the fear of God; and therefore they distinguish the
better sort from these profane persons by the name of Professors. This is the
estimation which they have one of another, which is a manifest note that they
are not come into the order of the Church of Christ. I deny not but there are
many amongst them, that are the Saints and Servants of Christ, that are godly
and zealous people, which so far as they know, they labor to yield obedience
to the commandments of Christ; and although by means of their Guides which
make them to err and go astray, keeping them in ignorance of this doctrine,
yet it shall go well with them: Such persons (I say) are fit stones for the
building of the Church of Christ, but so long as they remain in this
confusion, they can no more be said to be the true visible Church of Christ,
then a heap of stones fitted for a building can be said to be a house;
therefore they must be separated from the wicked, and placed together according
to the order prescribed by Christ Jesus, and practiced by his Apostles, as in
the new Testament, before they can be so esteemed.

As these Prelates will have this Church of England to be accounted the true
Church of Christ, so they will have the true Church of Christ to be accounted
false, schismatic and heretical, as in the 9. 10. and 11. Canons: by which
it does appear, that if any people separate from this corrupt Church state,
and join together apart from the wicked and profane, to walk in all the
ways and ordinances of Christ prescribed in his Testament, acknowledging
Christ Jesus to be the only King, Lord, and Lawgiver in matters of Religion
and the worship of God, which is the true and right rule whereby Gods people
ought to walk, and by so doing they become indeed the true Church of Christ,
to whom he has promised his presence and blessing: yet notwithstanding such
persons are for this to be accounted Schismatics, and to be excommunicated
ipso facto, as holding wicked errors. Thus they open their mouths wide to
speak evil of the ways of God, whereby also they appear to be the very
Image of the Beast that blasphemed the Tabernacle of God, as is showed before
upon the sixth verse.

Further, whereas the Apostles did ordain diverse Elders in every Church, to
whom they gave charge to feed the Flock of Christ whereof the Holy Ghost had
made them Overseers: On the contrary these Prelates in stead of Elders to feed
one Flock, they do ordain one idle Priest to be fed of diverse Flocks; that is,
some to have two, some three, and some four Benefices, and this they are not
ashamed to publish, as appears in the 41. Canon, by which it is allowed, that
Licenses and Dispensations shall be granted to Masters of Arts, and other
Graduates, to have plurality of Benefices, so that they be within the compass
of 30. miles.

Concerning their Copes, Surplices, Crossing in Baptism, and other their
foolish ceremonies, which they themselves acknowledge to be things
indifferent, yet those that refuse to use them through the tenderness of their
consciences are therefore greatly afflicted and persecuted, so far are they
unlike the Apostle (who would not use 1. Cor. 8. 13.
necessary things that were offensive to his brethren) as that they themselves
will, not only use those things which are unnecessarie, but also in their use,
justly scandalous and offensive; yea, and compel their brethren also to use
them, which if they refuse, they shall enjoy neither liberty, nor worldly
possessions. How unworthy this their practice is for those that would be
accounted Christians, let the world judge: certainly, it is so contrary to
Christian Charity, as that it is to be accounted Heathenish impiety, and
beastly cruelty, and it is as a Mark in their foreheads to testify unto the
world that they are those which our Savior Christ speaks of, that should
come in sheep clothing (that is, pretending themselves to be the Ministers
of the Gospel, and such as desire peace and unity) but inwardly are ravening
Wolves: such as do sow strife and contention, and by this means they grow
rich, filling themselves with the spoil of their brethren, whom they
persecute, as Lions, Bears and Leopards fill themselves with their prey.

These, and many other evils by their Canon Law established, and to the
dishonor of God and vexation of his people daily practiced, have been much
opposed, and the iniquity of them sufficiently manifested, but as yet it
remains like unto the Decrees of the Medes and Persians, that may not be
changed: yea, they boast and say (like their old Mother) that without their
Laws the Church of Christ would run into confusion, as if the Testament and
Laws of Christ were not sufficient for the government of his Church and
Kingdom. Thus they open their mouths and reproach the Almighty: But he who
sits in the heavens laugheth them to scorn, and will vex them in his sore
displeasure, if they repent not.

By these few examples of their wicked practices, I have briefly showed that
this Church of England still remains under the bondage of Antichrist, and is
ruled and governed by the Image of the Beast mentioned in this 13. chapter,
which usurpeth that power which is only proper to Christ Jesus.

And whereas it is objected in the behalf of the Church of England, that it is
fallen and separated from Babylon, the universal Church of Rome, and therefore
it is the true Church of Christ, and needs no other separation. To this I
answer, that true it is that that great City is now divided into three parts,
as was foreshewed in the 16. chapter of this prophecy, and the cities of the
Nations (that is the National churches, whereof the church of England is one,)
are fallen from it; but this is no argument that therefore they are the true
churches of Christ that are divided from Rome, unless they be united and
joined to Christ, and framed and built together according to the pattern
prescribed in his Testament. It is indeed an argument that their kingdom shall
not long stand, as our Savior Christ teaches, Mat. 12. Every kingdom divided
against it self, is brought to desolation: and every City or House divided
against it self shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself: how shall then his kingdom stand? Thus by the division of
this great City, Gods people may receive comfort and rejoice in assured hope,
that the fall and destruction of Babylon is near, and that the Lord will
shortly be avenged of their iniquities, which should teach us to come out from
amongst them, that we partake not of their synns, and so receive of their
plagues, and to have no fellowship with their unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reproove them, and steadfastly resist and fight against them. So
shall we receive the crown of righteousness, which God the righteous Judge
shall give at his appearing. To whom be glory and Dominion for ever and ever
Amen.

Revel. 20. 4. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness
of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast,
neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in
their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.




