A Form of preparation to the Lords Supper, meet for all such as mind with
fruit and comfort to communicate in the same.

Written by T. W.

2. COR. 13.5.6. Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith: examine your
selves; know ye not your own selves, how that JESUS CHRIST is in you, except
ye be reprobates? But I trust that ye shall know, that we are not
reprobates.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Waldegraue for Thomas Man.

To the people and inhabitants of B. and H. in the county of Hertford, health
in Christ Jesus.
BRethren, our hearts desire, and earnest request to almightye God for you day
and night is, that you and al yours, might be enlightened by the spirit of God,
in your inward man, with the sound knowledge, steadfast faith, and holy
obedience of his blessed truth, for the good and comfortable directyng of you,
in the days of your pilgrymage here, and that your bodies and souls may (when
the troublesome time of the race that is set you, to runue in this life is
expired) be eternally saved, in that great and last day of the Lord Jesus. Of
this most certain truth, we have many good and sufficient witnesses (I hope)
both within us and without us, at home and abroad: As first the eternal God,
before whom though we have walked, in great weakness and wonderful wants,
yet he knows that his glory, and your good, has been not only the
principal, but even the alone mark we have aimed at, in our public places And
if men may be admitted as testes in their own causes, not only the unfeigned
affections of our hearts to you-wards, but even our sound and sincere actions,
spiritually as in regard of our ecclesiastical ministry, and that in all the
parts of it, both prayers and preaching, shall be proofs, pregnant and plain
enough. True it is, that our hearts and minds (as which are inward) are indeed
known only to God, who alone is the searcher of the heart and reins, and in
whose sight it shall be sufficient for us to rest as in this behalf, in the
persuasion of a good conscience. But for our outward dealinges and behavior
that way, we are willingly content, to refer and submit both it and our
selves, not only to the general testimony, of all and every one of you, but
if any amongst you, be less zealous and forward in the gospel then were to
be wished, we will thus far offer our selves even by your sentences to be
tried, whether we have dealt deceitfully with the word, chopping and
changing the same at our pleasures, yea or no, or have been unmindful of
you, in our pore prayers, and faint requests though they be. To seek letters
of credit from abroad else where, when you your selves will not, with your
hands alone, but with your hearts also yield us (as we hope) and that without
fear, and flattery, our just commendation, may seem superfluous, specially
since we stand not upon them that are without, further than as we may, (keeping
our selves in the compass of an ordinary and settled vocation) do them what
good we can in Christ. And yet (to the praise of God be it written and spoken)
we may have in that respect, the most grave and assured testimony, not only
of godly and good men of our place, ministers of the word we mean about us,
(which shows that we have not vvalked by our selves, as the manner of some
is, in a proud and a contemptuous manner, and yet without cause the Lord
knows, refusing the company and conference of their brethren) but also if
need be, of great numbers of such, as be soundly lincked unto us, in the
unfeigned love, sincere knowledge, and holy profession of Gods eternal truth:
who though they cannot in every particular yield testimony of us, as you your
selves, yet having in some measure ben faithful beholders of the holy
conversation, and at sundry times attentive, and fruitful hearers of the sound
doctrine that God has enabled us, both to perform and deliver, cannot but
justify us, yea, sure we are in both respects will justify us, and that to the
comfort of our own consciences, and to the stopping of the mouths of the
wicked, also what we have done privately to procure your good, it were
better you your selves should faithfully report, and our christian
conferences had with you and yours, (specially before the administration and
participation of the Lords Supper) truly speak, than we, for our selves
this we can protest, in truth and sincerity before God and man, that our care
and toil that way was not small. What fruit it brought forth, would to God
that your works of piety toward his majesty, and of charity toward all
men, might as effectually declare, as your own words have plainly
witnessed, many of you having constantlye aduouched to your selves and others,
that you have been by the same, not only well fitted for that holy action,
but instructed for time to come, and comforted against the days of your
distresses, yea some of you having further affirmed (whether rightly yea or no
look ye to that) that that in diverse respects has been as profitable unto
you, as the word of wholsome doctrine, and spiritual comfort, that God has
enabled us in some measure publicly to deliver amongst you. In the ordinary
exercises of our families, we have seldom ceased to offer up holy sacrifices
to the Lord, as on your hehalfe. And this we have done, without partiality and
respect of persons, though sundry of you have given fearful occasions to cause
us to withhold the performance of this most necessary duty: we yet
notvvithstanding morning and evening, bowing our knees, and holding up our
hands to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ in our poor manner, praying
him for you, that of his infinite goodness it would please him, even for his
dear sons sake to pardon all our sins, that so in the forgiveness of them,
a way might be made unto his mercies, and the same amongst many other means
manifested in this, that our pore pains in preaching were not lost, neither
the time that your selves spent in hearing perish, and so the word become
through negligence, carlesnes, or contempt of your hearts, and a secret
judgment of God against you for the same, the sword of death unto your souls.
Neither do we now write this, as in the vaunting and glorious spirit of
proud hearts before God and men (for we have, and shall always have within us
from our selves, as in respect of our grievous sins and great insufficiencye
and without us from you, as in regard of your coldness and carelesnes, matter
sufficient to humble us, and cast us down continualy) or as unkindly to vpbraid
you in any respect, with the christian care we have had for you, and the great
good that we have meant to do to you (though yet we must freely confess it in
that behalf, we will not willingly suffer our selves to be spoiled of our
just joy in that behalf) but to the end that we might yet at the length
earnestlye stir you up in some deep consideration, sight and feeling, of our
unfeigned goodwils toward you in Christ, not so much to show your selves
christianly kind and soundly loving unto us (though yet we cannot but say
that the very beholding of it, if we might once see it, would yield
marvelous joy and comfort to our heavy hearts) but first dutiful to the Lord,
that every manner of way, in his rich liberality offers you so infinite
mercies, and afterward careful for your selves, not for the things of this
world (for a less we know by a lamentable experience, that you vvade to
far, and walk to much up and down amongst those craggy and barren rocks of
carke and care) but for spiritual and heavenly graces, specially for the
saving of your souls, in that great and last day of the Lord Jesus, for the
better acomplishment whereof, we come yet again unto you, and make offer of
an other sure token of unfeigned affection: we will not say the last
testimony of our love toward you (for we hope that shall always endure in
the Lord, howsoever we may be sundred from you by bodily presence) but in
truth the last trial that we mind to make of you, as in respect of your
steadfast faith to God, unfeigned love to men, and holy obedience to the Lords
whole truth and every part thereof, wherein if by your own good inclination,
and the forvvardnes likewise of those of your families, as vviues, children,
servants, etc. (for all your good, young and old, one with an other, have we
penned and pricked this short treatise follovving) you will make glad our
spirits and crown your selves with honor and immortality in the sight of God
and men, committing to your memories, for the increase of your knowledge, and
putting in practice for the strengthening of your faith these good things that
have been drawn for you, and are now dedicated unto you, we shall humbly
upon the knees of our hearts, thank the eternal majesty, for suffering that
gracious work in you, and as his pore and unworthy servants, by continuance
of our small traueiles, do what we can even to the uttermost for your growth,
increase, and holding on unto the end, in all goodness and truth for evermore.
But if notvvithstanding this, and other religious means before specified,
reverently performed for your good, as on our behalf you will remain as you
have done, in your old sins, of pride, unnaturalness, covetousness, carelesnes,
hypocrisy, hatred hardness of heart, and many other such like, we may (as we
shall have just cause) mourn all day long as the turtle, in that heavy
judgment of God against you, and upon our labors also among you howbeit we
shall rest in the persvvasion and peace of a good conscience before God, that
we have used toward you (as our weakness would suffer us) such good helps
and aids, as the Lord has been pleased to bestow upon us, and to put into our
minds and mouths to profit you vvithall, and to build you up into a holy
temple for the lord, that ye might be a people zealouslye given, and prepared
for every good work. God the only both searcher and sanctifier of the heart
and reins, vouchsafe for Christ Jesus sake, the very mean and matter of all
his mercies toward us, to make straight your declining steps, lest that which
is halting be utterly turned out of the way to soften your stony, yea, flinty
hearts, lest through hardness in your inward parts, you stop the course of Gods
grace, and the love of his saints toward you: and so powerfully and
unfeignedly to convert you unto himself, that you may serve as precious
vessels for honorable uses in his house which is his church, for ever and ever:
So be it.

Your loving brethren always in Christ, and painful Pastors in the service
of the word. T.VV. R.O.

LORD JESUS BEGIN and make an end.
Quest.

DO you mind, when the time and order of our Church shall require, to
celebrate the Lords supper, to communicate with the rest of this congregation,
in the use and participation of the same?

Answer.

Yea, if God will, and you shall find me fit for so holy an exercise, the
thing also which A desire, even with my whole heart.

Quest. Your fitnes for that purpose, I know not how better to discern of,
than by examining of you, and demanding from you a reason, of the faith and
hope that is in you, whereunto, I ask of you first, whether you be willing to
submit your self.

Answer. Yea in deed, with an unfeigned affection, praying you for Christ's
sake to have regard of me, that in the things I know, I may be still
further builded up, even unto the age of a perfect man in Christ, and the
things I am ignorant of, I may be instructed and made acquainted by your good
means, with the Lords truth.

Quest. I am glad to hear you protest this care and desire, And fith you
request this much of me, I will labor what I can to satisfy your wish in both
respects. To begin therefore, how many things think you, every good Christian
should bring with him, to the right use and participation of the Lords supper,
that so he may receive it to Gods glory, and the good and comfort of his own
soul, both in this life present, and that which is to come.

Answer I have heard you your self say, there are required principally five
things.

Quest. Which are they?

Answer. First, a sound knowledge, generally of all the will of God, as he has
reueiled the same in his word, and more specialy of the matter of the Lords
Supper: Secondly, a steadfast faith in the truth of all his promises, but
chiefly of those yt concern the forgiveness of sins in this life, and the hope
and fruition of heaven in the life to come. Thirdly, unfeigned repentance for
all our iniquities, whatsoever, either original or actual. Fourthly, sincere
love toward all men and even particularly toward our enemies. And lastly
humble thanksgiving to almighty God, for all his mercies and namely for those
that he gives us, at that his holy table.

Quest. You have said well, howbeit: both for avoiding of confusion, and for
your more full instruction in these necessary points, let us deal with every
one of these in such order, as you have put them down, that so also I may the
better perceive, whether you understand the things you speak, yea or no. And
first for knowledge, why do you require knowledge so much? will not ignorance,
good intents, men's imaginations, or some od conceits of our own heads, serve
the turn here?

A. No verily: for though in popery we have been taught, that ignorance is the
mother of devotion: and that as we intend, God will send, with many such like
corrupt opinions and speeches, yet now know we these assertions to be
detestable and damnable, as well by the plain places of Scripture, which
affirms, that men err, because they know not Gods word: And again, that
this is life eternal to know GOD, to be the only true GOD, and him whom
he has sent Jesus Christ, as by the light of human reason, for which of us
would be ignorant our selves in the things we profess or approve of want of
skill in others, we assuring our selves hereof, that without knowledge we cannot
tell, no not in earthly matters, where to begin, how to proceed, or when to
make an end. And if knowledge in worldly things be so necessary, whereunto
notwithstanding we may be helped a little, by the light of nature, how much
more is it requisite in spiritual things, to the comprehending whereof, man's
reason cannot reach, except it be altogether enlightened by grace from above,
the Apostle bearing record, to this, when he says* the natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God.

Quest. Why do you mention sound knowledge.

Answer. Because unsound, corrupt or heretical, will stand us in no stead, to
fit us for this action, but hinder us rather: the Apostle requiring deep and
due examination of our selves, before we come to this mystery, which as we
cannot for want of judgment in the natural blindness of our own hearts, so
can we hardly or not at all perform, when to that transgression there is added
this iniquity; of unsound, corrupt or heretical opinions; men in this case
growing under pretext of knowledge, though not right to subborne and stiff
defending, of their own or other men's conceits.

Quest. And why do you demand rather sound knowledge, then perfect knowledge.

Answer. Because we can never atteine to perfection of that, or any other
good grace in this life, perfection being reserved for the life that is to
come: both which things the Apostle plainly tells us, when he says, that
we know in part, and prophesy in part, but when that which is perfect is come,
then yt which is in part shall be abolished. And yet if it be found, it is such
as we our selves may reap great comfort by, in as much as it is Gods great
gift and grace freely bestowed upon us, and others receive some good by,
because Gods graces are not in his children, without some profit unto others
also.

Q. Do you mean that every knowledge is meet, for fitting us to the right and
religious receiving of this holy sacrament of the Lords supper.

Answer. No, as you may well perceive by that which I added, namely of the
will of God reueiled in his word, for many a man may have skill in tongues,
arts, manual occupations, husbandry, and such like, and yet be unfit for
this great purpose. The reason is this, because the thing it self is religious.
And though therebe outward elements used in it, by the Lords appointment, yet
the matter it self meant by them is spiritual. It must therefore be a
religious and spiritual knowledge that must profit us here, or else it will not
serve.

Quest. Why do you ad of Gods will, and the same also reueiled in his word.

Answer. First because his will is the only rule of righteousness and religion.
Secondly, because that will of his, is not made known unto us elsewhere, but
in his word, for as for those secret things, yt belong to ye Lord our God
only, which also he has been pleased to keep close within the bosom of his
own wisdom, as we cannot, so we mind not, either to search into, or to
meddle with, least we be overwhelmed of his glory: but content our selves with
the things reveled which belong unto us and to all ours for ever, that we may
know, believe, and do the same.

Q. What are the things, that that word does propound unto us.

An. They are specially two, that is faith and obedience.

Q. What mean you by faith?

A. All such things as we are bound to believe, touching our salvation.

Q. What mean you by obedience?

A. All such things as we ought to do, either toward God or man.

Quest. Let me hear what principal points of faith, you have learned out of
the word.

Answer. I believe in my hear, and confess with my mouth, that there is but
one true, eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise God. And that this
God; or Godhead rather, is rightly distincted (though not divided) into three
parsons, the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost, none of them being greater
or less then an other, or before or after an other; in respect of being,
honor, or time, but al of one and the self same substance, majesty, and
eternity, distinct notwithstanding in order and offices, for our weakness
sake: all their peculier works, being yet notwithstanding inseparable; or to
speak more plainly, they in the works, that they have wrought for us, being
not sundered or divided. Concerning the person of the father, I believe and
acknowledge that he did not only in the beginning, by his eternal word,
create of nothing, all things which are in heaven, and which are in earth,
things visible, and invisible, as the holy Scripture does teach us, but that
also ever since the beginning, he has by his almighty power and providence,
preserved, vphelde, and increased that most excellent work of creation,
otherwise, all things had long ere this, and should very quickly come to end.
Touching the person of the Son, I believe also and confess, that he was from
before all beginnings, be gotten of the father, and God equal with his father,
and that in the fulness of time, he was made man of the substance of his
mother. In whom I acknowledge all his names, and chiefly these; Jesus, that is
to say, a Savior, because he shall save his people from their sins: and
Christ, that is to say anointed, because he was anointed, withal fulness of
the graces of the spirit by God his father, to be a King, a Priest, and a
Prophet: his kingdom especially standing in this, that he bears sway
inwardlye in the hearts of his Children by his holy spirit, and outwardly in
his church by the scepter of his word: and his own discipline: his Priesthood
consisting in this, that he has offered up himself once for all upon the
altar of the Cross, a full and sufficient Sacrifice to God his Father, for all
the sins of his people, and now sits at the right hand of God, making
continual requests for them: his prophecy in this, that having in his
appearing, put an end to all manner of visions, and revelations whatsoever,
he is now become, the only Lawgiuer unto his Church, and therefore wll
have us to hear none, but him only and those that speak unto us according to
him, nor to receive any doctrine but that which he has sealed and set out unto
us, by his word. I confess further, his two several and distinct natures, of
the Godhead which he had with his father from before all time, and the
manhood, which he took of his mother when the fulness of time was come, as the
Apostle says: which two several and distinct natures, being united and
joined together make but one and the self same person Jesus Christ, who is God
over all blessed for ever, as the Scripture witnesses. Further, I believe and
confess, that this person Jesus Christ GOD and man, though the Godhead can
not suffer, and his manhood could not overcome death, did yet notwithstanding
in his whole person, and not in either of his natures, accomplish and make
perfect the work of our redemption, suffering both in body and soul, the
punishments that were due to us for our sins in body, as that he was
fastened to the Cross, that he died, and was buried in soul, in that he
descended into hell, that is to say, that he felt the sharpenes of Gods wrath
against sin, and did as it were fight hand to hand, against the Devil and
eternal condemnation ouercomming them all, through the power of his godhead for
us, that so we might in bodies and souls be reconciled unto our God,

I believe that as he died for our sins, so the third day he rose again
according to the scriptures for our righteousness: that he visiblie asscended up
into heaven, to prepare a place for us, and to take possession of it in our
name: and that he sits at the right hand of his father, in all majesty and
glory, making continual intercession for us and al saints: and that the heuens
might contein him until the general restitution of all things be made, at what
time he shall appear with great glory, accompanied with infinite numbers of
holy Angels and Saints, to judge all persons whatsoever, which either have
died, or shall die before his coming, or shall be found alive at his appearing,
I believe also that the holy ghost, is the third person in the deity, of the
self same substance, Majesty, and eternity, with the father and the son, not
made, created, begotten, but proceeding from them both. Whom I acknowledge to be
holy; and so rightly to be called, not only because he has the fulness of
holiness in him self, but for that he is Gods substantial and essential
power, to seal up in our hearts Christ's sanctification and holiness, and to
frame us also unto hollinesse of life, and to a godly conversation.

Concerning the Church, this is that which I believe and profess, that it is
holy, because it is sanctified and made holy by Christ, and has Christ's
righteousness and holiness imputed unto it, and to every sound and faithful
member thereof, and not by reason of any holiness it has of it own: for the
Church militant, both general and particular has erred, and may err, yea
does err, and that not only in manners, but in matters of doctrine also;
having need in that respect continually, to fly unto the forgiveness of sins,
and daily to say as our Savior does teach them, forgive us our trespasses etc.

Secondly, I believe that this Church is Catholic, or universal, that is
dispersed far and wide upon the face of the earth and scattered abroad through
out all the world, and is not tied to any one place either to Africa, as the
Donatists immagined, or to Rome as the Papists suppose or to any time or such
like, but that God has had, and ever will have, in every age and nation some,
that appertain unto him, howsoever it be, that they cannot be perceived or
seen by men's eyes.

Thirdly I believe, that this Church is the company of all Gods elect, whom
God has singled from the rest of the world unto himself, and a fellowship of
holy ones, whom the Lord has made holy unto himself also: and that therefore
it becomes those, that be sound and sincere members of this faithful
congregation, on the one side daily to labor for all manner of sanctification
and holiness, both in soul and body, and on the other side, carefully to
stir up them selves, to have bowels of compassion, and fellowlike feeling,
that is to weep, with them that weep, and to rejoice with them that rejoice,
and to be like affectioned one of them to another, as both Gods word, and the
straight coniuncion that is between them does require.

Fourthly, I believe and confess, that the essential notes and marks to
discern this Church by before men, are not (as the Papists imagined)
antiquity, universality and consent, for they be deceitful, agreeing many
times, to the most wicked and ungodly assemblies of the world: besides that
being qualities, and not substaunces, they cannot be essential notes to
distinguishe, no more then breath or life can discern men from sundry other
creatures: But as the truth does teach us, the pure preaching of the Word,
void of man's mixture, and the sincere administration of the Sacraments,
without man's inventions or devises.

Concerning the word, I allow or receive none for it, or under the name of
it, but only the Canonical books of the old and new testament, being
rightly divided into the Law and the Gospel, the Law, being a doctrine
delivered us from God, teaching us what we ought to do, as well toward him,
as one of us toward another: the Gospel; being a heavenly doctrine also,
instructing us what we must believe to our salvation through Jesus, Christ,
there being as much difference between them, as is between doing, and
believing, I here professing further, that this word is not to be read only,
but for the edification and profit of Gods people, faythfullie to be
expounded, and publicly preached. Concerning ye sacraments, I allow or receive
no more but two only, which the Lord has left to be had in perpetual use in
his church, til his coming again, that is, baptism, and the Lords supper:
baptism succeding in place of circumcision among ye Jews and the Lords Supper
coming in stead of the Jewish passover.

Baptism witnesses and pledgeth unto us diverse things: as first our entrance
into the body of Christ, which is his Church, in which respect it is
administered to newborn babes, even presenlye upon their birth. Secondly, it
is a testimony of our regeneration begunn in us, and that we are become as it
were new borne babes unto God our heavenly, Father. Thirdly, it seals unto
us, the forgiveness and washing away of our sins, in the sacrifice of Christ's
death. Lastly, it represents unto us this much, that we being baptized into
Christ's death, should by the power thereof die unto sin, and that by the
virtue of his resurrection (a sure pleadge also whereof we have in our
Baptism) we should walk in newnes of life. All which things teach us also
this much further, that for as much as Christ's sacrifice was but once
performed, and our entry into the Church, is but once made etc, that therefore
this sacrament, is but once to be administered either to the infantes of
believing. Parents, or else to those that being of the years of discretion,
are commanded to the faith, and able to render a reason of their hope, and that
religion that they are newly entered into.

I confess the Lords Supper to be a pleadge of that spiritual strength and
blessed continuance, that we have in the holy fellowship of the body of
Christ, the Lord sealing up thereby further in our hearts, first, the death
and passion of our Savior Christ, together with the fruits and benefits we
receive thereby, and namely the forgiveness of our sins. Secondly, that
spiritual nourishment that we have by him and in him, we being fed thereby,
taking hold of him through faith, both in soul and body, to the hope of
everlasting life. Thirdly, that mystical union, that is betwixt Christ and
his Church, he dwelling in our hearts by faith, and we thereby being made
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Lastly, that holy band
of unity and love, that ought to be amongst the members of the Church, in
as much as they though they be many being yet notwithstanding partakers of
one bread, are become one body in Christ* In all which respects, I say that it
ought oftentimes to be used, that in due examination of themselves do labor
unfeignedly to prepare themselves to so holy mysteries.

Further I confess, that God to this church, has given us necessary helps and
means, for the repressing of evil, and maintenance of good, the civil
Magistrates, and the ecclesiastical ministry, the on by the word, and the
other by the sword, to advance Gods glory, and to further the salvation of
men's souls, even in this life.

I believe that to the civil magistrate, we do owe unto the Lord, and for the
Lord, not only our goods and riches, wherewithal the Lord himself has
blessed us, but our selves, and our lives also, which he has given us,
because that by them we receive from Gods hand, not only public peace, and
quiet possession, of our own substance, but even the very religion and service
of our God. And therefore they are overmuch deceived, who go about to despise
government, much more they yt in deuor to overthrow it, because they labor the
confusion of Commonwealths and countries, and the utter ruin and decay of
Gods fear and worship.

Touching the ecclesiastical ministry, I believe and acknowledge, that now
there are no more ordinary offices, for the execution of it, but pastors and
teachers, who ought to be men, both of such life, and behavior, and also of
such learning, and judgment, as gods word requires, whose duty stands not,
in bare reading of the word alone, but in preaching the same unto the people;
the pastor exhorting, admonishing, and reproving, with all long suffering and
doctrine, adding thereunto the administration of sacraments, and publik prayers
acording to ye order of the church: and the doctor propou^ding sound doctrine
and mightelye conuincing or confuting erroneous opinions.

I believe and confess, that to this church. God has given most large promises
of grace and goodness, all which also he will in convenient time most
mercifullye and faithfully perform, and namely these perticulars following
amongst yt rest, first the free pardon and full forgiveness of al our sins,
whether it be our original iniquities, wherein we were conceived, and borne,
and which we have brought with us into the world from our mothers womb, or
our actual transgressions committed against God and his laws, either by
thought, word, or deed, either by doing evil things forbidden, or by leaving
undone good things commanded (Against both which) we have a double remedy in
Christ; namely, that our evil committed, is removed in Christ's death, and the
good that we have or do omit, is answered in the fulness of Christ's
righteousness and holiness imputed unto us: which thing as is serves very
well to express our common misery, and may be a profitable argument
unfeignedly to humble us, so does it highlye commend Gods infinite mercy,
freely without any merrites or deserts of ours at all, pardoning all our
transgressions, which ought not only to give comfort unto us, in as much as
neither sin, the Devil, nor hell, can lay any thing to our charge, to take
any hold upon us at all, to overthrow us, but also to provoke us to
continual thankfulness, for this great love, with care and conscience, walking
before him all the days of our lives, even as those that possess holiness and
righteousness.

A second special grace, that God has promised unto his Church, is the
rising again of the body, at the general judgment, which though it has been
dissolved into the dust, shall yet notwithstanding at the last day, by the
almighty power of God, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself,
be raised up again, and united every body unto his own several soul, that
so both body and soul being joined together, the faithful that in both of
them, has been partakers of grief in this life, may in both of them enter
into the joys of there Lord, and be made perfect partakers of eternal
blessedness.

And this is the third grace, and gift of God toward his Church which we call
also eternal or everlasting life, the very end of our faith and hope in
which the Lord has laid up for those that be his, such ioies, as the eye of
man has not seen neither his ear heard, neither is his tongue able to
express, nor his heart large enough to conceive. And this is that sum of
religion, which I have learned out of the word of God, renouncing all errors
and opinions whatsoever contrary to this, and promising and proposing, by Gods
good assistaunce (without whom I can not do any thing) to stand even in life
and death unto this for ever.

Q. It is well, and I am glad to hear this much from you, touching the first
part of the word, namely faith: now let me hear what you can say concerning
obedience.

A. Even that that God himself has put down in the ten commandments
containing the sum of all our duties* either toward the Lord himself, in
the four commandments of the first table: or one of us toward another
contained in the six commandments of the second table.

Quest. As you have gone over the grounds of religion, delivering the same, in
a short sum, by which I perciue, what you hold touching faith: so I would
have you to declare what God forbids and commands in every commandment of
these ten, that so I may perceive what growth you have made, in the right
understanding of them.

Answer. I will gladly do it (Sir) according to my poor skill. In the first,
God does forbid us to allow in our judgment, use in our actions, or defend in
our words, any idolatry, southsaying, conjuring, witchcraft, charming, false
doctrine, man's inventions, fear, love, or estimation, of any whatsoever
creature above God, or equally with him or any person or persons whatsoever,
which shall approve, use, or maintain such things; commanding us on the other
side, to yield unto him his due honor, and service both outwardlye, and
inwardly, that is, to honor, love, fear, and obey him in all things, to
worship him only, to put our whole trust in him only in all fear, danger,
and necessity, to fly unto him alone, and to call upon him only, acknowledging
him alone to be the creator, preserver, and governor of al things, both in
heaven and in earth, and in places under the earth, etc.

In the second, he forbids all making of images, or procuring of them to
be made, to express or resemble his incomprehensible majesty by, as also the
allowaunce, use or defense, of any such Images, or any other thing
whatsoever, by which we mind to seek him, or worship him in the same,
together with a manner of superstition whatsoever, Heathenish, Jewish, or
Papisticall, we abstaining altogether in his holy service, from our own
inventions, blind devotions, human doctrines, and other men's examples or
rules, as also from supposed good intents, and other such like corruptions
whatsoever, he commanding us again to give unto him that manner of worship and
service only, which he himself in his word requires, without adding
thereto, or taking from it, because he knows what best agrees, with his own
nature, according whereunto also he has given us a perfect rule of
righteousness, we continually withdrawing our selves from all superstitions
and carnal imaginations, as well concerning his spiritual majesty, and
substance, as also touching the services that we are to perform unto him.

In the third, he condemns all using or abusing, of his reverend and
fearful name, either vainly, or in rash swearing, (be they oaths) witchcraft,
curssing, forswearing, and such like, yea, he forbids us to talk, speak,
or think of him himself, his word, his works, or whatsoever else he is made
known unto us by, without an urgent and weighty cause, or without great
reverence and fear, of his dreadful majesty, he commanding us again, to
have and use in most high reverence his holy name, and all the parts and pieces
of it, his works, word, sacraments, and whatsoever else he is known unto us
by: likewise to take an oath, (but yet using therein, with great reverence the
fearful and glorious name of our God only, and of no creature whatsoever)
when there is just occasion, as to affirm or maintain a truth, (especially
if the magistrate lawfully require or command it) to set forth the glory of
God, and to preserve mutual agreement and brotherlye charity amongst men,
always persuading our selves, for the better accomplishment of these duties,
that he is ye only seatcher of hates, and rewarder of all sincerity and truth,
as on the other side also, most sharp and fearful reue^ger of al hipocrisy,
blasphemy, falls and vain swearing, together with all other prophanings and
abusings of his most blessed name and religion whatsoever, how great or small so
ever they be.

In the fourth he forbids, all abusing of the Lords day, especially, by
doing of our own wills in it, or by speaking of our own words, or by delight
in discourse or dealing with worldly matters, though at other times lawful, by
using also any wicked or ungodly exercise whatsoever, as dancing, dicing,
carding, table-playing, cauerne or alehouse haunting, reforting to the
beholding of interludes, be atbayting or such like, or by abusing of
recreations, at other times moderately used of them selves lawful, as
shooting, bowling, riding, etc. And commands us on the other side reuerendly
and religiously to spend the sabbothes, as in ceasing from the honest labors of
our christian callings and in absteining from lawful exercises or recreations,
so in preparing our selves, to and in frequenting and using of godly exercises,
both public and private. By public, I means the church assemblies, to which
we should carefully join, our selves, and soberlie and quietly there behave
our selves, in humble confession of our sines, in open professing of our
faith; in unfeigned thanksgiving for mercies received, in earnest prayer for
graces that we want, in diligent and attentive hearing of the word, read and
preached, and in christian communicating in the holy Sacraments, as time and
occasion shall serve, with careful performance of all other duties whatsoever,
and particularlye charitable releife to the poor, specially since God has
given us in his great mercy, a time, a place and quietness, and abilitye, both
of body and mind, to the end we should the better attend, these public
exercises of Gods holy religion. And when these be finished, to bestow the rest
of ye time in meditating by our selves upon the things taught and hard in
conference of the same with other our brethren in examinyng upon the same, our
wives, children, and servant, that so we may lay it up in our hearts, for the
strengthening of our faith, and the directing of our lives. And yet not to
cease here, but these duties performed, to give our selves to private reading
of Gods word, to Christian prayer, and calling upon his name, to earnest
consideration of his most noble and wonderful works: to visit the sick, and
the prisoners, specially such as suffer for righteous causes, that as the day
is dedicated to spiritual ends, so it may altogether be spent in spiritual
exercises, and as it was ordained for Gods glory, and our good, so it may
wholly be referred to the same.

In the fifth commandment, the Lord forbids al rebellion and disobedience,
evil speech, or wicked thoughts, of magistrates, ministers, masters, dames,
mothers, or any other person, whom the lord in his wisdom and goodness has
made our superiors, either by age, aucthority, office, wealth, or any other
manner of way whatsoever: he commanding again (because al aucthoritye,
whether it be of magistrates, ministers, parents, etc. is from himself) that
we should use humble obedience toward them all, beating a reverend mind to
them, being ready to relieve, assist, and aid them to our uttermost, with our
goods, bodies, and lives, and willing to do after their commandments in all
things, in the Lord, and for the Lord according to our duties.

In the sixth, there is condemned al murder, bloudsheading, fighting,
quarreling, brauling and chiding, as also all hatred, malice, and envy in the
heart, together with hasty and headless speeches, and every thing
whatsoever, that may provoke others or stir up our selves thereto, yea, there
is forbidden all manner of desire to do hurt or to revenge: On the other side,
there is commanded, unfeigned love, patience, humility, humanity, keeping
and making of peace, gentle words, soft aunswers, and all duties of
compassion whatsoever, more perticulerlie the relieuing of such as be in
need, the defending of such as be in distress, and the saving and succouring
of them that be in danger, in person, life, health, name etc. to the
uttermost of our powers.

The seventh condemning al whordom, fornication, adultry, incest together with
baudy and filthy talk, all love songs, tickings, toyings, dansing, and all
other wanton or light behavior and unseemly gestures, in body or countenance
(which indeed are nothing else but violent prouocations to filthiness and evil,
together with all uncleanness both of body and mind, on the other side, it
inioyneth us, to keep our vessels in honor, and holiness, as the members of
Christ, and the temples of the holy ghost, and to profess and practice also
all pureness and chastity, not only as touching the act, but also in heart,
word, and behavior, that so we may sanctify the Lord, both in our souls
and bodies, which are his, he allowing us also by this law, even for the
avoiding of all incontinency, his own holy ordinance of marriage, so it be made
up and performed in him.

The eight forbids all theft and stealing, either openly or secretly,
either by force, fraud, or otherwise, together with all deceaueable buying and
selling, whether it be in evil wares, or by falls weights and measures, also al
usury, all extortion, all oppression, al bribry, all uncharitable getting and
keeping of other men's goods, and all manner of corrupt dealing whatsoever, as
cousinage, commendation of deceitful commodities, etc. On the other side it
commands us, all true and faithful dealing in our several callings, due
payment of debtes, diligent service, together with all careful and friendly
saving and delivering of other men's goods, we contenting our selves with our
present estate, and not repining at the blessings of god upon other men, in
inward or outward graces whatsoever preferred before us.

The ninth forbids manifest perjury, and breaking of lawful oaths and
promises, all lying, slaundering, backbiting talecarrying, flattering and
dissembling, together with all evil speaking against others, and particularly
discovering our brothers secrets, either in words, or writings, proceeding from
the malice and naghtines of man's heart. Again, it commands us to maintein
the honor and credit of all, specially those that be advanced to publke place,
in the Church or commonwealth and in all our speeches to be just, simple,
modest, loving, etc. as also to witness, judge and speak the truth, yea ye whole
truth, and nothing else but the truth (yet with a sanctified mind and mouth)
as occasion shall be offered, without any respect, touching al men and matters
whatsoever.

In the tenth and last commandment, the Lord condemns the very pricks and
motions to sin in men's mind (which the scripture sometimes calls the
lusts and concupiscences of our curssed nature) as also all discontentednes of
heart, with the state and condition that God is pleased to put us in, together
with all manifesting thereof, by unlawful wishes, which be after a sort,
things inseparable, cleaving to the sins of lust, and discontentednes of
mind, forbidden here. And here he commands us to fight against the
beginnings of evil, in the first assaut, least otherwise, temptation further
prevailing upon us with delight, we be carried on forward by the subtlety of
sin, both to consent unto the evil, and to strive for the attempting and
accomplishment hereof. Yea, he commands us to foster and make much of
such good motions, as he puts in our minds, not suffering them to die or
to be quenched through the corruption and naughtines of our own hearts, but
carefully to strive by all holy means, and the diligent and often use of the
same, with earnestnes to pursue them, and to bring them to good effect.

Quest. I can not but rejoice in the things I hear you speak, and approve of
the same as good and holy: Howbeit, because in the beginning you said, that
besides the general knowledge of Gods will reueiled in his word, there was
required specially knowledge, touching the matter of the Lords supper, let us
deal somewhat in that also. Into which before we enter perticulerly, I would
gladly know of you, what a Sacrament is.

Answer. An outward and holy sign, ordained by God himself, and appointed to
be used in and of his church, to signify and seal unto the faith of the
believers there, such things as cannot be seen with mortal eye.

Q. Why do you call it an outward sign, and yet holy withal.

Answer. Outward, because it is subject to our senses, as sight, feeling,
taste: and holy, because it is appointed for holy uses, and to signify most
holy things unto us.

Q. And why do you say, ordained by God himself.

A. Because it belongs to none, but to him alone, to ordeine holy signs and
Sacraments.

Q. And why say you, appointed to be used, in and of his Church.

Answer. First, to avoid all private administration of them: Secondly to
exclude that superstition in popery, of showing them without participation and
communicating in them: thirdly to declare to whom they belong, namely, to the
church and to none other.

Quest. What mean the words following, in this description of a Sacrament.

An. They contain and express, one principal end of the institution of
Sacraments, namely that they be ordained to be seals and pledges of excellent
things.

Q. To what ends else, has God ordained, such holy signs and sacraments.

An. Thereby more and more to express our dulnes and grossenes, specially in
comprehending of spiritual, and heavenly matters, and withal to strengthen
and assure our weak faith in the truth and certainty of his most sweet
promises.

Q. How many things are there to be considered in a Sacrament.

An. Three specially, as I take it: namely the outward Element it self, or
the visible and sensible sign: Secondly, the inward and spiritual grace,
signified thereby: and lastly, the analogy and proportion between the sign,
and the thing signified.

Q. What be the signs or elements in the Lords Supper.

An. We have there, two most lively signs, to wit, Bread, and Wine.

Q. What is the spiritual and inward grace.

An. Christ and all his merrites, in whom alone dwells the fulness of all
goodness and truth for evermore.

Q. What proportion is there, between these signs, and the thing signified.

Answer. The bread specially, when it is broken, does signify unto me Christ's
body crucified for me, and the wine does lively represent unto me, his most
precious blood that was shed for me, and for many, to the forgiveness of sins.

Quest. What meant the Lord to take these elements rather then other, to
represent and set out such excellent things by.

Answer. Because they do indeed most lively declare, those spiritual graces,
that we have from Christ: for as bread strengthens man's heart, and Wine
comfort the same, as both the truth of the word and dailye experience
teaches; so must we have all spiritual strength and consolation for our
souls, from Christ alone, and him crucified and bruised, and broken for our
sins, or else it will not be.

Q. And wherefore has he ordained two signs, in his holy supper, seeing in
baptism there is but one only.

Answer. Not only to meet with that sacriligious devise of popery, taking
from the people the Cup: but more lively to set forth his love toward us in
the multitude of his mercies, and the more steadfastly to assure us, that he as
in spiritual respects, does not feed us to the halues, but fully, the
abundance of his graces in Christ, being not only the meat, but the drink
also of our souls.

Q. And why has the Lord appointed you, to take, eat, and drink, these
outward elements.

An. The more assuredly thereby to put me in possession of Christ, and his
merits, and the fruits and effects flowing from the same, I being no more
certain in my outward man, that I have received these to some good profit and
purpose, then that by faith, I have certainly taken hold of Christ, he
dwelling in my heart by the same, and making me fruitful to every good work.

Q. Do you mean that you should much regard the outward elements? or that the
bread and wine are become our spiritual nourishment.

Answer. No indeed, neither the one nor the other: for if we doubt upon the
outward, we should soon have our faith stolen away from the inward. And for ye
other, we know and believe, ye bodily things cannot nourish spiritualy, but
this is that that I mean, that by the outward signs, we should be as it were led
by the hand unto that which they signify, from whence indeed, both spiritual
life here, and eternal life in the world to come do proceed, that is to say,
Christ Jesus himself who has suffered his death and passion, to take away the
cause of our death and condemnation, yt is to say, Sin, and to renew us unto
eternal life, through the fulness of all spiritual liuelines, which rests and
remains in him.

Q. Where is Jesus Christ now (the matter of the Supper) specially according
to his human nature.

An. Not on earth surely, whatsoever men fantasy, but in heaven from whence he
shall come in great glory, to judge the quick and the dead.

Q. By what means, can you the^ which are on earth, receue him that is in heaven.

A. As I receive with my hand and my mouth the sacrament, that is to say ye
bread and wine, of the sacrament, and that to the norishment of this body, and
preservation of natural life: even so, by the virtue and power of ye holy
ghost, I do in wardly and in my soul, receive and embrace, through the hand and
mouth of a lively and steadfast faith, our Lord Jesus Christ, very God and
very man, that by him, I may lead a spiritual life here, and afterward live
eternally.

Q. Hitherto we have labored, and I hope profitablye, in the first part of
preparation to the Lords supper: wherein also (because it is the foundation and
groundworke to the rest) we have dealt more largely. Now let us proceed to the
other remaining, dealing with them in some more shorter sort, yet so still, as
we may comfortablie and profitablie understand the same. Tell me therefore
which is the second thing, necessarily required of him, that shall worthily
partake in this holy sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord.

An. A steadfast faith in the truth of Gods promises.

Q. Why do you so expressly demand steadfastnes in faith.

Answer. Because that is most necessarilye required in the same, as a notable
mean to make it being Gods gift, in some measure acceptable before him, and
comfortable to our own souls: for what joy or peace can we have when our
persuasions be carried hither and thither and we find our selves wavering in
those principal thoughts of our hearts, that do concern Gods eternal mercies
toward us in Christ.

Q. And why do you require a steadfast faith, rather then a perfect faith,
seeing that perfection being more excellent, then steadfastnes, it is likelye
that it should bring forth more excellent fruits.

Answer Because that we, by reason of the remainders of corruptions, that we
shall carry about with us, so long as we live here, can never in this life
atteine to perfection, of this or any other spiritual grace. And yet if it be
steadfast, sure, and immovable, it is such as God will accept in us for
Christ's sake, because there is in him alone, matter sufficient to cure all our
maladies, and to cover all our imperfections: and such also as we may well
comfort our selves in, because he that only gives faith, has been pleased
to bestow the same upon us, and we rest persuaded, that he will not reiecte
his own work in us.

Q. Do you mean, by a steadfast and an immovable faith, such a faith, as from
the first planting of it, was never assaulted with diffidence, or shaken with
distrust.

Answer. No indeed: for that were to imagine, that there were no sin
remaining in us, or satan without us to tempt, whereas we know, that as in
respect of our selves, we are dull of heart, and slow to believe, so Satan in
a continual malice against us, has not only desired to winnow us as wheat,
but sore battered and beaten our faith and hope. Howbeit here is our comfort,
that Christ has prayed for us, that our faith fail not, we further raising up
also our selves, even as the Apostle does him self, and the rest of the
believers, with this sweet sentence, that though we doubt, yet we despair
not.

Q. And what do you take this steadfast faith to be, that you speak of.

An. It is a certain persuasion, and particular application of ye whole word,
and specially of the sweet and comfortable promises therein contained, to mine
own heart. I assuredly feeling this in my soul, yt whatsoever is generally
promised, to the company of ye faithful and believing people, shall be
particularly verified, and specialy in my self

Q. And why say you that by the eye of faith, you look rather to the promises,
then to the whole word, or holy scriptures of God.

A. Because though it be true, that my faith respects all the word, and every
part and piece of it, as which contains whatsoever is necessary to eternal
life, yet does it most principally regard the promises therein comprised,
which be indeed, the most proper peculier, and comfortable obeicts thereof, as
which do most lively propou^d and set before us Gods eternal favor, Christ's
holy merrites, and whatsoever else is sweet and pleasant, either for this life
present, or that which is to come.

Q. Are all promises in the word, of like excellency, sweetness, and comfort.

A. No certainly, for though that they be all profitable, yet the promises of
spiritual blessings ar most to be esteemed

Q. If all be not a like precious, tell me which are those promises, that you
ought to make most special account of, to lay hold of them by faith.

A. I say, yt by ye hand of faith, I ought to aprehend the^ al general, whether
they concern, earthly, or heavenly, bodilye, or spiritual benefits, because
they be the very norishment, or life rather of my soul: howbeit, I ought most
chiefly to look upon those, that do concern the forgiveness of my sins in this
life through christ's obedience, and those that are made touching eternal life,
and everlasting salvation throw him

Q. And why should you regard these rather then the other.

A. Because without the feeling of ye forgiveness of our sins in Christ, we can
have nothing but disquietnes of spirit, and hell in our hearts, neither can all
or any of Gods graces without that, be comfortable unto us: but means rather to
agrauate our most fearful comdemnation. And besides if it were not for ye
fruition of eternal life, after this life ended, we yt profess godliness, were
the most miserable of all men.

Q. I perceive then by this, that as it behooves every godly man and woman, to
be well acquainted with all the word generally, so it specially stands them
in hand, to labor to have a most skilful feeling in the promises thereof.

A. That is most true, as without the which indeed he cannot, either lawfully
enjoy, or religiouslye use, the outward blessings of this life or patiently
undergo, or courageously overcome, the afflictions that he is to endure for
Christ's sake, or comfortablie to feel Gods most holy favor and love, or
sweetly be made partaker of Christ and his merits, or have any hope of heaven
assuredlye settled in his heart, or atteine indeed to any true joy and
consolation of the spirit, because all and every one of these things are
offered, and as it were conveyed over unto us, in the promises of the word.

Q. But we are dull of heart, and slow to believe, as you said before. And
besides there stands betwixt us and Gods promises, not only the cloud of our
natural corruption, but also the innumerable transgressions that we have
committed against God, and one of us against another, by means whereof, we
are become not only unmeet and unworthy of any such grace, but in stead of the
same, have deserved all judgments, both temporal and eternal, to be powered
forth upon us. To all which add the exact justice of God, which cannot but
punish such horrible transgressions. In this miserable estate and taking what
shall we do? or what shall betide of us.

A. I will show you so far forth as my poor skill will serve me, and as I
have learned from your mouth out of the word against the strength of natural
corruption in our selves, we are to set the power of our regeneration from
GOD, Gods work in the excellency and might of it, being able to overthrow
every thing, that either by our weakness, or Satan's malice, shall exalt it
self against it. And to the wound that is made in us by the huge heap of our
transgressions, we are to apply the sovereign salve of our saviors
sufferinges and death, the least crumme or drop as you would say of whose
merrits, is able to break the strongest band and chain of our sins, in whom
also being the person that god is well pleased with, and having the fulness of al
goodness in himself, we cannot but find sufficient worthiness, to cover our
wretchedness and all imperfecious that be in us whatsoever. And as for Gods
justice, it is all ready answered in Christ's obedience for us, by the means
whereof also there is an entrance made into ye infinite tresure house and store of
his incomprehensible mercy, to be communicated unto us. And if it agree not
with humain equity where a det is once paid, to demand it again, can we imagine
yt it shall stand with Gods justice, either to demand yt det, or to cast us into
prison, sich yt hand writing of ye law, which was against us to condemn us, is
canceled thruogh christ's obedience.

Q. But many of Gods children, in the midst of there co^bats, know not whether
they have faith or no: yea, for the most part it seems to them, that then they
have non at all. Tell me therefore how may a godly man try, whether he have
faith, yea, or no.

A. They must here have recourse, to those fruits and effects of faith, that
God has bin pleased to bestow upon them, and enabled the^ in some measure to
show forth either toward his own majesty, or toward men, and particularly
they must look to those graces of fervent prayer, christian patience, godly
sorrow, sincere love, and many such other good duties, either past or present,
as God has made them able, either in affection to desire and aproue, or in
action to accomplish and perform; from whence doutles they may and ought to
receive comfort, because that if our former transgressions proceeding from our
selves, should cast us down and grieve us to the heart, then the former feelings
of gods Graces bestowed upon us of his own goodness, and flowing only and wholly
from him, should give comfort to our souls, and yield us hope in time to come,
though presently we find it not, that we shall again possess, not only these
former joys, but greater measure and more assurance thereof.

Q. One necessary question is yet behind, wherein also I would gladlye have you
speak namely, why you do require faith now, rather then at other tims since we
should carefully endeavor always, to find and feel, that at home in own
hearts, as which is indeed the principal comfortt and joy of our souls.

An. Because we have now through the use of the Sacrament, in more particular
and plain manner, all Christ's merrites offered unto us, yea, whole Christ
himself, in whom all the promises of God, are Yea, and Amen. Al which, since
they can no otherwise be laid hold of, then by the hand of faith, (for
Christ is in heaven, and we are on earth, and his graces are spiritual, and
cannot but by a spiritual instrument be apprehended, and faith only has this
virtue in it, to ioyn things together, that be as far a sunder as heaven and
earth, yea, and to make things past, and to come also, as though they were
actually present, either in sight or possession) I say we have now more
need, then at other times to raise and stir up our faith, and more strongly
and comfortably, to apply the promises unto our own souls, or else we shall be
far of from aunswering the goodness offered, a great dishonor doutles to
almighty God.

Q. Which is the third point, nececessay for a godly communicant, to bring
with him to the right use and participation of the Lords holy Supper?

A. Unfeigned repentance for all his sins whatsoever.

Q. Why do you demand vnfeignednes in repentance?

A. To the end that our inward and outward hypocrisy, both before God and man,
(a vice too common in all holy actions, and even in this particularly) being
put far from us, we might labor in soundness to perform that, that shall be
acceptable in his sight, and profitable and comfortable both to our selves, and
others.

Q. Why do you demand unfeigned repentance, rather then perfect?

Answer. Because as has been said sundry times before, we can never in this
life atteine to perfection, either of this, or of any other good grace
whatsoever. And yet if it be settled in the heart, and proceed in sincerity
from the same (the heart being the most principal part, that God requires in
all services) it cannot but be accepted in his sight.

Q. And what profit shall come unto us, by this unfeigned repentance, if upon
right examination of our selves, we find it in our own souls?

A. First, it shall distinguish us from Hipocrites, who outwardly make many
godly shows of this, and other good things also, but yet have no soundnes
within them. Secondly, it shall be a sure pledge unto us, of the forgiveness of
our sins, because repentance and forgiveness of sins can never be sundered,
as the Scripture says in many places. Thirdly it is an evident testimony,
that we have embraced the Gospel, (because repentance is a principal part
of it) and by consequent eternal life, because the Gospel is the power of God
to salvation, to all them that believe; Lastly, it is a plain proof of that
faith, that God by his word outwardly and by his spirit inwardly, has
wrought in our hearts, repentance being one principal fruit and effect
thereof.

Quest. What is this repentance it self?

Answer. An earnest hatred of all and every sin, which heeertofore we have
loved, delighted in, or performed, and on the other side, an unfeigned love of
all righteousness whatsoever, which heretofore we have hated: this love of
the good, and hatred of the evil, proceeding from a right and reverent fear
of Gods eternal Majesty, and working also so far in us, that it causes us
to forsake our selves, and to strive in some acceptable measure to the
mortification of our own corruption, and to the renewing of Gods Image in us,
to the end we may be altogether governed by the holy spirit of God, both in
the service of his Majesty, and also in the performance of all holy duties
toward our selves and other men.

Quest. I perceive by this you have said, that before we can either tell what
repentance is, or can well come to the practice of it, we must be
acquainted, and that in feeling, with many good things, and namelye, that we
must know first what sin is, also how many sorts there are of it, and
likewise by how many means it may be committed. Tell me therefore first,
what you take sin to be?

A. Sin is the transgression and breach of the law of God only.

Q. And why say you, it is a breach of Gods law only?

A. Both because his law is the only rule of all religion toward him, and of
all charity toward men, and because none has authority to bind men's
consciences with the cords of sin, but he alone, that has made them, and
who only knows what sin is.

Q. How many sorts of sins are there?

A. Two kinds as I take it: the one original, and the other actual.

Q. What call you Original sin?

A. An universal infection and geneall corruption of al mankind, both in body
and soul, conveyed over from our first parents Adam and Heuah, (because we
were all in their loins standing and falling together with them) not by
imitation, but by purgation, into al their posterity, there flowing from the
same, an utter defacing of Gods Image in us, which was given us through his
grace in Creation and their following in stead of it, the Image of Satan
through corruption.

Q. What call you actual sin?

A. All the fruits and effects of our original unrighteousness whatsoever,
whether they be motions to evil in the mind, or consent or yielding to sin in
the understanding or accomplishment of the same in word or deed.

Q. Why do you call these actual sins, seeing that the most of them,
stand rather in affection then in action?

A. Because they are indeed, and of their own nature sins, whatsoever
papists say to the contrary (who hold that motions to evil, are not evil, if
they be withstood) as which proceed from that bitter root of original sin,
and therefore must indeed be sin: Besides since God that is a spirit (whose
pure eis cannot behold wickedness, and who also tries the hearts and reins)
being best able for his upright judgment, to determine and pronounce touching
sin, has in his word shut up evil motions and evil affections, under the
name of sin, they must of necessity be so accounted of us.

Q. By how many means may sin be committed?

An. Either outwardly, by our words and deeds, as by filthy talking, foolish
speech, unclean actions, etc. Or inwardly, by our corrupted thoughts, and
iniquity may be committed also, as well through ignorance, negligence, or
carlesnes leaving undone the good duties that God enioyneth us to do, as
willinglye and willingly performing, the evil things that he has forbidden
us by his law.

Q. Let me hear in few words what profit you make by all this speech of
sin?

A. First I learn, that in as much as Gods law is a plain mean to discover
good and evil, I should therefore use it as a notable instrument, both to
confirm me in goodness, giving it this priuiledg over me, that it should for
ever over rule all the thoughts of my heart, all the words of my mouth, and all
the works of my hands, and also to strengthen me against all sin, both in
affection and action, and the rather because God by his word has condemned the
same. Secondly, that for as much as a world of sin lies lurking within my
corrupted nature, I should learn thereby, not only to suspect my self, and
every thing that I my self like of, as who by corruption, do love and like the
worst things, but diligently to take heed also, that either by the pleasure
or subtilties of sin, which endure but for a while, or through the ignorance
or parcialitie of mine own heart, I be not deceived. Thirdly that for as
much, as sin may be committed so many ways, I should in all holy care
and a good conscience, be watchful over my self, not only, that I be not
overtaken with the act of sin, (a thing that Hipocrites greatly regard)
but that the affections of evil preuail not upon me, absteining in my heart,
what I can, from motions and consent thereto, and in my outward countenance,
behavior, words, and deeds, from all appearance of evil.

Q. There remains one thing, which I had almost fogotten, whereof
notwithstanding I would be glad to hear your mind, and the rather because it
is a profitable point, both for knowledge and comfort, many of Gods Children
in the time of their distresses, not knowing how to answer an assault, that
arises up in them, to wit, whether they have repented, yea, or no, Tell me
therefore by what testimonies and tokens, may we be assured of our repentance,
that it is right, specially before God?

A. I suppose, that for the peace of a good conscience in this behalf, we
should look first into our affections, and see whether they be truly turned
from that love of evil, and hatred of good, which was in them, through
corruption of nature to a sincere detestation of evil, and an unfeigned desire
and delight in things acceptable before God and men, which if in due
examination we find, they may then minister no doubt some comfort unto us.
Secondly, we are to consider what fruits have followed this alteration and
chaung of our affections, as well toward God as toward men, and toward our
selves particularly: as for example, if before God we have been humbled in
unfeigned confession of our transgressions, and in earnest craving forgiveness of
former sins, and praying for power against subsequent iniquities, and all
this we have requested for Christ Jesus his sake: if toward men, they have
made us in christian charity to labor, the strengthening of them that stand,
and to pity and pray for such as be overtaken, we doing also what we can to
pull them out of that filthy puddle of their corruption: and if, as in regard
of our selves, they have brought forth in us, fear that we fall not into the
like, desire care, and endeavor of a better course, wrath against our sins,
and our selves for our sins sake, and the using of every good and holy mean,
both outward and inward, for the repressing of all sin generally, and
specially of our particular iniquities: then I say, I see no reason, but if
we have found these and such like fruits, soundly settled in our hearts
(though happily we have them not in so large a portion, and great measure as
gladly we would) we should be thorowlie assured of our repentance.

Q. To shut up this point of repentance, and so to proceed to the rest
remaining: Tell me why do you demand repentance, rather now, then at other
times?

A. Because Christ now, is more plainly, and plentifully exhibited unto be,
and set as it were before all our senses, our eyes, ears, tastes, and all
being in some sort, as it were satisfied with him and conueying him after a
sort down into our hearts, to dwell there by faith, that so he may make us
fruitful to every good work. Both which things, that he may the more
delightfully do for us, and in us, as in respect of our selves it stands us
in hand, more mightelye to labor the purging of our selves, from all
filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, and to have our sanctification
thoroughly perfected in the fear of God, otherwise he will not take pleasure to
dwell or work in us, because the LORD Jesus cannot abide to have his aboade,
in an unclean soul.

Q. Let us now come to the fourth thing, meet and necessary, for every
religious pertaker at the Lords table, which also I desire of you to know
what it is?

A. Sincere love toward al men, and even particulerly toward our enemies

Q. What do you mean by love here?

A. Not only the unfeigned affection, of ye heart, though yt be the first
beginning and root of love, but also the sound testification of it, by outward
signs, as countenance, behavior, words, deeds, etc.

Q. And why do you exact soundnes, and sincerity in this love.

A. That so we might, the better remove that dissembling and hipocrisy both of
heart and word, that rests in our corrupt nature, and willingly give over our
selves, to yield obedience to the rules of the word, which enioyneth us, to
let love be without dissimulation, and commands us, that we should not love
in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and in truth.

Q. Why do you require sound love toward all men?

A. Because Gods word in many places of it, demands that duty of us: also
the example of our heavenly father, toward all mankind leads us thereto:
and that common creation and bond of nature, that is amongst us should
provoke us to it.

Q. But must we love all men alike: and show the like testimonies of love to
all?

A. I suppose not so, but our love must be ruled, specially in the actions,
testifiyng it either according to the abillitie that God has endued us our
selves with all, yet so that we prefer in our wants, the chief and most
principal duties: or else according to the worthy graces, that he has
bestowed upon his Children, always notwithstanding having respect unto the
most excellent. I will with your good patience, in two or three words, make
my meaning more plain, that so you may perceive your labor not lost in the
former instructions that you have given me touching this point. If many stand
in need, either of bodily or spiritual succor, and through want of ability or
otherwise, I am not able to relieve them all, then my mind is, that those are
most to be preferred, to who^ I am most straightly bound, either by the bond of
nature, or christian profession.

Q. What reasons have you to lead you to this?

A. First, the plain words of the text, which as it charge us to do good
unto all, so will it have us especially to regard the household of faith.
Secondly, we have the examples, as of many good men, so of one that is greater
then all exception, Christ Jesus himself, who though he loved all his
Disciples, yet adorned one above the rest, with this title, The disciple whom
Jesus loved.

Q. But this should seem to approve of respect of persons, and to be a mean of
great emulation and contention amongst the members of the body of the church?

A. Not so neither, because here is nothing of man esteemed, but only Gods
graces, according as he has made us to see them in our selves or others,
rightly reverenced, which also shall be so far of, from breeding iarres or
dislikes, that it shall be a notable spur to all goodness, in as much as they
that be endued with the best parts, shall be most loved and best liked; from
which likewise there shall flow a third commodity, namely, that our love, which
is now carried away with wordly respects, and carnal considerations, shall be
ouerruled as it were, and most specially restrained to spiritual and
heavenly blessings?

Q. Why do you add particulerlie, toward our enemies?

A. The more deeply to sound our own love: for we love them that love us what
great thing do we, and the better to try our obedience to god, who requires
this great duty at our hands: in performance whereof also, we our selves
(sone be soundly done) may reap singular comfort, in as much, first as we
see Gods spirit, and power fully working in us, the practice of that, from
which through the corruption of our nature we are most far. Secondly because
it is an undoubted testimony of our sound affection to Gods Saints, in as much
as we love them that even for well doing, do hate and persecute both us and
them, we hoping yet further her also, that God in such sort will so bless our
pore obedience in this behalf, performed according to his word, yt other men
by our example, shall in some sort be drawn on, to do like toward us and
others also.

Quest. But this is a hard, yea an impossible thing for us, as in respect of
our seluese specially, to accomplish and perform?

Answer. I confess that to be true, howbeit the more need we have for
that, to strive to the doing of it, not making the difficulty of this duty,
a mean to discourage us, as many do in this and many other points, but to
encourage us rather, knowing that this being once performed by the power of
Gods spirit that dwells in us, GOD by this shall reap more glory, as whose
power shall the more plainly appear, by how much the work was hard, and
altogether impossible as in respect of us: and we our selves shall receive
more comfort, in that weak flesh and blood has been enabled by him
unfeignedly to do that, from the least thought whereof, we were most far
removed.

Q. What reasons have you to lead you to the doing of this, so hard and
excellent a duty?

An. First, many commandments contained in the word, and namely, Mat. 5.
Luk 6.27. where we are expressly commanded to love our enemies, etc. Secondly
Gods own practice, who loved us when we were his enemies, and yet testifies
his love toward all, making his sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the
just and unjust. Thirdly, Christ's own example who loved, and as a sign of his
love, prayed for them that put him to death, as the Euangeliste records.
Against which, if either through Satan's subtlety, or in our own ignorance,
we will say, that Christ did this as God: we are fourthly to regard the
example of many of Gods saints, and particulerly of Steven, who as appears,
Act. 7.60. compassed about with flesh and blood like unto our selves, did the
like, in persuading our own hearts, that God which performed it in him and
others, will accomplish the same in us.

Q. What fruit and comfort shall you reap by this sincere love in you, and the
effects thereof?

A. Great and many doutlesse: as first it is a plain badge and cognizance,
both to my self and others, that I am Christ's disciple. Secondly, it is one
assured argument, that I am translated out of darkness into light. Thirdly, it
seals up unto me this, that I am a sound and feeling member of the body of
Christ. Fourthly, it certifieth my conscience, that the saints and servants of
God do unfeignedly love me. And lastly, it is a certain pledge, that I am in
some measure fit for prayer, with out the which also, even all the
supplications of the faithful, shall be abominable in Gods sight, hurtful to
their own souls, and unprofitable to others.

Q. And why do you require love now, more then at all other times, seeing it
is a duty that we should walk in, all the days and times of our lives?

Answer. Because we receive now, a more excellent pledge of that holy love,
that is and ought to be, betwixt the members of Christ's body, then at other
times. And therefore good reason, that in sound love we should be more fit,
for the receiving of that which God gives us, not only to express our
mutual love by, but there being also a certain proportion and good
agreement, between the thing offered and received, we might more and more be
strengthened, and made to grow up therein.

Q. Which is the last thing of al, requisite to this holy action of the Supper?

A. Humble thanksgiving to almighty God for all his mercies, and namlye, for
those that he offers us, at that his holy table: which though it come in the
last place, yet is it not of the least importance, as by which, because it is
the principal part of this action, the whole action it self is many times
named: and being rightly performed, is a good mean doutles, to have that and al
other mercies continued upon us.

Q. Why do you require humblenes in your thanksgiving?

A. First, to beat down the pride of our own conceits, who are then specially
puffed up, when we have received most graces from god: also because we are
assured, yt without it, whatsoever service we offer up to God, and therefore
our thanksgiving likewise shall be abominable in his sight, for as it is true
that God on the one side, resists the proud even unto their faces, generallye
in all their facts, and most specially in such services as they undertake to
perform to him: so does he delight in, and give grace to the lowly and meek,
specially to such, as be so cast down in themselves, that they feel, that not
only their own sins, have made a fearful separation betwixt God and them
(howsoever it please him, in Christ's innocence and righteousness to cure and
cover the same) but also that the works of righteousness, which God has
enabled them to perform, are (not as they come from him or of themselves, but
also as they taste of the remainders of our corruption) as filthy and stained
clouts in his sight, if they should be tried by his most exact judgment.

Q. And what is this thanksgiving you speak of and require?

A. Not only a grateful receiving of Gods benefits, as in regard of the
affections of our mind, though that indeed be the principal, and which God
most respects, and we our selves may reap most comfort by: neither yet a
sanctified use of them, which also is some testimony both of our reverence and
thankfulness toward him that gives the same, and of faith in our selves,
but also an unfeigned declaration (which I add the better to shut out
hypocrisy) of our thankful hearts, first by the words of our mouths
continually speaking unto his praises, that has dealt so liberallye and
largelye with us miserable wretches, not worthy of the least benefit of this
life, much less of that which is to come: and secondly, by the deeds of a
holy conversation, in some measure aunswerable to those mercies, and a notable
mean also to testify the care and kindness of our hearts, toward God in
his graces most plentifully powered forth upon us.

Q. Why say you to almighty God? may we not yield thanks to men also?

An. I name him because he is the only founteine, from whence alone flows
all godnes to us ward, and therefore indeed to him alone belongs all praise
and thanksgiving for the same. Not minding yet hereby to debar men from
thanking one an other, in the gifts that they communicate one to an other: for
piety or performance of duty to God, does not destroy humanity or courteous
dealing one toward an other. And yet herin* men must be always circumspect,
yt they rob not God of his glory, in the whole, or in any part of it, which
they shall do, if they make or take men to be any more then instruments or
means of Gods mercy toward them.

Q. That that follows, me thinks seems impossible for us to perform,
namelye, that we should yield God thanks for all his mercies, since they are
infinite and innumerable. The consideration whereof, also should greatly cast us
down, since we fail in a duty of so great a moment and weight. Tell me
therefore what is that you mean thereby?

A. I deny not but confess, that Gods mercies are as you say infinite and
inumerarable, and that it is indeed impossible for us to account them all;
much more impossible worthelye to praise him for them or any one of them. But
as in unfeigned confession of our own infinite transgressions before him, we
have some piece of a good conscience, in the general laying of them out, and in
a particular rentall of so many of them as we can call to memory: so no doubt
in this action, this may comfort us that though we cannot call to mind, every
one of his mercies particularlye, yet we cease not in general terms, to
praise him for all, and particulerly to recount as many as we can? that so
both ways, our thankefulnes may be both earnest and continual: we dealing
further in this, as in all other good duties, namely in forceing our selves to
the vttermoste of graces received, to the careful performance of this holy
service, cleaving yet when we have done, for the covering and curing of our
wants here, as in all other works of righteousness and fruits of our faith, to
the fulness of perfection and holiness in our savior, who is therefore given
unto us, not only to take away sin, but to supply al our defects, that so
every manner of way, he might become wholly ours for ever.

Q. How many sorts of Gods mercies are there toward us?

A. Two in my judgment, even as we our selves, consist of two parts, to wit,
the one, outward as our bodies, and the other, inward as our souls, and as we
know and believe, that there are two lives, the one temporal here, and the
other eternal in the world to come. Of the first sort, are peace, plenty,
health, godly Magistrates, good laws, and sundry such like, for which we are
bound dailye to praise God, because we daily enjoy the same. Of ye second sort,
are faith, repentance, forgiveness of our sins, and all good means whereby
these things are begun begotten and continued in us: which because they are
spiritual, do no doubt more necessarily be long, to the good estate of our
souls, then the former to ye preservation of our bodies These latter being
again of two sorts: some respecting this life present, as the Ministerye of
Gods word, cellebrating of the Sacraments, execution of Christ's Disciplyne,
earnest prayers, and Gods holy spirit, by the powerful working whereof, all
these are made fruitful: oath or some concerning the life that is to come, as
the saluaion of our souls, in the day of Christ, the comfortable fruition of
Gods presence for evermore, etc. The former notwithstanding being means to
bring us to the possession of these latter, and therefore good reason, why we
should reverently receive them, and rightly use them to those ends and purposes
whereunto God him self has been pleased, in great mercy to us ward to appoint
the same.

Q. But ought we to be alike thankful to God for all his mercies?

A. True it is, that we should let none of them slip out of our memories, nor
be unthankful for the least, if we could tell how, because the least of them
exceeds all the thanks that we are able to yield: Howbeit those that are
most excellent, should fetch from us most humble and hearty thanks, otherwise
we shall deprive God of a principal part of his glory, whilst we give him
smallest thanks, for his greatest benefits, and bewray slender judgment in our
selves, that are not able to discern between the best and the meanest of Gods
mercies, yea, we shall spoil our selves of that hope, that we might have of
the continuance and increase of his goodness toward us, because the more
dutifullye thankful we are toward him (that also being his own grace
wrought in us) the more hope we have still to receive.

Q. You said, we should especially thank him for the graces, that he is
pleased to bestow upon us, at that his holy table: But why say you so?

A. As well because we have then, a special provocation given us thereto, in
the right use of the Supper, those graces being after a sort plainelye
propounded unto all our senses, as also because that the graces that are there
offered, be indeed special and singular merrites, if we consider, either our
unworthiness that receive them, (miserable men that we are) or the great goodness
of God the grace of them, or the excelency of the graces themselves, that be
offered to us therein.

Quest. What are those graces I pray you?

A. Many and diverse, yea infinite and innumerable, specially Christ's death,
and the most comfortable fruits and effects, that flow from the same, to al
faithful communicants, because in them, his death, and the fruits following
it, connot be sundered.

Q. What is there in the supper, that may lead us to Christ's death, or may
put us as it were in possession of it and the fruits of the same?

A. The breaking of the bread, and the pouring forth of the wine, do most
lively set before the eyes of my faith, the crucifiyng of Christ's body, and
the sheading of his blood, though that were performed many hundred years
ago, this being one special property of faith, (as has been said already)
to make things past present; And I am made pertaker of the same, with all
graces flowing from it, in as much as according to Christ's ordinance and
commandment, I take the bread and eat it, and drink likewise of that
mystical cup, by faith, assuring my self, that as verelie as that bread is
broken, and that Wine powered forth before mine eyes, so verily was Christ's
body crucified, and his blood shed upon the Cross for me, to the
forgiveness of all my sins. And as verily as I eat the bread and drink the
wine, hoping that it shall turn to the nourishment of my outward man, and
comfort of my heart, so verily Christ and his merits, are and shall be the
spiritual food and joy of my soul, even to eternal salvation and everlasting
life.

Q. What be the principal fruits flowing from Christ's death unto us?

Answer. We have by Christ's death, these especially: first, the forgiveness
of all our sins, the Scripture bearing record to this truth, and saying:
Christ died for our sins, and again, the blood of Christ does purge us
from all our iniquities. Secondly, we have strength against the power of
sin, the Apostle telling us in the spirit of truth that our old man crucified
is with him, that the body of Sin might be destroyed. Thirdlye, Sin
being taken away by his death, the curse that lay upon the Creatures for
it, is also removed, and we in the taking away thereof, have the same
sanctified to our lawful uses. Fourthly by his death, we have not only the
rage of natural death assuaged, but are thereby delivered from eternal death,
having by means of his obedience also, a ready way, and speedy passage to
eternal life, which also is and ought to be taken, even for a most principal
fruit of his death and sufferinges. For had our savior by his death, brought
unto us the former graces only, and yet appointed us to have lived here in
manifold calamities, and persecutions under the wicked, or suffered our souls
to sleep as some dream and suppose, we had been most miserable.

Q. I rejoice greatly, in the reasons that you have hitherto soundlye rendered,
touching your faith, and hope, wishing you more and more to endeavor the
increase of all feeling, knowledge, and holy obedience in these and all other
things that may concern Gods glory, the good of his children and your own
comfort, both in this life, and that that is to come. But tell me plainly,
have you a mind and desire to strive thereto?

Answer. Yea, I thank God for it in some measure: and I beseech him heartily to
continue, with increase of the same in me for ever: And I pray you in that
behalf, let me be assisted with your earnest prayers, both public and
private, as I have been heretofore.

Q. And purpose you at all times, to meditate of these good things spoken, but
specially then, when you sit at the Lords table, with the rest of the
believers?

Answer. Yea the Lord strengthening me thereto, and inabling me by his
spirit, to master mine own corruption and to subdue the straggling thoughts
of my heart and head.

Q. Though upon this that you have confessed, I am willing to admit you, to
the participation of the Lords Supper, yet let me I pray you, sound you a
little further, in some necessary points, for me and you before we draw to an
end. Do you for the time repent from the bottom of your heart, and will you
vnfeignedlie in time to come hereafter, always deteste all corrupt,
erroneous, and heretical opinions, and particulerlye that of poperye, which is
a monstrous body, bombazed and patched, of all heresies that ever have been?

An. Yea with all my heart, and will most willingly perform, that which you
require, by the grace of GOD, without whom I cannot do any thing.

Q. And will you not suffer your self through seducing spirits, that are sent
abroad into the world, by Antychrist that man of sin, to pervert men's souls
to have your affection in any part with drawn from dutiful obedience, unto
our gracious sovereign, Queen Elizabeth, her inferior Mgistrates, and Godly
laws? Or if God should send as a just punishment upon us for our sins,
alteration and change in our state and religion, will you not revolt and fall
away from the truth, now publikelye preached and professed in our land?

A. No the Lord assisting me. As for her majesty I will be always ready, with
goods, lands, life, and all that I have, to yield obedience unto her in the
lord, and for the Lord, and touching religion now presently established, I
purpose through Gods goodness, whatsoever shall fall out, to live and die
therein.

Q. Now the very God of peace that brought again from the dead, our Lord
Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, sanctify you thorowout, that your whole spirit, and soul, and
body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
make you continually perfect in all good works, always to do his will, he
working in you that which is plesaunt in his sight, through Jesus Christ, who
together with the father, and the holy ghost, three persons and one eternal
God, be magnified and praised of us: and of all people, both now and at all
times, for ever and ever?

An. So be it (good Lord) even so be it.


