THE SVMME OF A SERMON, PREACHED AT SOWTHELL THE THIRtith of March. 1596.

By T.W.

printer's or publisher's device BY PEACE PLENTY. BY WISDOM PEACE


LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Thomas Man. 1597.

Lord Jesus begin, and make an end.
A Sermon preached at Sowthell.
THE TEXT. Matthew. 11. verse. 28. 29. 30. 28 Come unto me, all ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you.

29 Take my yoke an you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden light.


THAT brother said very well, who ere while out of this place told us, that the
exercises of this day, are or should be the same to our souls, that physic
is to the body. The reason is, because as many times medicines help corporal
infirmities, so these holy and heavenly exercises of fasting, prayer, and
preaching, should heal the maladies of our minds. Though these things be
true, and we willingly acknowledge the euidency and certainty of the same, in all ye parts and pieces thereof, yet this also is no less true or certain,
that as physicians for the body, notwithstanding al their skill and experience,
are sometimes deceived, in the very particular sickness it self of their
patients, and the causes of the same, and thereupon minister many times matter
that does small good, and if sometimes it do not much hurt it is well: so the
ministers and preachers of Gods holy word, sometimes by means of the ignorance
of the state of the people, with whom they deal, sometimes by partial or
corrupted respects in themselves, sometimes by the waiwardnes and wickedness of
the hearers, and sometimes by one means, and sometimes by another, do now and
then propound that, that either is impertinent, or else unprofitable: not sure
as in regard of it self, being the Lords truth (for so it is always good
and wholesome) but as in respect of the people or persons, to whom it is
propounded, who either through carelesnes or prophanenes of heart, or some other
corruption lying lurking in themselves, profit not thereby in knowledge, care,
conscience, or comfort. Howbeit because we know there is this difference in
particular, betwixt the bodily medicines for the outward man, and spiritual
physic for the soul, that that which is for the body must have the present
use, or be presently used, otherwise it will do ^he patient no good, and as in
regard of it self, will mould and putrify. But that which is for the soul,
though it fall out as many times it does indeed that it is not powerful at the
first, or for the time present, yet (as that that never will corrupt, but abide
unto eternal life) it may and no doubt shall be profitable afterward (for
the word that is delivered shall never go forth in vain) we are in that hope,
and will in confidence thereof deliver that, that God has been pleased, not
only by art, but by heart to acquaint us withal.

And to persist a little in our begun metaphor or similitude, of bodily
physic. You have by the two first preachers been travailed withal (though it
were as a man may say, by bitter potions, and biting medicines, I mean as in
regard of man's corrupted nature) for the purging of bad humors, and the curing
of dangerous, yea deadly diseases and wounds. Now as skillful and tender hearted
physicians and chirurgions, do after bitter purgations and biting plasters,
minister some sweet things, and as we may say gentle and lenitiue salues, that
by that means the patients may conceive some hope of health, yea help and
cure: so though in conscience I think the most here, have not present need of
sweet comfort (and yet what your case is or may be that way I know not) as who
I fear me for all that is past, and even particularly for this days exercise,
are not humbled as you should, yet will I assay in love, because charity is not
suspicious, and in hope that though presently it be not, yet in time to come
it may be fit for you, to my power uttermost to lay open, and to minister unto
you the comforts of God.

In regard whereof, and for the better performance of which duty, I have
chosen this present place read unto you, for the better understanding whereof,
I pray you mark that in the verse that goes next before these that we have
read, Christ our Savior had in plain and evident terms declared, that the
fulness of all good things both bodily and spiritual, for this life present and
that which is to come, were from the father communicated unto him, That so of
his fulness we might all receive even grace for grace. Which least we might
suppose he had propounded, as many vain glorious men do their glory and
glittering, their plate, wealth and substance, their wit, health, and strength,
to show what they have, and so to hunt after estimation and credit thereby, and
not to do other men good, unless it be to dasell their eyes, and to amaze their
understandings, quickly as it were, not affected only but overcome, with the
sight and sense of such things: he does in these words give all to understand
far otherwise, yea he declares the quite and clean contrary: for he shows,
that neither the greatness, and excellency of his own glory, nor our own
poor and weak estate, nor any thing else in him or from our selves, should
hinder us from coming to him, and being made plentiful partakers thereof, but
further us rather: for where there is fulness, and the same offered unto us for
our good, in coming being called to partake of it, we shall not lose our
labor: and where there are wants in our selves, we cannot (if we have any
sense or feeling thereof) but feel a supply, and indeed receive it to, when
it is so freely offered. Now because we do sometimes from Christ's person in
the greatness of it, and sometimes from the wonderful riches and excellency of
grace that is in him, and sometimes from our own beggary and need, gather
arguments of discouragements unto our selves, and so sundry times lay stumbling
blocks in our own ways to hinder us, from approaching to such sovereign
good, our Savior laboreth to remove all these impediments, and stones of
offense whatsoever, and lovingly inuiteth us unto himself, and freely offers
to make us partakers of all his graces, in this sweet and comfortable saying,
Come unto me all ye that labor and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you,
etc.

In which words or verses there are contained two special things to be
marked. First grave exhortations, or holy commandments if you wi^ Christ
thereby provoking and stirring us up to come unto him, and these are contained
verse. 28.29. which course he knew was necessary, as well because many times we
imagine things to be arbitrary, as also because we are backward, by reason of
our dulnes, generally to every good thing, and particularly to this, though it
highly concern our own spiritual benefit. The second is a weighty reason
joined to those exhortations or comma^dements, the better both to prove the
truth of that Christ had said, and also the more effectually to persuade us to
walk in the obedience and practice thereof, and this reason is comprehended,
verse. 30.

True it is indeed, that the reason does more specially concern the latter
exhortation or commandment, as we shall show hereafter if God will. Howbeit it
may not improperly also in some sort and sense be applied and referred unto the
first. But because this is not a point greatly material now, we will let it
pass and proceed to more necessary matter.

Now concerning the exhortations or commandments, they are according to the
number of the verses in which they are contained, two. And yet if I be not
deceived, both of them tending to one end, namely by calling men, to come unto
Christ, and to learn of him to minister comfort of conscience to them that
were heavy hearted. And yet we must not think, that they are needles
tautologies, or mine repetitions, but serve as to express Christ's singular
love, toward afflicted persons, he urging them as we see again and again: so
to let us understand, in the doubling and trebling of these sweet and
comfortable exhortations or commandments, that it is no easy thing to
comfort a wounded spirit, and that a broken and troubled heart, does not by and
by, though gladly it would, admit and recelue comfort. For if that were so, one
exhortation, commandment, call or promise, would suffice, but rather that
even for their mind, that is true in them, that is said in the Prophet
Jeremiah, and is repeated in this Evangelist chap. 2 Rahel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they were not.

And yet further between these two exhortations or commandments I make this
difference, that in the first he calls us simply, without any other respect,
than of our own miseries and his mercies, to come unto him for relief. And in
the other he calls on us, or commands us to learn of him, and to profit by
our coming, and not to be as bad scholars, that have very good teachers or
masters, and yet learn little or nothing from them. And we are further to
mark, that in delivery of these exhortations or commandments, Christ
observes this order. First he puts down the exhortation or commandment it
self, as ver. 28 Come unto me alye, etc. and ver. 29. Take my yoke upon you,
etc. And then adds promises, full of comfort and consolation, as, I will
refresh you, in the end of verse. 28. and again, Ye shall find rest unto your
souls, the last words of verse 29. which our Savior Christ presses as we
see by doubling of them, not so much to express the infinite treasure of
spiritual joy that is in him, as to assure us that coming at his call, we
shall have that in great measure and plenty bestowed upon us, that shall ease
our smart. But all these things with many other more, we shall see more plainly
and understand: more fully in the particular exposition of the words themselves
as they lie in the text, and in the observation of doctrines, arising out of
them. To them therefore we come.

Verse. 28. It is said, Come unto me) In this verse, two things contained:
First, the exhortation or commandment it self in these words, Come unto me,
etc. Secondly, a promise adjoined as for our greater encouragement to well
doing, so for the better assurance of it in our hearts, in these words, And I
will refresh you, or make you to rest and find ease. In the exhortation or
commandment, we are to consider the person exhorting or commanding which is
Christ, comfortably saying, Come unto me: and the persons exhorted or
commanded in these words, all ye that labor, etc. who are described by
adjuncts or attributes, setting out their miserable estate: and they are two,
to wit, laboring and being heavy laden. And indeed the promise following
respects also these two persons, that is to say, Christ's person promising to
refresh, and the laboring or heavy laden, who are to be refreshed.

The word Come, whether it be of exhorting or commanding, does not comprehend
in it, either readiness, willingness or power of them that are called, as of
themselves, as the Pelagians in former times supposed, and our popish
adversaries have dreamed of late, because we know the scripture says, it is
God that works in us both the will and the deed according to his good
pleasure: and we believe that to be true, that our Savior Christ himself
testifies saying, No man can come unto me, unless the Father draw him: but
rather the singular care and love of the caller, and that not so much for his
own glory (who in the death and destruction of men can get and will get
himself a name) as for our good, who when we think no such thing, no nor of
our own good neither, being distressed in spirit (for then commonly we are
either dull and heavy hearted, or else through fear are grievously cast down,
and disquieted in our selves) does yet notwithstanding call upon us and to us,
and wills us to go or come, not to others, for then we might imagine, either
that he had no power or will in himself, or that he meant to shift us off: and
besides they either cannot or will not yield us relief, if we should repair
unto them, but unto himself, yea to himself alone, and no others with him,
for so much do I take these words, unto me, to import.

And that this is the true meaning indeed, both places of Scripture, and
reasons drawn from religion do plainly prove. In the xiiii. of Hosea, the
Lord by the Prophet speaks thus unto the people. O Israel return unto the
Lord thy God, as though he should say, to him only, and to none other besides
or with him. To the same end, yea and worthy to be noted, as serving also for
confirmation and exposition, of all the words of this very verse, tends that
which Christ himself says, Isaiah 55. which no man doubts to be an evident
prophecy of Christ and the graces, that we shall find in him, if with a
lively and steadfast faith, we labor to lay hold of him, Incline your care and
come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. And so much indeed must
Christ's words import, both there and here, or else we shall see a more
dangerous consequence than we think of. For if any were to be respected
besides him or joined with him in that work of spiritual joy. then were he
not God all-sufficient, because if any were joined with him, he were not
sufficient of himself: and, if he were not the God of all comfort, as well as
the Father of mercies, he were not God indeed, and so our faith and the
grounds of the word or Christian religion should be shaken. Besides if it were
so, and he told us not of it, but as a vain glorious person would take all to
himself, and more indeed then did belong unto him, then shall he be wrapped
up in a double transgression, the one against his father, toward whom he has
carried himself unfaithfully, whilst he has not revealed unto us all his
counsels communicated unto him for our good: and the other toward man, because
he has dealt deceitfully with us, in that he has deprived us of hope and
help, that we might have from others with or besides him. But all these things
are most false and untrue: for he was the faithfullest in all the house of God,
even as a son, and coming out of the Fathers bosom, has communicated unto
us all his counsels, and we know and believe that there was never guile found
in his mouth. And therefore that sense must of necessity be true, yea the
only true sense. It follows in the verse.

All ye that labor and are heavy laden. As the former words respected the
person calling and exhorting or commanding us to come unto him, so these words
concern them that are called, exhorted or commanded. Wherein Christ first
shows, that he is free from all partiality or respect of persons, in as much
as indefinitely or generally he calls all heavy hearts, and as it were
commands them to repair unto him. Which does not only serve to show his
great care and love toward them, whilst he both calls them all, and calls
them when they think least of any such matter (for if we would respect him in
his magnificence, or men in their own unworthiness, what are they that should
receive any favor, specially so great a grace as this?) but also answers
that, that many distressed spirits imagine that God has promised or showed
favor to such and such, because of some rare and singular grace in them, and
not for his own mercies sake, or for their miserable distressed estate. But he
that will well weigh the course of Gods works that way, or the truth of the
word, he shall find this to be but an imagination of man's heart and head, or a
suggestion and temptation of Satan, rather to hinder the course and passage of
Gods grace and goodness, from troubled and afflicted souls. For as for Gods
mercies, they are and must be altogether free, or else they are not mercies.
For who knows not that man in his best estate after regeneration, cannot
merit the meanest mercies of God, not in things appertayning to this life, no
not in a crumme of bread, or drop of water, much less spiritual graces and
eternal life. And though it be true that God acknowledges his own graces in
his own servants, as the fruits of their faith, and good testimonies of their
willing obedience, yet he may if he will by reason of the imperfection that
cleaves thereto reject all. And no doubt would do it, as in regard of his
absolute and exact justice, but that he has provided in Christ as a gracious
means for the forgiveness of all our sins through his death, so a plentiful
supply of whatsoever is wanting in us, through the most perfect righteousness
that is in him.

And me thinks we may see this to be true, thorough the disclaim that Gods
people have made of all, or any good thing in themselves, as David for example
in the xvi. Psalm. My goodness, O Lord, reaches not unto thee: and Isaiah for
himself and all the faithful, Chap. 64. Our righteousnesses before thee, are
as filthy and stained clothes. Yea we may see it by the course they have
kept, in pouring forth of prayers unto God, in which they have respected
simply and only these two things, Gods mercy and their own misery, and used
them as principal arguments, both to uphold their own hearts, and to provoke
him to pity, as we may plainly see in many Psalms of David, but specially
in the 86. thorowout. So that we may safely say, God respects nothing in man,
no not his misery (though I doubt not but that many times he is much moved
therewith) for if it were so, he should either leave all or none in misery,
and that our own experience teaches us the contrary: or if man's misery should
be the working cause in him, then those that are most miserable, should soonest
and most of all be respected, but that is not vriuersally true neither. And
again, if misery should be the first moving cause in God, why do not thou
that art distressed, and in thine own judgment so much as no man before thee,
from thine own estate and confession, gather comfort unto thy self from the
Lord? Wherefore let the troubled spirit cast away these conceits, and fully
assure himself that as in no respect, God is a respecter of persons, so not in
distributing and bestowing his graces, specially spiritual graces. And that
therefore so often as this or such like thoughts come into their heads, they
should know that they are, either from the ignorance or diffidence of their
own souls, or from the malice of Satan against them, and therefore they
should beware how they admit the^, for men can hardly carry such fire in their
breasts and not be burnt. But let us proceed.

Least this general and indefinite term of our Savior, should be stretched
further than his meaning, he knowing also even wicked men to be more forward
that way then they ought, he does restrain it, by two particular adjuncts or
attributes saying (ye that labor, and are heavy laden) Where first we are to
mark, that as in other places of the Scriptures, and other cases also, God is
wont to resemble spiritual things by bodily, and to speak of the^ by
metaphorical and borrowed kind of speeches; whether they be things in
himself, or without him: so here he does the like, for under these terms of
laboring and being heavy laden, which are properly referred to outward actions
and bodily burdens, he means sense of sin, conflict of conscience, and
tugging and wrestling as it were, with and under the wrath of God, sometimes in
outward afflictions, sometimes in inward sorrow, yea and condemnation for the
same. And as this is an usual thing with the spirit of God, here and in other
places of Scripture, and namely Isaiah 55. saying: Ho every one that thirsts,
come ye unto the waters, and ye that have no silver come buy and cat, come I
say, buy wine and milk, without silver, and without money, understanding there
by thirst that which he does in this place by labor and burdening, and by
water, wine, and milk, that which he does by refreshing and ease: so he does
it not without cause, specially as in regard of us, who do not only
understand outward things better than inward, but volesse that we be taught of
the inward by the outward, we can hardly comprehend them. He not meaning under
these borrowed terms, to signify that these outward are able to the full, and
as it were lively to set out the inward and spiritual (for that no eye has
seen, no ear has heard, no heart can conceive, nor tongue can utter) but by
them so well sorting with our nature, to give us some sight, smacke or taste of
them. And even herein also appears Christ's love, that he is pleased to stoop
down so low unto us, and in such base terms to express unto us such
excellent things.

But yet let us a little more particularly examine the words. That word that is
here termed labor, does not signify simply every labor, but such a labor as
is sore, and has joined with it toyling of the body, and moyling of the mind,
with carke and care, yea and wearines both of body and mind joined with it as
an effect flowing from it, and that causes some also to turn it thus, Come
unto me all ye that are weary. Whatsoever it be, we may see, that Christ
minds by this Metaphore, to express this much unto us, that distress of
spirit upon what cause soever it arise, and conflict of conscience, is no small
pain, but a great and grievous sorrow, entering deep into the soul,
disquieting the spirit, distempering the body, and making all parts and powers
unfit for all or any duty almost. And this to be true, the Scripture elsewhere
shows it, and namely Prou. 18. Where it says. The spirit of a man may endure
his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who shall bear it? And our own
experience can witness it, if either we have been humbled our selves, or have
been acquainted with other men's sorrows that way: in whom it has taken away
for the time, sleep from the eyes, hearing from the ears, speech from the
mouth, appetite from the stomach: nay I will say more, it has caused some, to
assay the finishing of their pain, as they supposed, with a shameful and
fearful end had it bin accomplished. Which yet notwithstanding is not spoken
here, or propounded elsewhere unto us in the word, to discourage or oppress
them that be in that combat: but as on the one side, to teach all men to cast
away security and carelesnes, so on the other side to instruct them that are
so weak in themselves to rely upon him that is the God of their strength, who
being in them and with them, and for them, will doubtless make his strength
and power to appear in their weakness.

That other word heavy laden, is metaphorical also and translated from bodily
burdens unto spiritual, that is to say, to the burdens of sin and iniquity,
which lie more hard upon the soul and spirit, though worldly men feel them
not, than any outward does or can upon the body: yea though a man should be
pressed therewithal unto death, because that only reaches unto the body,
and in the midst of the pains thereof, the soul little or nothing touched,
nay, it may be very cheerful and comfortable spiritually, and so cause the
soul almost to find no grief, as in the Martyrs, that have been so many
ways, and so grievously tormented, may and does appear: but when the soul is
ouerclogged with sin and the sense thereof, or of Gods anger against it for
the same, the very body is tainted thereby with sundry sorts of sicknesses, and
diverse kinds of diseases, some recouerable and some unrecoverable.

And we shall find it much used in the scripture, that sin it self is
compared unto a burden, which may in part appear not only by this, when the
Prophets call the judgments of God, that should fall upon men for their sins,
burdens, that so there might be some proportion between the iniquity they
had committed, and the punishment that was executed upon them for it: but also
by a plain place of the Prophet David, in that eight and thirty Psalm, that
we sung before this Sermon, when he says: Mine iniquities are gone over my
head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me to bear. By all
which we may see, that sin is not so slight or light a matter, as men make it,
but a wonderful weight indeed, whether we consider it in it own nature, as
being the fearful violation and breach of the law of God; or God that is
offended thereby, whose pure eyes cannot behold that that is evil, and his
hand in justice is pressed and ready to strike, or the dangers and damages they
pull upon themselves, in body and in soul, for this life present, and for that
which is to come: as terror and fear of heart, shame and confusion of face,
discredit amonst men, specially godly, discords yea anarchies in Kingdoms,
common wealths and families, and what not?

And indeed this were a point well worth the wading into, by reason of the
grossenes and corruption of the age wherein we live, making so small or no
conscience at all of sin and transgression, were it not that we are to be
occupied in some other points of comfort and consolation. Howbeit this much we
may say, that as it argues small conscience of sin in men, that mittigate
and minse it; so it ministers small hope of comfort unto themselves or others,
of the happy recovery out of it. For how is it likely, that they should be
cured of a disease, that either know it not, or feel it not, or take it not
to be so deadly and dangerous as it is? Whereas on the other side the tender
conscience charging, yea surcharging it self, with more then it should, it may
be (and yet that can hardly be, if men consider rightly the height and the
haynousnes, yea the infiniteness and innumerablenesse of their own sins
general and particular) though in that accusation it suffer much grief, yea,
and plunge it self as it were into distrustfulnes, is in more hope of a
gracious recovery (which in the midst of such sorrow of heart should minister
some comfort) because sin felt is more likely by repentance to be cured and
healed, then that that men make no keep or account of. But to let this point
pass, and to come to that that does more nighly concern our purpose at this
present.

Now there follows the last words of this 28. verse: And I will refresh you,
and contain in the^ the second part thereof, namely a sweet and comfortable
promise for the better drawing yea alluring of us, unto him that calls us
unto himself, but yet for our spiritual good. A thirsty body indeed would
rejoice to hear, though it were but of water and not of drink, to slake the
thirst withal: the reason is, because he knows it, and takes it, to be a
mean to maintain life. The tidings of ease, and lighting of him in some sort
of a great and grievous burden, to him that carries it, is no doubt of it
gladsome and joyful also, because it is a toil and a moyle, a wearisomnes and
weakness to body and mind to bear a weight (yea though it be but small)
continually. Reason and our own experience teaches us the truth hereof, in
these worldly things. But how much more shall this be found true, as in regard
of cooling yea satisfiyng our spiritual drougth, or as in respect of easing
the griefs and burdens of our minds: which in deed shall be so much the
better welcome unto us, when God shall be pleased in mercy to vouchsaue us the
same, by how much the burdens that we bear, and the pains we endure, are
indeed grievous, and (as we may say and shall find it too, without grace and
assistance from God) vnbeareable. In these outward matters, the more that is
promised the better we like, and the more great and faithful the party is that
gives us his word, the more constantly we assure our selves: but if together
with words, we find undeceivable accomplishment, then is our joy, as a man
may say, at the top and full. Mark these things here, and then we shall see
our comfort increased.

Where are more bountiful promises of truth and life then those that every
where sound in the holy Scripture? Do not they reach to the good things of
this life present, and that which is to come especially? Who more excellent
than the Lord that has made them? Who more great for power? Who more certain
for good will? Who more assured for fastness and fidelity than he? Should not
all these raise up our spirits in our selves, that are fallen down within us,
and even as it were cause us in hope or under hope, to believe against hope?
Which that we may the better perceive in our selves, and persuade our hearts
of, let us a little insist or stand upon the words.

He says, and I will refresh you. Who speaks it? He that either cannot or
will not perform it? no verily. But Christ God and man in one person,
consisting yet notwithstanding of two several and distinct natures, the
godhead and the manhood, has delivered it, that so we might be well assured,
as of his eternal power by reason of his godhead, so of his infinite good
will, by reason of his humanity, and in both of them inseparably joined
together from the time of his conception, persuade our hearts for the faithful
accomplishment of this most gracious and sweet promise. And we must needs
refer it to, and understand it of his whole person, not only because in him
consists the fulness of all goodness as we have heard, yea, even the very
fulness of the godhead bodily, but also because that delivering this as the
King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, and not accomplishing any of these
offices, in either of his distinct natures severally, but in his whole person,
he must in his person needs both deliver this sweet and comfortable promise,
and also effectually perform the same in the hearts of his saythfull people.

The word refresh is metaphorical, and well answers indeed the terms
before going, of laboring and being heavy laden. A man that labors sore
would be glad of ease: who doubts of that? The party that has a sore
burden on his back would willingly be lighted. Nature, reason, experience and
all teaches the truth of this. How much more then he, that is pressed if not
depressed with the sight of sin, with the beholding of his own infirmities,
with the feeling and fear of Gods wrath against him for the same, would be
glad to find refreshing, ease, and comfort. Which if it be offered and meant as
here it is, is excellent: but if it be received and felt, is so much the more
notable, by how much the soul is better then the body, and the griefs of the
one more great then the other, and therefore they being helped and cured, the
mercy ministered and made effectual, and the comforts flowing therefrom, far
surpassing all. Wherein our Savior Christ surely offreth no more, then what
he is able to perform, nay, then that which he will accomplish indeed, so
that we labor by that eye of faith, which he has bin pleased to vouchsaue
unto us, and that hand of faith that he has bestowed upon us, steadfastly to
look upon it, to lay hold of it, and to apply it to our own souls, because
the promises of God, though most holy, heavenly, and excellent in themselves,
yet without faith to feel and apply the same unto our hearts, they are as in
regard of men, as if they were not at all.

And yet to say truth, and that indeed for the further enlarging of the
comfort of distressed consciences, we are to mark, that the word signifies
much more then refreshing: though I deny not but that that considered, as it
comes from God, or in it own self, is a very singular grace. And it shall
both appear, and be so much the more gracious, by how much all and every one
of us, are unworthy of it, yea most worthy of all discomfort and judgment,
both for the time present and all continuance. But to the word, I say, it being
compounded of a preposition or particle, and a verb that signifies to finish,
end or cease from, our Savior notes not only refreshing from the pains,
and pangues that we endure, but putting an end unto all troubles, and sorrows
that are upon us, whether they be outward or inward, which though it shall be
principally, yea only and most absolutely performed in the life that is to be
reueiled, according to that of the spirit in the xiiii. of the Revelations.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they cease from their labors,
and their works follow them: yet it is in manner and measure begun here, and
by faith we steadfastly believe the full fruition of it, and through hope hold
fast, and with patience look for, the continual enjoying thereof And no doubt
of it our Savior has used so significant a word, that he might the better
provide for, and propounde comfort to the wounded spirit, which as it is in
anguish and grief for the present distress, so does it trouble and torment it
self, with this temptation, that it sees no end of the miseries and
calamities thereof. But be not dismayed says Christ, for the time shall come
faith Christ, wherein I will wipe all tears from your eyes, all grief from
your hearts, all sorrow from your souls and not only stay there, but give
you perpetual rest with them that are sanctified, and saved through me.

Hitherto we have tranailed, and I trust not unprofitably, chiefly in the
exposition of the words, interlacing now and then some things of comfort and
consolation, no whit I am sure strange from the meaning of Christ, or improper
or unfit for this present exercise and assembly. Now it remains, that
before we go any further in the words of our text, we do from this verse
gather some such good lessons, as it does afford us, for doctrine or
consolation; because this indeed may most properly be called the life of the
word, when men learn from the same good instructions, and endeavor to make
good and profitable use thereof.

The first point of doctrine issuing out of this text is this, that true and
sound comfort for an afflicted conscience is no where else, either to be sought
or found, but in lesus Christ only. Where I beseech you first to mark, both
how this doctrine arises from hence, and then the terms in which I do
propound and deliver the same. It is gathered from this place, because our
Savior calls us unto him yea unto him alone, which if it had not bin the
will of his Father, and very truth indeed, or if he alone had not had
abundant, yea infinite matter of strong and solid comfort in himself, he
would never have done, as we have already heard in the beginning of this
exercise. And for the words I do not say, there is no comfort to be found:
for meat, drink, sleep, friends, recreation, and such like, are comforts I
confess, but not true and sound comfort, for a distressed spirit. For the
affliction of the mind is inward, and these are but outward, and therefore are
not fit for a person or party so affected: and I would as soon think and
say, that bodily food were the proper and sound nourishment of the soul, as
suppose that these outward things, were the true and sound comfort of a broken
and contrite heart. But that yet we may be the better persuaded of the truth
of this point, let us proceed unto some further proofs of it.

This was not in my mind obscurely signified, under all the sacrifices of the
old law, whether they were ordinary, or extraordinary, daily or yearly,
general or particular, all and every one of them, in measure more or less,
tending still unto him, whom they did prefigure and signify, as the Apostle at
large declares in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And why him because he was he
alone, in whom God was pleased to reconcile the world unto himself, and to
make the one and only object of our faith. And this is plainly propounded
unto us and proved also, by manifold texts of Scripture both in the old and
new testament. I will not trouble you with many, for I like not much of that
course. Out of that great store let us take two or three both plain and
pregnant for this purpose. In the 55. Chapter of the book of the Prophet
Isaiah, a place cited before, and is as we all know and confess an evident
prophecy concerning Christ, and the graces that we shall find in him, if
with a lively and steadfast faith we labor to lay hold of him, it is said,
Incline your ear and come unto me (Oh mark how like this Euangelical Prophet
and our Savior himself speak and let this phrase also I beseech you serve
for a confirmation and exposition of these words of our text) Hear and your
soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David. Every word has his weight, he, yea, he alone will
establish not a momentany, but an everlasting covenant with all his faithful,
of which that we might be the better certified, he tells us it shall be
sure, yea, as sure as the mercies manifested unto, and bestowed upon David,
which as they were large and almost innumerable, so were they irreuocable and
could never fail. To the same purpose serves a notable sentence of the
Apostle 2. Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation abounds through Christ. By sufferinges of Christ, he means not
only those things, that we endure at the hands of persecuters for Christ's
sake: for Christ did not only suffer that way, but even those anguishes also,
that we have in our souls and in our spirits, Christ being as much, yea, far
more thrown down and humbled that way than all flesh, as appears by his
conflict in the garden, and by his outcries upon the Cross, saying: My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me. And though these have bin, were, and are, very
good indeed (as those that have felt and do feel the^, know and confess) yet
to the end that we might assure our selves, that our joys should match
them, he says, Our consolations abound through him. For if there were not a
proportion betwixt our heaviness and our comfort, nay I will say more, a
superaboundance of our joys above our griefs, then sure, what by reason of
Satan's malice against us, and the dullness and hardness of our own hearts to
believe, and the greatness of our griefs and sorrows besides, it would go
hard with a distressed spirit. And therefore as for the comforting of us,
against the hugenes and height of our sins, we say with the Apostle, where
sin has abounded there grace has ouerabounded. So in this case of inward
afflictions, particularly we say, our sorrows may be sore and our griefs
great, yet our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a
far most excellent and eternal weight as of glory in the life to come, so of
joy in this life raised up in our hearts by the comfortable feeling thereof.

And he that knows soundly, and feelingly believes, the names, natures,
person and offices of our Savior Christ, together with the effects that from
him in them are communicated to us, cannot choose but see, feel, and confess
the truth of this point. He is good, and in him there is not, or cannot be
any thing, but that which is absolutely good, as in whose face and presence
also, there is the fulness of joy for evermore, and at his right hand pleasures
for ever and ever. He is likewise so good, that yet notwithstanding he is man
like unto us in every respect, sin only excepted, and one that has bin
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, by means whereof we may the more
boldly come unto the throne of grace, and so receive mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need. Yea, these two natures are so joined and knit (as we
may say) inseparably in one person, even from the very time of his blessed
co^ception in the womb of his mother, for the accomplishment of the work of
our redemption, and our full comfort thereby, as that they cannot be divided or
sundred, he being man that so he might suffer, and God that so he might
overcome, the perfection and full accomplishment of our redemption standing
upon these two parts, suffering for sin: this is the first, and then
ouercomming sin, and death, and him that had the power of death, that is the
devil.

And why is he called Jesus? but because as it is said Matthew. 1. He should save
his people from their sins. For sin, and that that insueth upon sin, as
shame and confusion of face, horror of heart, condemnation etc. is it that most
stingeth men's minds and souls. Now all these being taken away in Christ, why
should they not as well and comfortably sing that tryumphant song, O death
where is thy sting? O grave or hell where is thy victory? the sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God, which
has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: as well as mournefully
utter that sorrowful voice, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death! His other name Christ, and his stately offices, of
King, Priest, and Prophet, contained in it, and under it set out unto us, what
do they else, but prove this point? For why was he all in all, but to give us
to understand that as all was in him, so all must be fette from him, or else it
could no where be sound. And though it be true that diverse persons had as
some one or other of those names (for example Iehoshua) so one or diverse of
those offices upon them, at one and the self same time (as Melchisedech if you
will) yet neither had they all, or if they had them, they had them but as
figures of him, whose person and place they did for a while represent, and
those graces also they had in measure, whereas in him they were in all
fullness, that so of his fulness we might all receive even grace for grace: that
is, abundance of grace, and yet when he has given us all that we have, he
having never a whit the less in himself.

And this very thing have all the godly in all ages felt in themselves, and
confessed before others, that so if it were possible, they might be made
partakers with them of the self same comfort. Abraham, says Christ in the
Gospel after John chap. 8. rejoiced to see my day, and indeed saw it, and was
glad. Christ meaning thereby that the abundant riches of Gods grace that was
in him, was made manifest in all former ages, the fathers by the eye of faith
(as the Apostle plainly shows it Hebr. 11.) seeing in the promises that he
should come: of whom also as they did very joyfully lay hold on by faith so
in respect of him and the sweetness of his promises they contemned all outward
things. And David no doubt of it in many places, fetteth out this grace and
feeling to have bin in himself, and he to have found favor with the Lord, as
in regard of comfortable assurance of this matter. How gloriously in many
places of the Gospelles, does Peter and the rest of the Apostles acknowledge
it. In the 16. Chapter of this Gospel, in the great variety of opinions, that
was amongst men concerning Christ, some saying he was Elias, some Ieremias, or
one of the Prophets. Peter in his own name and in the name of the rest, being
demanded what they thought, answered for them all, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God: Which what was it else, but to acknowledge that in him
alone, and in none other, was the fullness of all goodness, truth, life,
comfort or whatsoever else we can think of, or reckon up? And in the sixth of
the Gospel after John, where it is showed, that even for some points of
doctrine which our Savior Christ did deliver but were not rightly understood,
many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him, Christ
demanding of the twelve, whether they also would go away, Peter answered (as
he was always a forward fellow) Master, to whom shall we go? as if he
should say, certainly we cannot tell, Thou have the words of eternal life,
and we believe and know that thou art that Christ that Son of the living God.
But amongst all others yea above the rest as seems to me, the Apostle Paul
is most plain and plentiful in this point, whose several sentences recorded
in his holy Epistles concerning this matter, would make almost a volume. But
let us take one or two in steed of all the rest. In his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, and first Chapter thereof toward the end, he says concerning
Christ, and for the body of the faithful, that he is made of God unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, meaning thereby, that
all, even the chiefest graces that we can wish or would have, as true and
heavenly wisdom, absolute righteousness even before God, houest and holy
life in the sight of men, and deliverance from all sin, and all miseries and
calamities whatsoever, are to be found only in him and no where else. And in
the Epistle to the Colossians, once or twice for failing, he says, that it
pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell. chap. 1. And in the 2.
chap. he says, that in him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily: meaning
thereby that he was replenished, not only with most plentiful, but with
infinite abundance of all things, both divine and humane, he being not only
most perfect in himself, and passing all other things, but teaching his, that
whosoever has him, need require nothing more. Yea, that we might see in him,
what we our selves should strive unto, even every one of us, as in regard of
our own part or feeling, he does not only tell us comfortable things, 1.
Tim. 1. but sets a worthy preface before it, saying, This is a true saying,
and worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners, of whom I am the chief.

Neither need we to think this strange, that godly men have every where
acknowledged it, for even the diuelles and wicked men, convicted with the
evidence and clearenesse of this truth, have bin constrained, though it have
bin full sore against their wills, and but for the further increase of their
condemnation to confess it, saying, What have we to do with thee, O Christ,
the Son of the living God? And this is it also that S. James means, when he
says of the^, the deuilles believe and tremble.

And surely God himself does not obscurely, but most plainly rather propound
this point, both in the giving of his gracious promises concerning Christ, and
in the reiterating of them also, because as the Apostle says, In Christ Jesus
all the promises of God are yea and Amen. As for example, when to our first
parents after the fall, he says, the seed of the woman shall break or
bruise the serpents head. And when to Abraham he says, in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. Which he does repeat in Genesis, twice or
thrice at the least for sailing: and the Apostle does notably expound it in his
Epistle to the Galathians, saying, in thy seed as of one, which one is Christ.
That so in the particularizing of it we might see still this to be most true,
that no where we can seek for or find sound consolation, but in him alone.
Which also may yet further appear by this, that God the Father has not only
provided for the continuance and conueyance of this truth, over or unto men,
by the audible voice of preaching in the public ministry of the Gospel,
teaching them to sound and to publish it, saying, This is my well-beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased, hear him: but has offered to seal it up in the
hearts and consciences of them, by instituting and ordayning certain visible
signs and Sacraments, both in the law and under the gospel, all leading us
not only unto Christ, but unto all those sweet graces and heavenly comfortes
that we receive from him.

To omit to speak of the sacraments of the old testament, which yet
notwithstanding were for substance and matter, the same to the fathers that
ours are to us, and to come to the^ of the new Testament, yea and but to touch
one of them only, namely the Lords supper. What wonderful and unspeakable
comfort, does God in Christ offer unto us therein? To say nothing of those that
we receive there, the pledges of his death, and blood sheading, and of all the
graces that flow unto us therefrom, as forgiveness of sins, sanctified use
of the creatures, reconciliation to God, and sundry such like: what a
maruailous mercy is this, that under those elements of bread and wine, he
should seal up in our hearts not only the spiritual strength we have from
him, to die the death of sin, and to live the life of righteousness, through
his power, but also the heavenly comfort that he co^municateth unto us: bread
no more effectually or lively strengthening our hearts, nor wine more
effectually making us to be of cheerful spirits, than Christ partaken of by
faith, fills us with all manner of heavenly and holy joy.

And by arguments taken from privation if I may so say, we may prove this
point. The comfort that we speak of is no where else to be sound: therefore it
must of necessity be in him alone. If we would look to Angels and saints
departed out of this life, there is a double exception against them, for first
we are uncertain of their good will and sound affection toward us as in this
behalf: then we are sure they cannot afford us that we desire, as who neither
have that power in themselves, because it properly and only belongs unto the
Lord; and besides are sundred so far from us, in respect of distance of
place, that they are not able to stretch out their aid though they could help.
As for the rest of the creatures, they are as far unable and weak for this
work as the other, if not more. The diuelles and damned spirits will rather do
what they can to torment us, then yield any consolation. Man and woman that
live with us in the world are infirm, and stand in need as we our selves, and
not able in the greatness of their distress, to comfort themselves, much less
us: unreasonable creatures are tainted with our sins, and since the wicked
enjoy them in greater portion than we, cannot yield consolation. Our own
things that we have in our own power, as our wives, our children, and
friends, either in hard heartedness against us, will become miserable
comforters unto us, as Jobs wife and friends were, all the sort of them, or
else when we shall consider what injuries and indignities we have offered them
will increase our sorrow. And the like may we say of our health, wealth,
strength etc. which being abused, will cast down rather then comfort.

But whither am I carried in confirmation of this point? It is time as I take
it, to make use of it, and so to proceed to the handling and hearing of some
other doctrines.

We may see by it as if it were in a clear and true looking glass, the
miserable estate and woeful condition, of all in the world, that be without
the knowledge and feeling of Christ, I say, both knowledge and feeling (and I
beseech you join them both together, for they cannot be sundred, no more then
the soul and the body) because as all without the knowledge of him are under
condemnation, so many that know him, and yet feel him not in faith and
obedience, shall certainly perish. For if that be true which Christ himself
says, Ioh. 17. This is life eternal to know thee to be the only true God
and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: then this by the contrary must needs
be true also, that those that know not God, and him whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, rest under eternal condemnation, because Christ says, he that
believes in the name of the only begotten Son of God, shall not come into
judgment, but has passed out of death into life: and again, he that
believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the
only Son of God. By which we see what sentence to give not only of the
heathen and gentiles, of whom the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 2. that they were
without God in the world: neither yet of the Jews, Turks and others, who
though they acknowledge God the Father, yet obstinately deny and refuse the
person of the son: but also of many thousands of Christians, whereof some as
heretics deny his natures, as the Anabaptists, who deny his humanity, and
our popish adversaries defacing his offices of Kingdom, in erecting and
exercising another government, the^ he has prescribed of priesthood, in
placing their daily unbloody sacrifice in stead of it: of prophecy, in
bringing in new docirines, and establishing traditions, and other such trash
and trumpery. Other some again knowing him, but denying him through loose and
lewd life, of whom we may say as the Apostle says of some other not much
unlike them that When they knew the power of godliness, they denied it
notwithstanding in their deeds: and of whom also we may say though it be to
their terror, as Christ says Luke 12. He that knows the will of his master,
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

And yet let no man think this a hard or hasty judgment, for here we speak
not the words of our own heart or mouth, but of God, and may in some measure
in this behalf say, even as Christ himself says Ioh. 12. I judge no man, but
there is one that judges such, even the word that he has spoken, it shall
judge them, according to which when we judge, we cannot but judge righteous
judgment, because it being all and only truth, it can give no sentence, save
according to the same. But to draw it more near to our present purpose and
occasion.

We may learn from hence what is the reason why so many distressed spirits ly
as it were broiling in the flame and fire of a troubled and disquieted he art.
Sure he either they know not Christ, and the power of his grace and spirit, and
then no marvel though they boil and broile indeed, when they are touched with
the sting of conscience for sin, and condemnation therefore: For how can it be
otherwise, seeing there is neither forgiveness of sins, nor ouercomming of
condemnation, nor any comfortable and continual feeling of any favor but by
him. Or else they feel him not with his force and effect that way, though they
know their own sin, the punishments due unto them therefore, with the
manifold vnworthynesses they find in themselves, hindering them from comfort and
consolation. As for the former sort, I would wish them carefully and painfully
to labor the attainment of knowledge, because then they are and shall be a
degree nearer to grace and comfort than before, which having once obtained, and
hearty prayer made unto God for the sanctified use, continuance and increase
thereof in the^, they shall no doubt in good time come to feeling: but till then
let them never think of it, for all their thoughts that way shall be but
lost labor, because not knowing, they cannot believe, for how can any man be
persuaded of the things he knows not? And for the other I would in the fear
of God counsel them, never to think of sin alone, or of condemnation by it
self, or of their own unworthiness apart, for then certainly they cannot
choose, but be much discomforted and greatly cast down, but to ioyn always
therewith the remedies that God has provided and given them there against, as
opposing against sin, Christ's sufferings, and the merits thereof, which being
strong to take away the cause, cannot but utterly remove the effect, that is,
condemnation: and to oppose against their own unworthiness, the worthiness of
him that has deserved all in all, not for himself, for he needed no merits,
as never having offended; but for us, that in his righteousness we might stand
pure and clean in the sight of God. And then no doubt but if we do this,
these temptations shall be the more easy, and the sooner overcome, specially
if we adioyne therewith all prayer for the increase and strengthening of our
faith, to apply unto our selves all the sweet promises and comfortable
examples of the word, which indeed, be not only as many sure seals and
pledges set thereunto, but so many particular documentes to instruct us what to
do, because God is not in this sort or sense, a general God to all, but a
particular God to the faithful, and a special God to every one of them, as may
appear by these words of the faithful, I thank my God, and in prayer, My
God, my God, etc. And yet this applying of him unto our selves does not
straighten Gods goodness in it self, for that is infinitely large, nor hinder
it from others, for he may and does give to all abundantly, and yet all they
have to the full, and he himself never a whit the less therefore.

A second doctrine that we may learn from hence is this, that the estate of a
distressed and an afflicted spirit, is not so hard or heavy, so dangerous
deadly or desperate, as many men in the world take it, and would make it to
be. This is gathered from hence, yea and confirmed also by this, that he does
here so comfortablie call upon them, and command them to come unto him, which
if they had been past hope he would not have done, for our Savior has not
done or said any thing in vain. Surely nothing was hidden from him, he knew
their estate, and accordingly framed himself thereto. And indeed to say true,
it had been to no purpose, because being past hope, it should have been in vain,
either to have called or commanded. But Christ shows rather the quite and
clean contrary, namely, that it is good and comfortable, as we may perceive
by this, that our Savior Christ so tenderly regards them that be plunged
into that misery.

And this we may understand also by many reasons as well as by that before
alleged. All things in the world, and therefore this, must of necessity come
from God or from nature. That which is from God, is as himself good yea, very
good: that which is from nature, is as nature, vitiated and corrupted. But this
indeed is no natural thing, as may appear by this, that nature in the
corruption of it rather sootheth men in sin, than any manner of way charge
them withal: yea nature is so far from working it, that it rather shunneth
it, and flies from it as a most grievous evil. And besides, if it were
natural and from man, why should not all be exercised with it, seeing all men
are meerlie natural, and have alike sinned as in regard of the taint of
original sin? and though it may be that actually all men have not sinned alike,
yet since every man in his measure or manner, has broken the law of God: if it
were from nature it would follow thereupon that every man either more or less
should be touched therwithall, because every man has more or less sinned. It
being therefore from God, as may appear by this also, that he has ordained
many means, and amongst the rest the execution of judgments, and the
denouncing of the same, by the ministry of the law, and his using of the same,
as a worthy instrument, to bring men there unto; it will follow thereupon that
it cannot be but good, because nothing comes from him who is all sovereign
goodness in himself, but that which is good even as he himself is. And if it
be good, as it must needs be coming from him, then it is not evil, or so
dangerous, deadly and desperate as many men make it.

Besides, let us but a little regard the persons, who are most touched
therewith, and we shall see that they be the dearest and nearest unto God, and
are best beloved of him. Amongst the Fathers under the law, were any more
excellent than Abraham, than Moses, than David, than Isaiah? Of Abraham it is
recorded, that he was the Father of the faithful, and the friend of God. Of
Moses it is affirmed, that he was the faithfullest in the house of God, as a
servant. Of David, that he was a man even according to the heart of God. And
yet how much were every one of these humbled? Let David stand us in steed of
al. How many not only here and there sentences or verses thorowout his book of
Psalms, but whole Psalms of this subject and matter, plainly show him, to
have bin far thrown down and humbled? To reckon them all would require much
time, and therefore to rehearse them in whole or in part much more: but let him
that doubts of the truth of this read Psalm 6.13.38.77.102. and 130. and if
by them he will not be persuaded, that David was touched to the quick this
way, no thing I suppose will cause him to believe it. Under the Gospel we have
our savior Christ himself, the principal preacher or minister thereof, a
plain pattern of this point. His whole life was lead under this estate, yea
and as we may say, laid down in it also, as it is at long and at large
described unto us by the Evangelists. And this argument also, I mean
concerning the humiliation of our Savior, every way the Apostle in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, does not only handle in the six or seven first chapters of
that his epistle, but teaches Gods people to make special use thereof for
instruction and comfort. And if any will imagine that he was so thrown down,
because he was best, yea only able to raise up himself and others also: let
us turn our eyes from him unto others, and yet we shall behold the same still.
The Apostle Paul was an elected vessel, and chosen to carry Christ's name
amongst the Gentiles: and yet his state and condition this way is notably
described in many places of his second Epistle to the Corinthians, but
specially in the fourth chapter, where he says: We are afflicted on every
side, yet are (...) not in d^stresse: we are in doubt, but yet we despair
not: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but we perish not. And he
makes a particular recit all of many of them in the eleventh chapter
following. But specially that of the twelfth serves for this purpose, where
he says, Least I should be exalted out of measure, through the abundance or
excellency (for the Greek word does signify both the one and the other) of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger
Satan to buffet me: for this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it might
depart from me, but he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for my
power is made perfect through weakness. And shall we think that God would lay
any thing upon these the only worthies of the world, save that which was good
indeed? If we imagine so we are much deceived. And think that that will
neither agree with Gods nature in love, nor stand with the favor and affection
that he bears unto his children. For no doubt but as he loved them most
dearly, so he bestowed upon them the greatest and best blessings.

Again if in all affliction we may in our measure say as David the Prophet said,
in some particulars of his own. It is good for me, O Lord, that I have been
troubled, for before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have learned to
keep thy law. Then much more in afflictions of this kind, I mean sorrow and
sickness of soul for sin past, God using it not only as a mean to draw us to
repentance for that which is past, but to make us in time hereafter to come,
more wary of and watchful over that, that in former time has bitten us and
pinched us by the heart, and provoking us in the heaviness of our spirits to
spend time that way, to provide comfort for ourselves, spiritual I mean, that
others are constrained to employ about bodily ease, relief and pleasure. And
surely the^ these inward sorrows and griefs, cannot choose but be good, not
only because they are occupied about a more excellent part, the soul, I
mean, which God no doubt does especially regard, but also because they bring
forth better, at least sure I am more spiritual effects: as because they
pinch more, more earnest prayer for grace to bear with patience, to undergo
with profit, and to overcome through strength, and do more conform us unto
the Image of our head in his sustringes (who endured much more this way, than
any other way) and therefore also better or more excellent. Where we must yet
further note, that that is not simply or only, as in regard of the afflictions
themselves, but because God accompanies them with the power of his sanctifying
spirit, which makes us in some measure, not only peatakers of the divine
nature, whilst we fly the corruptions that are in the world, but like unto
God, as in other respects, so in this, that as he causes the rage of men to
turn unto his praise, and at the beginuing yea and ever since to, commands
light to shine out of darkness: so we out of the folly of our own sins learn
spiritual wisdom, and from their darkness which is more palpable and gross
than that of Egypt, labor and learn to setch the spiritual light of a holy
life.

And a further proof yet we have of this point, in that God himself is pleased
well to like of and highly to commend this estate and condition: We know and
believe that he alone is the best able to discern of men and matters: and we
are thoroughly persuaded of this also, that for his entire uprightness, he
cannot give wrong sentence or judgment. For howsoever men through blindness,
partiality or other corrupted respects have been and are foully misled, and
erred in matter of opinion and fact, yet none of these things falling into
God, he can do no otherwise but determine according to right, so absolute and
perfect is all and every thing that is in God. But he has told us, that he
likes well of, and will respect and regard indeed those that are this way
exercised. Of which if any man doubt, let him but mark and embrace that which
we speak according unto godliness and truth, and I doubt not but he shall be
well persuaded. In the 51. Psalm. David as well experienced in these cases as
any man, says thus: The sacrifices of God (that is to say, such as the Lord
now delights in and accepts of) are a broken spirit: by which he means a
mind that is bruised and cast down in it self with the priuity of his own
infirmity and unworthiness. What can be more plain? what can be more pregnant?
And yet as though this were not sufficient, he adds further, A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Gods not despising is indeed
esteeming, and he uses so mean a speech, the better to express so excellent
a matter, for no doubt of it, but he will well accept thereof, as his own work
in us. And agreeable unto this is that of the Prophet Isaiah in the 66. chap. I
look to him (says God) that is poor and broken in spirit, and that tremble
that my word. As if he should say, others I regard not though they come with
their hands full of sacrifices: for that hypocrites may and do perform, but
this none can come unto indeed, but such as be sound hearted, and assuredly
belong unto me, and are indeed my holy temple and dwelling place. And what
shall we say of that, that Solomon speaks even from God himself in the 28.
chap. of the Proverbs. Blessed is the man that fears much continually. Is it
not a plain proof of this point? And does it not directly cross our
corrupted judgment? We say they are in miserable and wretched estate. But we
are ignorant and cannot discern of those matters specially, no more than a
blind man is able to judge of colors. But God says he or they be blessed. If
he be the only wise God, why stay we not our selves upon his sentence?

To shut up, and that as if it were in a word or two the confirmation of this
point, we say that whosoever either considers God from whom these anguishes
and distresses, are sent to good ends doubtless, as in regard of his people;
or regards the persons upon whom they are laid, to wit the dearest and the
best of Gods people; or respects the fruits and effects that they bring
forth in the servants of God; or believes God so highly accouning of them, he
cannot choose but give glory to God, and acknowledge the truth of this,
namely that the state and condition of a man or woman wounded in spirit, is not
so hard or heavy, so dangerous or deadly, as many times we take it, or men
make it to be.

But now let us descend to the uses of it. By all this we may see how much
they are out of the way that judge the disquiet and distressed estate of Gods
people in this world, either by God to be laid upon them for sin, which is
false, for God does not always punish his for their iniquities, and there are
many causes that may move the godly to mourn, as well as for their own
sins, for examples, the mischiefs intended and practiced against the Church,
the disorders and breaches of the common wealth, the general ouerflowing of
sin and iniquity in others with sundry such like: or else take it to be mere
madness in them, or at least superfluity and predominance, and ouerruling of
melancholy. As for madness surely, call it by what name you will, frenzy,
lunacie, or I cannot tell what, it cannot be so, for then it should go and
come, according to the increase and waning of the Moon, and should cause them
affected therewith to be so unorderly, yea so unruly, as no man or matter
almost should be able to hold or guide them. But those that are in this way
touched, we know to be for the most part in one estate, and so far from
unruliness, that they are very meek, patient, and ready to be guided, having so
profited under the hand of God, and by the feeling of their own unworthiness,
that if any come to them, and handle them roughly in word or deed, they bear
it with quietness, and say in some measure as the faithful do in the Prophet
Micah. J will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: at which time he will
bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness.

And as for melancholy, I will not deny indeed, but that the conflict of
conscience may be somewhat increased by abundance of that perilous humor? And
I think no man that knows what it means, and the conceits it works in
them, in whom it abounds, will ever gainesay it. But there is not all. For if
it were only from thence, why should not all melancholic persons have it in
proportion according to the superaboundance of that humor in them? But that is
not so, as daily experience shows. Or why should others, and of other
complexions also, besides the melancholicke, be sick of this disease? and that
many times more dangerously then diverse of those that have abundance of
melancholy bearing sway in them. Surely God shows us hereby, not only that
their judgment is corrupt that thus think, but also that they are blind, and
buzze out a word touching a matter that they have small skill in and less
experience of, yea none at all. Small skill, because they know not the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, without which indeed no man shall be
skilfully acquainted with these causes. No experience, because they never felt
hell in their hearts, or Gods wrath against men for sin, unless it have bin
in them, either as a flash of lightning for a while, to make them without
excuse, or as a mighty fire and flame to torment them without ease, that so
they and the wicked that deny God, heaven, hell, immortality of soul and all,
might see in themselves, though they have no comfort thereby, but wonderful
terror rather, how much they are seduced. We say and we say truly, that a
blind man cannot discern of colors. And why so? because he that must judge
thereof, must both have sight and wisdom. One of these the blind man lacks
if not both. Yea we see many that notwithstanding they have their eyes, are not
yet able (for want of judgment and experience) to discern of the diversity
of colors, specially if so be they be mingled or compounded. He that must
determine rightly of this matter, either as in regard of himself, or as in
respect of other men, must have more then the eyes of his head, and more then
the understanding of his natural heart, for the natural man perceives not
the things that belong to the spirit of God, neither indeed can he, because
they are spiritually discerned, and he is carnal and sold under sin. Yea he
must have even the eyes of God, and wisdom and understanding from above, that
is spiritual, and such as he vouchsaueth to bestow only upon his own
children, and to which also, for their better encouragement of them in it, of
his own mercy he promises a blessing in the 41. Psalm, saying, Blessed is he
that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble. The Lord will keep him and preserve him alive: he shall be blessed
upon the earth, and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of sorrow, thou have turned all his bed in
his sickness.

Wherefore when the afflicted person has many times his griefs enlarged
within him, not only by the sight and sense of his own sin, and Gods wrath
against the same, but by this also, that such a man and such a man thinks so
of him, and says so of him, we may see he has in a readiness, and may easily
answer even for himself in this behalf with the Apostle, or as the Apostle
did in another not much unlike saying. It is a small matter for me to be judged
of man or of man's days: and the rather too, because God has not given
judgment unto men, but reserved it in his own hands, as who is best able
every way most rightly to pronounce. Again he may well and truly say thus to
his own soul, they that so censure me, are ignorant, or unexperienced, or
hard hearted, or partial, and one way or another souly overtaken and unfit
to give sentence: they know not themselves or their own estate, how should
they know mine. We must stand or fall to the Lord, and not unto men. With
these and such like are they to raise up their hearts, and cheer their
spirits against the blind, unexperienced, rash, yea uncharitable judgment of
other men, hudled out thick and threefold against them, in the days of their
affliction and sorrow. And if in other cases of far lighter weight, the
Apostle will not have us to judge one another, but sharply reproves it, saying,
What art thou that iudgest another man's servant? He stands or falls to his
own Lord, yea he shall be established, for God is able to make him stand.
Shall we think he would approve or bear, so gross a corruption and foul a
fault as this? No verily. Let us learn therefore, to lay our hands eue^ upon
our hearts and our mouths both, and not give our selves liberty either to
think evil of, or to speak hardly of, those that be thus thrown down, and
humbled under Gods mighty hand, for that is presumptuous against the Lord, and
uncharitable toward men.

And another use may be made of this point as in regard of the faithful
themselves, who minding too much their own sins, and by means there of
misery and unworthiness in themselves, and judgments from God against them
for the same, many times make their own mouths means to express fearful
things against their own souls: as for example, no man in so woeful taking
as I, I fear I am a castaway, or else why should I thus be tormented? And
these things I doubt not but they deliver from a heart, that feels as much
as the mouth expresses. Howbeit I say, what art thou, that take the Lords
office into thy hands? and deliuerest these hard and heavy things, and that
not against other men (which were indeed uncharitable) but even thine own self
which is unnatural? Tell me I pray thee. May blindness so far prejudice men's
judgments, that it shall hinder them from beholding their own and other men's
states? and shall it not obscure thine own also? yea, and that even concerning
thy self, and touching thine own present state? But further know this, O
man, that sometimes greatness and continuance of griefs, makes the best of
Gods Saints to say as much against themselves as thou do, and yet for all
that be in never a whit the worse case. David in the xxii. Psa. cries out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And yet even the^ he was near unto
God, yea and dear unto him also, or else he could not have called upon God,
and that in such particular manner, applying him to himself as he did, neither
would the Lord have so graciously granted him his requests. And why should
not this be thy state, rather than the state of a damned or reprobated wretch?
To uphold thy heart, thou have something, even the sanctified examples of the
people of God, but to depresse thee so above measure, thou have nothing but
imagination and conceit, either of that which is not in God, or if it be, is
not in him to that end that thou supposest: or else of that which is not in thy
self; or if it be, is not in that measure and quantity, or to those ends that
thou imaginest.

Besides I beseech you consider, that it is one thing what men speak of
themselves, according to their present feeling, either of sin in their
souls, or the wrath of God against them therefore, which many times may be
more tha^ is either meet or true: and another what God is in his own nature,
and what he himself says of them. God is exceedingly good and merciful, and
is not indeed bound to ratify every sentence of man's mind or mouth, which he
utters either against his own soul, or against others. I hope no man is,
sure I am no man can be rightly persuaded, that any particular person is more
than the whole Church. And yet God no otherwise approoueth the Churches
judgment to ratify it in heaven, than they on the earth bind according to his
will. And why should it be otherwise as in regard of particular persons? Have
they better privileges than the whole Church has: if it be so, let them
produce a law, not of the twelve tables amongst the Romans, but of the ten
commandementes amongst the people of God, or else there is no credit to be
given. O my brethren, it fares in the diseases of the mind, as it does in the
sickness of the body. Many a man, yea skillful Physicians, take them to be at
deaths door, when God gives afterward long life. On the other side some
bless themselves in their own hearts and think all is well, when death
suddenly seizes upon them, and leads them to the grave and hell. Remember I
beseech you what was said before out of the 28. of the Proverbs, Blessed is the
man (says the Lord there) that fears much continually. This state and
condition of ours, whenever or wheresoever it pleases God to exercise us
therewithal, is a principal argument unto us, that God would not have us
perish with this wicked world, he by this as by other means through his grace,
making us able thus to judge our selves. And indeed to have such a fearful
and checking heart of our selves, for sin past, or for fear to fall into it
hereafter, is one plain difference betwixt the godly and ungodly, who are
seldom or never this way touched, at the least with comfortable effect. And
therefore let the afflicted soul, gather consolation to his conscience, and
correct his judgment: for surely that which he takes to be bitter as gall or
wormwood, is by the Lord himself, and not by the voice of man to be
proclaimed to be sweet as honey, or the honey comb.

The promise specified in the last words of this verse, comes now to be
looked into. Out of which gracious and sweet promise we may learn two things.
One, that the fulness of all spiritual joy and comfort is to be found in Jesus
Christ and no where else: which because it is the same that has bin handled
heretofore, we will but only touch, and put you in mind of it, not standing
upon it, because it is done already. And indeed though the point be excellent,
and would be handled again and again, yet because the time passes away, and
we are to come to other points, we will say no more. Only let the faithful
conscience look well unto it, and provide his comfort this way, or else let
him know he shall never be comforted indeed.

The other is this, that if a man will find sound comfort indeed, he must be
well acquainted with the promises of the word. This doctrine as others is both
gathered out of this place, and confirmed by it, as may appear by this that
our Savior Christ is here so plentiful in the promises, I will refresh you, ye
shall find rest unto your souls: which course also he observes in many other
places: I will have mercy and not sacrifice: and again, I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And most sweet is that in the third
chapt. of the Gospel according to S. John, God so loved the world, that he
has given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Neither is this his practice only, but the
spirit also in all the writings of the old and new Testament is large this way,
and specially in that evangelical prophet Isaiah, as we may see by the
manifold promises contained therein, and specially in three or four chapters
together, as 53.54.55. etc. But amongst the rest how comfortable is that of
chapt. 41. from whence even unto the end of his prophecy almost, he does
nothing else but publish promises and confolations: amongst which howsoever he
do sometimes intermingle terror and threatening, yet he does it to no other
onde, but to make the mercies of God, more exceedingly merciful: as sometimes
to disgrace a base color, or to make a color that is perfect indeed, to
appear more beautiful and orient, we set by it another that is nothing so
glorious and good. But to our purpose, I say, how comfortable is that of
Isaiah. 41. where the Lord commands his ministers to comfort, yea to comfort
his people, and to seek out for them, and to speak such things unto them, as
may delight and affect their heattes, and to proclaim unto them that the set
time is accomplished, that their iniquity is pardoned, and that they have
received double at the Lords hands for all their sin. And this is yet further
made plain by this, that though all the word generally be the object of our
faith, teaching us indeed what we should believe and do for Gods glory here,
and our endless glorification else where; yet the principal props and stays of
our consciences, for comfort and consolation indeed, are no where else to
befound, but in the gracious and sweet promises contained therein: which also
is manifest even by the very practice of God himself every where propounding
them to an afflicted and distressed heart, as the principal and peculiar
remedy against the sickness of our souls that way. In the 103. Psalm he
says, that look how much more high the heavens are over the the earth, so much
does his goodness prevail upon them that fear him. Again, he remooueth our
sins as far fromvs, as the East is from the West. By two fit similitudes
taken from things that are subject to our fight amplifying the grace and mercy
of God, and opposing the same against our transgressions. And in Isaiah 1. he
says thus, Though your si nes were as skarlet, they shall be as snow, and
though they were as crimosin, yet they shall be whiter than wool. And fearing
least men would not willingly come, how does he there intereat us? saying,
Come now I pray you and let us reason the cause together, as though he should
say, let us friendly confer of the matter. If you will but lend and bend your
care, and be touched with the true sense of my righteousness and your own
sins, I promise faithfully, that I will for mine own mercies sake put away
all your transgressions whatsoever, though they be never so great or grievous.
That shall not let my work in you: my mercy shall surmount all: yea your
misery (if you soundly turn) shall magnify the greatness of the abundant
riches of my mercy. The new covenant that God makes with his people in the
31. chap. of Jeremy, (and to the end that we might know it indeed to be a
promise of the new testament, it is repeated by the Apostle Heb. 8.) how
comfortable and full of sweet promises is that? After those days says the
Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying: know the Lord
for they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest; says the
Lord, for J will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no
more. And if the old testament be so plentiful, what shall we think of the
new, which does as of purpose propound, and handle this point or question?
Christ himself says, Mat. 7. Ask, and it shall be given unto you, seek and
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. And in the 7. of John, in
the last and great day of the feast, he stood and crying out said, He that
believes in me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
water of life: and in the 12. of that Gospel, He that believes in me, yea
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever lives and believes in
me shall never die. Is not that of the same nature which he speaks of in
another Euangelisst? The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. And what
may we think of that which is alleged in the 12. of the Gospel after Mathewe,
out of the prophet Isaiah, A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking
flax shall he not quench, till he bring forth judgment unto victory? Out of
Paul's epistles we have spoken somewhat before in the first point of doctrine
that was gathered out of this text, yet take one or two. In the 2. to the
Corinth. chap. 6. he says, We are the temples of the living God, as God has
said I will dwell amongst them and walk there, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Yea I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters says the Lord almighty. And the same Apostle delivers a
notable promise, with a glorious and comfortable preface, prefixed before it
also. 1. Tim. 1. This is a true saying and worthy to be receined of all men,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief.
May we not of these and thousands such like, say as the Apostle Peter does,
that most great and precious promises are given unto us, and that even for that
end which he expresses there, namely, that by them we should be partakers
of the divine nature, whilst we fly the corruption that is in the world through
lust? Are not these great promises, and may justly be so called, because they
proceed from the great God, and propounde unto us great and excellent matters?
May we not esteem them precious, not only for the raritie and excellency of
them, but also because they underprop our precious faith? Are we not made in a
double respect by them partakers of the divine nature? 1. that as in regard God
is joyful and cheerful, we are also become comfortable, and replenished with
spiritual joy. 2. That as be cease from sin, and is continually occupied in
well doing, so we learn thereby in our measure and manner to die the death of
sin, and to live the l^fe of righteousness: What other men may think I know
not, but to me it seems that God thus in his word, setting promises against
sin, minds nothing else but to show that as sin is it that most stingeth the
conscience, so the mean to heal that biting (as if it were the brazen Serpent
set up to cure the bytinges of fiery Serpents) and to bring comfort against
the same, is the promises of God propounded unto us in the word, and selt in
our hearts by faith.

And this is so plain and evident a truth, that even there where God seems
most to terrify, I mean in denouncing the threats of his law, or judgments
against sin, he yet thinks upon, not only his mercy in himself, but as it
is manifested unto men, he even there, either plainly expressing promises of
blessing, grace, and favor, or else closely implying and understanding them.
Wherein surely he deals no otherwise, then he does in the commandments, by a
good thing commanded, forbidding the contrary cuill, and by an evil thing
prohibited, inioyning straightly the loving and doing of the contrary good,
that so we seeing what God aymeth at both in his precepts promises, threats,
and all namely not only our obedience and humiliation, but comfort also, we
might learn to attain that, and to look to and for that, which he has
provided for our good.

And yet we shall more clearlie perceive and behold this truth, if we respect
Gods word, or the holy scirptures in the several parts thereof, fundred as
if it were from the promises. For if we look upon the threats contained therein
against sin and sinners, they will be so far off from performing this duty
of comfort and consolation, that they will rather work in us horror and
trembling, and make us to be so not only cast down, but dismayed in
ourselves, as we shall hardly, or not at al admit comfort. The doctrine of the
law separated from the curse and threatening due to the transgressors thereof,
will indeed set before us Gods absolute and exact righteounesse, and disconer
unto us the duties, that we should do to him and to our neighbors. But when we
consider withal that it sets out our sin against every particular
precept, that will be so far from yielding us consololation, that it will
over whelme us with despair, when we either respect Gods absolure
righteousness, or our own innumerable transgressions against his blessed law.
And though I doubt not but these former things may be good and powerful to
humble us and somake us indeed more fit for consolation and comfort, even as
preparatiues going before better physic, for the scouring away of bodily
diseases, yet can they not of themselves help or heal (but wound and
terrify rather) for that is the peculiar both office and work of Gods
promises made essectuall in our hearts by the touch and operation of the
spirit. Nay, I will say more than that, though the ground of Christian
religion, and the maine points of faith be excellent things, and have their use
not only for increase of knowledge, but even for the building of us up in care
and conscience of well doing, and being well felt may answer many temptations
that arise in a scrupulous and doubtful mind: yet still the promises of the
word, minister matter of assured comfort and comfortable assurance and
feeling: which also we may perceive by this, that many may have the knowledge
of faith, and yet in the day of temptation, not be able to strengthen their
own hands or others.

But to proceed a little further in the proof of this point: We cannot but
confess, that the examples of mercy and comfort in the word, are full of
strong and sound consolation, because they be as if it were so many seals set
unto the writings of Gods promises, that as heretofore he has been to
others, so he will hereafter or still, be favorable unto his people. And yet
we shall see, that they lie open though not of themselves, yet by reason of
man's corrupted heart to many exceptions: as for example, they to whom they
were accomplished were better than we: God was more favorable then, than he
will be now, because we have more means of mercy, and have profited less:
and therefore are not so properly fit for consolation, as the promises are. For
over and besides that they are but in men, and therefore full of weakness and
wants, we know and confess every where, that as we must live not by
examples, but by rules, so we must be comforted, not so much by examples, as
by promises. And therefore though examples be good, yet not so strong; whereas
the truths certainty, and power of the promises, is from the might and mercy
of him that has made them, who also is both greater then all exception, and
free from the least show or shadow of turning. And yet let us be understood, I
beseech you as we should: namely that we ascribe not this excellent work unto
the promises themselves, though also we deny not but even in that respect,
they are spiritual, holy, heavenly, etc. but as by the spirit they are made
powerful in us, and as by the hand of faith we are strengthened to apply them
unto our selves: for otherwise we may say of them, as we do of the rest of the
word, that without the spirit and faith they are as if it were a sealed book
unto us for understanding, and a dead letter for instruction and consolation,
having even no other use in us, than the rest of the word not felt or obayed,
namely to make us without excuse, or to cause our sorrowefull and heavy
estate, to beco^e more sorrowful and heavy, because we see holy and heavenly
things propounded unto us, and ye have not either hearts to understand, or
souls to believe. This therefore must be our principal care, to make that
profitable unto us that GOD graciously provides and propounds for our good.

Now we come to the use of this necessary doctrine, which as I take it, is or
may be twofolde. First, for instruction. Secondly, for confutation. For
instruction, we may plainly perceive hereby, what is the reason of so much
heaviness of heart, sorrow, and fear, in so many of Gods people and children
in the world. Surely either they are ignorant of these sweet and gracious
promises not so much as having either heard them, or known them, or else if
they have in some measure of knowledge been acquainted with them, they have in
the carelessenes of their own hearts, or not seeling present use of them, let
them slip out of their minds, like leaking vessels, not able to contain
such good things; or else if they have known them and remembered them through
want of comfortable feeling of the good things propounded therein, they have
been unto them, as if they had either not been at all, or as though they had
contained in them, no such sweetness and pleasure as they do indeed. And let us
not think this strange: for even as ignorance in religion and carelesnes to
obey the things that we know, is a principal cause of all transgression and
loose life: men not being either willing or able to do the things they are not
acquainted withal; and for the things that they know, blearing out their
knowand laying the raines in their own necks: so they not knowing of the
promises, or they not minding of them, or not striving comfortablie to feel
them, is the very welspring as I may so call it, of all inward and outward
discomforte, and distress of conscience especially. For how can the wounded
conscience admit comfort, when he understands not the comfort presented unto
him? or if he forget it, where is his joy in the midst of his
forgetfulness? We say that of an unknown thing there is no desire: and we
may in proportion say the same of a thing that is not remembered. For our own
parts let us know that as Satan labors to root out of our hearts generally,
all the seed of the word, that thereby keeping us in blindness and
ignorance, he may make us run riot at his pleasure: so especially he
trauaileth, either to hinder us from receiving or having received from making
good use of the sweet and comfortable promises of the word, the very matter
if I may so say, and a special mean I am sure of our spiritual comfort.
For the redressing and repressing also of which enormities in us, a godly man,
that is in some sort ignorant, should labor to abound in the knowledge of
them: as he that is forgetful should refresh his memory, by often reading,
meditation and conference in them, and that not only by and with his own
heart, but even by other men also: and they that want feeling of them should
look unto Jesus Christ, in whom all the promises of God are yea and amen, and
should be much and often in the use of all the means whereby Christ is become
ours, as the word, sacraments, prayer, sasting, etc. But above all they should
regard, and labor for the holy spirit, to be shed abroad in their hearts,
both to make all these things before named powerful in them, and to pledge up
also the truth and certainty of the promises themselves, because it is the
carnest penny of our adoption and inheritance. That so since satan there
labors to assault us most, and shake our faith as in that behalf, we might
thither bring all our aides and defenses, as they do that are in a besieged
hold, and so we better made able not only to endure the assault, but to drive
our foes with their forces, from our gates and walls. And he or she or they
whosoever that can do this, they may well assure their hearts, that howsoever
they may now and then, or for a while be buffeted and beaten, yet they shall
never be vanquished or overcome, because he that is in the^ and with them and
for the^, by himself and his blessed spirit, and all other effectual means of
consolation and comfort, is stronger and greater than al.

Secondly, it is very fit and meet for confutation of a conceit, that rises
up in men's minds, yea and is delivered also by the mouths of some specially
our popish adversaries, who tell us that this propounding of comfort in the
promises of the Gospel, acquainting the people therewith makes mensecure and
careless. But herein surely they show themselves blind and blockish, as who
have not yet learned to distinguish between a thing good in it self, and man's
corruption abusing that which is good. They may by the self same reason
abolish all the other parts of the word, and disanull or euacuate the
sacraments, because infinite thousands in the world abuse them, to the increase
of sin and licentiousness in themselves: yea if they will or can make
frustrate Gods grace, because many turn it into wantonness, and say since is
this true, that where sin has abounded, there grace has superabounded,
therefore let us continue in sin that grace may abound? And if for or in
outward things, we should reason as they do, and have it followed that so is
delivered, we might easily bring all disorder and confusion into the world, and
overthrow the whole course and raze of mankind. Some abuse drink to
drunkenness, and other some meat to gluttony and gourmandise, therefore there
must be no use of meat and drink: what is this else but to starve the
excelle^test of Gods creatures, man I mean? Many abuse apparel to pride, and
puffing up. It were best therefore to have men go naked, which what were it
else but to become or bring in new Adamites? Diverse turn magistracy and
authority into tyranny, and therefore with the Anabaptists, away with all
civil authority and government: which what were it else, but to bring in
Anarchie, worse than tyranny by much? But to the point indeed. The promises of
themselves, and in the servants of GOD bring forth no such effect. For as they
are delivered for the comfort and consolation of them that are afflicted and
mourn in Sion, as may appear in every place where they are alleged, and
namely in the two first verses of the 40. chapter of Isay, and tend indeed to
manifest Gods love and mercy, that so in the truth and performance of his word,
we might be well assured, that nothing should put an eternal separation
between him and us, that has loved us so tenderly, and given us such gracious
promises of truth and life. So surely the doctrine every where adjoined to
those promises in the word, does plainly show that God means not, to make
men secure and careless thereby, or would have them to infer any such thing
thereupon. And therefore when in the latter end of the sixth chapter of the
second epistle to the Corinth. he had alleged many promises of peace and
goodness, he begins the seventh Chapter thus. Seeing the^ we have these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filt hines of the
flesh and the spirit, and finish our sanctification in the fear of God. And
the like he does in the second chapter of the second epistle to Timothy,
saying, The strong foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the
Lord knows who are his: but withal let every one that calls upon the name
of Christ, depart from iniquity.

And let this suffice for these words of the 28. verse. with the rest I cannot
proceed, because we have been somewhat long: and as I am weary in my self, so
am I loath to be troublous or tedious unto you. God may be pleased hereafter
to give both occasion, time and place, to pursue these things and to finish the
residue. In the mean while, it shall not be amiss, in a word or two to apply
that has been said, to our persent assembly and causes thereof, and so to
shut up this exercise.

The causes that have moved us thereto, are great and grievous iniquities
prevailing upon al and every one of us, the heavy rod of penury and scarsity
that ouerfloweth the land, wars and rumors of wars, and the same intended
and threatened against us, both outward and inward at home and abroad. To divert
or turn away, the punishments for our sins and the judgments that we
confess and acknowledge, we have justly deserved therefore, no outward thing
will serve, though it be never so great and glittering or seem never so
pleasant or painful, but soundnes of heart and humble walking with our God in
all our ways, and all the days of our lives. To this we have been exhorted
and provoked by manifold good means, and namely by propounding singular
comforts and consolations which the Lord has vouchsafed unto us, the better to
meet with our backwardnes from approaching to him, we being sometimes
discouraged from doing of that duty, by his almighty greatness and
excellency, and sometimes let from it, by the consideration of our own base
and unworthy estate. But yet since he has so lovingly and fatherly called us,
and for our better encouragement given us gracious promises, let us draw near
with a true heart in assurance of faith, our inward parts being pure from an
evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water. And so no doubt the
punishments we presently feel shall be removed, the fear of our foes at home
and abroad shall be put far away, and we shall not need to dread the curses
of that Balaam of Rome, not the vaunts and attempts of that proud and
persecuting notion of Spain, nor of any other our enemies bodily or ghostly,
because that our consciences being quieted with the comforta. blefeeling of all
Gods favors, and specially of the forgiveness of our sins, and the
salvation of our souls, we may comfortably say, as the saithfull that have
gone before us have done, I will not be afraid for ten thousand of the people
that should beset me round about. Nay though I should walk in the valley of
the shadow of death, I will yet fear none ill, for thou art with me, thy rod
and thy staff, they comfort me. Yea that we are persuaded that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Now let us pray that God would give a rich and plentiful blessing in our
several hearts to all the good things that have been delivered unto us at this
time: and let us humbly entreat him to make them profitable in us, not only
for this present, but for all the days of our lives, to his glory and our
everlasting comfort through Christ.

FINIS.

