A GLASS for Gamesters: and namely for such as delight in Cards and Dise:
wherein they may see not only the vanity, but also the vileness of those
plays plainly discovered and overthrown by the word of God. Written by T.W.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Thomas Man. 1581.

A Glass for Gamesters.
The first Chapter.
Seeing that the lewsenesse and blindness of this our age, either of ignorance
perceives not, or of malice will not understand, what great evil ensues,
by the play of Cards and Dise, and other games of lotte, fortune, or chance
(as men use to call them) I have thought good to putt down, and by writing
breefly to show, the arguments and reasons which may make the inconveniences
hereof to be sensibly perceived, yea seen as it were with the eye, and
touched with the hand. And although I know (by the little experience which
God has given me) that in these evil days of the world (wherein all manner
of ungodliness does wonderfully abound) there is great store of mockers and
contemners of God and good things, men altogether inflamed and set on fire,
to run after their own pleasures, yea and that even in the midst of the
Christian congregation, who peradventure for all this, will not leave their
vanity, and in respect of whom, all the travail, that I now take, shall be but
labor lost: ^saiah. 55.11.
yet because I am assured by the word of God, that the truth shall never be
uttered in vain, and because I hope, that even in these wicked days there are
some (though the number be but small) with whom good counsel shall prevail
(when they shall see the evil they have done) to draw them back from former
inco^ueniences, and disorder. I have for their sakes the more willingly
attempted this matter. For notably in deed, and full of great comfort,
both in the instructor, and the party instructed, is this saying of the holy
ghost: Proverb. 9.9.
Give admonition to the wise, and he will be the wiser: teach the righteous
man, and he will increase in learning. But terrible to the one, and full of
heaviness to the other are these sayings: Prouer. 1.7.
Fools despise wisdom and instruction. And again. Though thou should
braie a fool in a Mortar, Prouer. 27.22
among Wheat braied with a Pestell, yet will not his foolishenesse, depart
from him.

The second Chapter.
HEre in the beginning, I will put down the things I purpose to deal
withal, and the order, which I mind to observe in handelyng of the same. As,
first, whether a Christian may play, yea or no? Secondly, whether it be
lawful, to play at any game for money? Thirdly, I will name those Games which
I take to be unlawful. Fourthly, I will make it plain, by the testimonies of
the Scripture, of ancient Fathers, general Councelles, the Civil and Canon
Law, yea and of the Painims themselves, that these plays of chance and
fortune, and namely them of Dise and Cards (for my purpose is specially to
touch them) are not tolerable, nor to be used of them, which make
profession of Christianity. Lastly, I will answer, in as few words, as I
can, the objections and reasons of such men, as maintain these Plays.

The third Chapter.
THe first matter, which I am to entreat of, is a question: and that is,
whether a Christian man may play, at any manner of game, yea or no? Which I
think meet to be handeled, because there is in these days amongst us, not
only diversity, but contrariety of judgments touching this matter.
Libertines, Atheistes, and carnal professers.
For the greatest number (play it self being a thing, wherein the flesh very
much delights) think that they may lawfully play at all games: an
opinion surely very detestable, and to be shunned of all true Christians. An
other sort there are, Anabaptists and others.
who seeing the evil, that ensues of some games unlawful, hold it therefore
unlawful to play at any game: a judgment, thought not sound, and therefore
to be avoided, yet nothing so dangerous, as the other. Because this (though
over much and more in deed then reason would) brideleth the flesh, a thing
which stands in need of very much taming and subduyng, whereas the other
loses the raines, and opens not a window only, but a broad gate, to many
great mischiefs and grievous inconveniences. A Christian therefore is to
consider, how he may escape these two great gulfes, and how he may so behave
him self, that in this behalf he be no sclaunder, to that holy profession,
wherein God has placed him. I, for mine own part (and yet in all that I
write, I willingly submit my self, and my judgment to the censure of Gods
Church) am neither so leuse, as the first sort, nor so rigorous or scrupulous
as the other: but am persuaded (of which mind also saint Augustine seems
to be) that it is the duty of a wise, or godly man, Augustine. libr. 2. de
Musica. cap. 14.
sometimes so to recreate him self, by lawful exercises, that he may be able
to endure, and hold out, in the labor of those things, which he has
attempted and begun: and do affirm, that it is good to have (as it were) a
breathyng time, yt afterward he may return more cheerfully to his
ordinary travail and labor. We see, that the holy scripture (which is the
only rule, to try out good and evil) both makes mention of plaiyng, and
permits the same to Christians.

Zechariah. 8.5
In the Prophet Zechariah, we have these words. And the streates of the City
shall be full of boys and girls, plaiyng in the streates thereof. 1. Corint.
10.31
Also, when saint Paul says, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God: we may understand this word,
whatsoever, to comprehend any godly and honest recreation: which without
doubt is as lawful for us, by reason of the infirmity, and weakness of our
Nature, as is drink, meat, sleep, or any other thing, when we have need
thereof. And as we may by our Savior Christ's words in S. Mark plainly
gather this poinct: Mark. 2.27.
to wit: That the Sabbath was made for man and his use, and all to this end,
that it might be referred to Gods glory, his own good, and the benefit and
profit of others. So I suppose, that a man may safely, and without any
prejudice to the truth conclude, that honest and lawful recreation, has been
invented for manne and for his healthes sake, and the preservation of his life
(I mean not, that play can prolong man's life, Job. 14.5.
for all our days are numbered, so that we cannot pass them) in which while
we are, we have (no doubt) wonderful, and unspeakable occasions offered us,
religiously and holilie to serve the Lord our God. Which I think to be one
of the cheifest causes, why GOD has placed men in this world, and one of the
greatest reasons which moved David, Psalm. 30 9. Isaiah. 38.3.1
Ezekiah, and others, to desire of the Lord, long life, and continuance upon
the earth. I confess in deed, that all and every one of our actions, ought
to be referred to the glory of God, and the edification and profit of our
neighbors.

Neither doubt I, but that, if we solace our selves honestly and godly,
thereby indeuouring to maintain (as much as in us lies) our strength, to
uphold health, to repair our forces, by continuance in some exercises, a
little as it were decayed, to refreshe our Spirits, dulled or overwhelmed with
some labors or studies: and all this we do to this end, that we may
afterward, when our duty requires, more joyfully and cheerfully give our
selves over to that calling, wherein it has pleased God to set us, and might
be thereby made the more fit and better able to perform the same: I doubt
not I say but that in the end, this shall redounde both to the glory of God,
whom by this mean, we serve more readily: and to the good of our neighbors,
whom, we being fresh and well disposed thereto, may more easelie and
commodiouslie help, according to such ability, as the Lord has given us.

The nature and spirit of man, may in my judgment, be aptly compared to a
Bow, which how strong soever it be, if it be always kept bent, is not only
in danger of marring: but by that means becomes, both very weak, and
afterward being drawn, is easelie broken: but if it be bent, for the time
that a man uses to shoot in the same, and afterward unbent, set up and
kept in good order, it is preserved and continues a long while. No man I
think, has ever denied, but that it is lawful and fit for a Christian, if
he be sick, to use ordinary and godly means for the recovery of health. And
why I pray you should it be less lawful to use lawful and honest means,
for the continuance and preservation of health? The use of godly means is
not unlawful, but trust in them is forbidden. To use them, with trust in them,
is to shutt God out of the doors, and place his creatures in his steed. On
the other side, to neglecte or refuse them, which God has ordained, is to
tempt God, and therefore we ought warely to shun, and avoid both these
extremities. Verily in my judgment, this should be too great a cruelty in no
wise to grant, that a nature ouermuche wearied with study, or a man
ouerwrought with travail, might not or should not recreate him self. And on
the other side, this were too great a leusenesse, to let him use at all times,
lawful recreation, or at any other time unlawful recreatio^. I take play at
honest and lawful games, to be a thing allowable, and lawful, and to be of
the number of those things, which are left in Christian liberty: Galath.
5.13.
which liberty we must not abuse, as an occasion unto the flesh, but
according to such rules, as GOD has left for the lawful use of the same in
his holy word. Wherefore I forbid not, neither do I condemn all manner of
play: yea, I think it not evil, that sometimes a Christian man play and
refreshe him self. Provided alwaie, that such recreation and delight, be in
things lawful and honest, and that also with moderation or measure. For it is
not meet, that men should spend at play (though the play it self be never
so lawful) either those things, or that time, which God has allotted him,
to other ends and purposes. For God has given him goods for the mainteinance
of him self and his family, and the releeuyng of those, which want necessary
succor and maintenance. The Lord has also appoincted him a time, which he
ought to spend, in the faithful dischargyng of that office, which the Lord
has laid upon him. So that whosoever shall thus excessiuelie and unlawfully,
waste these good things (yea I say, though it were at lawful games) shall be
subject to Gods heavy judgment, for the miserable and wicked abusyng of
those his good gifts: and shall no doubt (unless speedy and unfeigned
repentance ensue) feel the hand of God upon him, for his sin and
transgressio^. And thus much for the aunsweryng of the^, which think it not
lawful to play at any game: with somewhat also touching the^, which think it
lawful to play at all games. But these men shall be more particularly and
fully answered, in the discourse of this treaty, and namely in the last
chapter thereof.

The fourth Chapter.
Touching the second poinct, I fear not to affirm, that it is unlawful to
play for money, to win it, and purse it up when it is won, that is to
say, either for a man to lose his own money, or to win an other man's, and
so to make gain of the same. As concerning both their persons, that is, the
winner and the loser, I say generally, that they both do evil in this, in
turnyng vpside down the nature of play, and the end, for which play and
gamenyng was devised. For whereas play was appointed in the beginning, only
for the exercise of the body, or recreation of the spirit, these men omittyng
those ends, make it a mean to gain or get money by, and so change and alter
the nature of recreation, into a kind of dishonest and unlawful game, which
thing Christians (be it little or be it much) are plainly forbidden by the
word of God. And as touching the party that loses, he is deprived of that
(yea though it be but a little) which either might do good in his family,
or profit other the needy members of Christ: beside that which follows
upon this losing, as disquietnes of mind at the least, if not cursing,
sweareyng, quarellyng and such other like, which make the matter on his side,
and in respect of him much more intolerable: Add to all this, what wisdom
does it argue to be in that man, who when he has the possession of a thing
in his own hands, will by Cards, Dise, and such other unlawful exercises,
make trial whether it shall be his own? And if the looser fall into these
inconveniences, so that on his behalf, it is not lawful for him to play for
money, by what right or reason shall we think, it may be lawful in the
winner. That which he gets at play, he must get either by right or by
wrong, for between these two, there is very little or no mean at al: If he
get it wrongfully, I think all the world will condemn him therefore: because
that though the world delight in wrongful dealing, yet such is the might and
power of truth, (and that even in the^ which do wrong them selves) that it
makes them to dislike that vice in others, wherewith they them selves be
defiled and infected. If they will say, they get it rightfully, let the^ show
by what law. This saying of the common Lawier, Id possumus quod iure possumus,
we may do that only which by law we may do, is (having a godly
interpretation) a very good saying. Sure I am, that all the Gamesters in ye
world, if they should lay their heads together, shall never be able to prove,
either by the law of God, or by man's law, that play was at any time received
amongst men, to be (as it were) a certain kind of Merchandise, traffic, and
bargainyng away of our goods, or a lawful means whereby to get other men's
gooddes. Amongst all the laws of men, which have at large set out all honest
means, rightly to come by, and lawfully to possess the goods of an other, the
civil Law is very excellent, and has most largely and carefully put down
the same, and yet amongst all the honest means there declared, play is not so
much as recited or reckoned up, nay cannot be comprised, either directly or
indirectly, under any term there expressed. There is mention made of bargains
of sale, of hiryng of others things, of promising to leave a thing better then
a man finds it, and such like, by which we may justly have and possess
that, which is an others, but of lawful possessyng an other man's goods gotten
by play, not so much as one word, title or iotte, tendyng to that end. So
that (seeing neither in God his law, nor man's, any thing is found for it) we
may well infer, that whosoever takes and withholdeth the money of an other,
having won it at play, withholdeth it without any lawful cause, and
therefore has it with an evil conscience. And if this should be permitted, se
what would ensue thereupon: men should bring in an insatiable covetousness, in
the place of the recreation of the mind, and an earnest desire to beguile one
an other, insteede of delightyng and rejoicing the spirit, which is so far
of from refreshyng either of the parties which play, that it is a continual
trouble and boylyng in them, one while having a greedy desire to win and
gain that which is an other ma^s, and an other while vexed and moved, that he
shall leese and forgo his own. And though there were never so many customs,
politic laws, evil uses, and corruptions of manners, set against this
truth, that here I put down (albeit for my part I know no law or custom,
that says otherwise then I say here) yet durst I boldly aduouche, that to
win money at play, and to purse it up, is utterly intolerable and
unlawful, yea that it is plainly and directly, against this last
commandment of the second Table: Exodus 20.17.
Thou shall not covet: for tell me (I pray you) who is he among all the plaiers
in the world, that has not this greedy desire in him, rather to win an
other man's, then to leese his own, though he play for never so little or
small a sum? And herein I am not alone, for amongste the Laws and statutes
of Geneua (a City for the Godliness there practiced, The laws of Geneua. folio
70. page ^. lin. 8 Also fol. 80. page 1. lin. 8.
worthy of all men to be reverenced) it is decreed that no man play at any
manner of game for money, whosoever shall do otherwise, shall forfeite
threescore shillinges in money, and abide three days in prisonme^t. That not
able man Peter Martyr, Peter Martyr in cap 14. lib. Iudicum. fol. 148. page 2.
lin. 44. etc.
in his Commentaries upon the Judges, both aunsweareth an objection, that men
use to make for their defense in this behalf, and plainly declares his mind
herein. His words are these: But some say, they delight not in play, except
they play for money. But I will demand of them, to what use they intend to
bestow that money? Peradventure they will say, upon a feast. Why not rather
upon the poor? But I say, it is much better and safer not to play for any
money: for although it may be, that thou thy self art not touched with
covetousness, the other yet with whom thou plaiest, is peradventure touched: let
the occasions unto evil be taken away, which otherwise are very many, which
move unto evil, etc.

Hottomanus lib. 2. devsuris
Master Franciscus Hottomanus, not only a great learned Lawier, but a
Christian Lawier, is of the same judgment also, and teaches, that by the very
order and disposition of the Civil law, gain gotten at play, and pursed up,
is a thing forbidden, and justly to be disliked. Neither is Saint Augustine
far from this mind, who wills that the money won at play, should be
given to the poor: to the end, that both the looser should be punished, not
having again, that which he lost: and the winner also deprived of his hope,
having nothing of that, which he had evil gotten. Besides, what reason is there
I pray you, to turn that, which was found out and devised for man's
recreation, into an occasion of covetousness and filthy gain? What show of
reason is there in this, that (there being so many poor as there are, in the
Church of God, and they to in such great misery and need) he which is
called a Christian, and brother of these poor, and acknowledges them for the
members of Jesus Christ, should play and spend his money at his pleasure,
and that at unlawful games, rather then to distribute it in alms, and give it
to his poor brethren, Isaiah. 58.7.
who in the Scriptures are called his own flesh? Cannot money (being of it
self the good gift of God, be better employed, then vnthriftly to be consumed
at Cards, Dice, and other unlawful games? If we would look well about us,
we should see, that with it, many poor children might be provided for, and
instructed in knowledge and religion, and so become afterward profitable
members in the church or common wealth: we shall find many sick and weak
ones, which have need to be relieved, and many prisoners and exiles, that
ought to be comforted: to minister unto whom if we be able, rather then waste
it at unlawful games, our duties prescribed unto us in the word of GOD, do
very straightly bind us. What a grief and horror of conscience, will be unto us
one day, though now we consider not of it, when we shall buy this our
pleasure so dear? Were it not better for us, Luke. 16.9.
to follow Christ's counsel, and to make us friends with our money, not those
which win it from us in play (for neither does our Savior Christ mean
it of such, neither shall they stand us in any steed at that day, unless
it be to be witnesses of our sins, Prouer. 19.17.28.27.
and to accuse us) but the Godly poor, upon whom, look whatsoever we
bestow, we shall be sure to have it plentifully, with great profit and
increase restored unto us again, in the day of that great judgment of God.
Augu tom. 8. colum. 116^. d.
Augustine will not have a faithful man, to give his money to a Iuggler, or
Stage plaier, although that by his travail and pleasure, we receive some
pleasure: much less me thinks should he suffer us, Idem tom. 9. colum. 4^4.
a.
to give our money unto a gamester, which plaieth with us, and whom we our
selves for our part make merry, as well as he makes us merry? This is then my
conclusion, that the plaiyng for money, and the pursyng of it up, when it is
obtained and gotten in play is unlawful, both in respect of the thing it
self (because it takes away the end, why plaiyng was ordained): and also of
the persons, because the loser is unjustly dispossessed of his own, and the
other unlawfully possessed in that, which is an other man's. Neither will I
here make any distinction of Plays or Games. For whether the Game it self be
good or evil tolerated or forbidden, it skilleth not in this behalf. And yet
I must confess, that it is a greater evil, to win it at unlawful games,
then otherwise.

The v. Chapter.
WE are now to declare, which be plays prohibited and unlawful. Touching
which, first I affirm, that all such plays as the law and custom of the
Country wherein a man does live, forbids, are to be held as unlawful, but
yet with this condition that those laws thus forbiddyng such plays, be
grounded upon some honest and holy considerations: otherwise if the
Magistrate forbid such plays, as Christians may lawfully use, I think, that
if the Christian use those games forbidden, with certain Godly conditions, he
does not offend. My meaning is this, that in such cases, men are to take
heed, that they do nothing openly, to the public contempt of the order taken
by the Magistrate, whom God has placed over them: neither privately in the
presence of those, which are scrupulous in conscience. Touching the
observation, of all whatsoever positive Laws of Princes, least that by this
doing, they should by their examples, make others to neglect public orders,
and draw upon them the wrath of the prince (which is as a messenger of death,
Proverb. 19.12 20.2. 16.14.
and like the roryng of a Lion) for their transgression of his Law, and grieve
or trouble the minds of the weak. For play being as I said before, a thing
allowable or lawful, we are therein to consider not only what we may do,
but also, what shall be profitable for us to do: 1. Corin. 10.23
and to look not to our selves alone, Romans 14.21.
but with all to have an eye to this, that we grieve not ye consciences of the
weak. Secondly, I say, that al those plays are unlawful, in which there are
alurementes and prouocations (whether it be by words, deeds, countenances, or
any other way whatsoever either secret or open) to wantonness, dissolutenes,
or dishonestie, be it I say, either in effect, or be it only in words and
appearaunce. Touching the deeds, I think there are but few so wicked that
will deny it. Touching the countenance, words, and appearaunce, perhaps
they will make some stay, and say that it cannot be. To answer whom, though
I might allege, many good and sound reasons, yet because the holy Scripture
is that, whereby w^ must stop the mouths of al adversaries of the truth, I
will make that alone, my foundation and ground work, touching this matter. For
countenance we see what our Savior says. Whosoever looks upon a woman to
lust after her, Math. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. The consideration
whereof made David to pray to the Lord, Psalm. 119.37.
to turn away his eyes from regarding vanity. And as for words our Savior
also tells us, Math. 12.36.
that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof at the day of Judgment: Psalm. 141.3.
the consideration whereof made David in an other place to pray, and say: Set
a watch, O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. And as
for appearaunce, the holy Ghost is so precise therein, that by the mouth of
the Apostle Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
he commands us to abstain from all outward show and appearaunce of
evil. By which we gather, that all these filthy plays of daunsinges,
maskinges, mummynges, and other the like, should be banished and driven far
away, from the company of Christians, because they be not only little
entraunces, or small beginnings to much wickedness, but fierbrandes, or
rather in deed, great flames of villainous and secret whoredoms, and many
other vices: A third sort of plays there is, which be unlawful, and these
in one general term, I call the games of chance. I call these games, or
plays of chance, in which men are directed, rather by chance, to obtain
the game and victory, at such a play, then by cunnyng and industry. They of
old time were wont also, to call these games, the plays of chance or hazard,
and they did define them after this manner. Play of Chance or hazard, is all
manner of play, where the adventure and event of chance, being as it were
hidden and unknown, the victory by the same chance, is given and brought
unto him that wins. There was of these games many kind of sorts, as
appears by Julius Pollux, Onomasticon lib 8. cap. vlt.
all which the men of old time, did co^prise under this word Deca, as the
Frenchmen at this day do the same, under the name of Cards, and Dise:
against which, as I mind chiefly to speak in this treaty: so here I put
down, that even for this reason, because they be games of chance or fortune
(as we call it) that therefore they be not only dangerous, but also
intolerable, and altogether unlawful. And because I will not be thought to be
alone, I think it not amiss here to put down Peter Martirs judgment
touching this matter. Petrus Martyr ^n 14. lib. Iudi^um. fol. 148. page 1. lin.
36.
We must decree says he (that such plays, ought not to be suffered, which
are covered by chance and rashness, so that in them goods and money are
indaungered, because it belongs to the public wealth, to see that things be
rightly governed, and GOD gives goods to be spent to good uses: and because
by it spryng oftentimes horrible blasphemies, and robbing of our fre^des, and a
covetous desire of other men's goods, is stirred up, besides the great loss
of time. If any man will deny the^ to be games of chance, that is easily
answered. For must not men take that which the Die cast, or the Card dealt,
gives and brings. So that though we would gladly have, either a better cast
at Dise, or a better game at Cards, yet we cannot, but must content our
selves with thai, which the Dise, or the Cards give us. Whereupon it
follows, that the victory falls, where it pleases the Cards and Dise to
give it: of which mind also, even Tullie him self is, who writes thus? What
is lot or chance? Even that in deed which it is, to throw the Dise, in
which things, rashness and chance, not reason and counsel prevails. Yea
but some will say, we can so set the Cards and the Dise, that we can win
when we list, and have what game seems good to our selves: so that it is not
by chance, but as pleases us. To which I say, that though this might be
some piece of an answer, to wit, that many times, the cunningest in that
wickedness are deceived, yet I ad that this is a horrible sin, added unto
sin, not only by unlawful games to spoil men, of that which is their
own, but also by treachery and deceit to win it from them. How much I
pray you does this differ from cousnage, forbidden by the law of our Land?
And how much does cousnage differ from a certain secret kind of theft, which
is forbidden by the law of GOD? ^xod. 20.15. ^phes. 4.25.
And how many are the places in holy Scripture, by which such crafty and
deceivable dealinges be forbidden? Besides that thereupon insueth commonly,
braulynges, quarelynges, fightynges, blows, yea many times murder. But more
of this particulare matter of Cards and Dise, in the next Chapter followyng.

The sixth Chapter.
IN this Chapter, I will according to order before specified, put down profes,
plainly declaryng the unlawfulness of these games of Dise and Cards. And first
to begin with the scriptures and reasons annexed thereunto. I take these
games of Dise and Cards, being as I said before, games of lot, hazard, or
chance, to be statly against the third commandment, Exodus 20.7.
thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. The reason that
leads me thereunto is this. Lot, or chance (as we call it) is one of the
principal testimonies of the power of God, Prou. 16.33.
because it is ruled and governed immediately, by his hand and providence, and
was never ordained of God for any thing, but for matters of great weight, and
never used amongst the Godly, Psalm. 16.5.6.
but in causes of great importance, as in partyng of goods, Nomb. 26.55.
diuidyng of lands, election of Magistrates, choice of Ministers, and such
like things, Samu. 10.20.21
and was appoincted to take away, Acts. 1.26.
all occasion of heat, in words, and quarelles, and corruptions in speech.
Now for us to take that, which God has appointed to so great and holy uses
only, and to apply it, to serve our fond affections, in every light trifle,
and case of no weight, what is it, but to tread under foot, the ordinance
and institution of God, and so consequently, to be transgressors of that
third Commandment. Besides that, it seems to be a manner of temptyng of
God, when we know, that he will not have this used, but in matters of great
weight and importance, and yet we will use it, in things of no value, as
though we would make God, a servant of our pleasures, laughters and delights,
and would know, whether he have any care thereof, then the which, what can be
more strange to utter, or fearful to think? Ephesi. 5.16.
Secondly, the spirit of God commands us, to redeem the time, that we have
lost, by exercisyng our selves in vain, idle, and unprofitable things, and
to bestow that time, which we now have, in good and holy things, and such as
in deed may serve to edification and profit. The reason which the holy
Ghost uses to move us thereunto, is this, for the days are evil, as if he
would say: the more corrupt, that the manners of this world are, so much the
more need we have, to use all seasons, and to take all occasions, and to set
nothing before us, but the good, holy, and acceptable will of God. To which
also we may add, according to the truth of Gods word, an other taken from
the brittlenesse and shortness of our own lives here in this world. Psalm.
90.3.4. etc.
Whereupon I infer, that whenever it shall please God, to give us a time
and occasion to be occupied, either in readyng, or hearing his holy word,
visityng the poor, comfortyng the afflicted, or doing such like things, it
must be taken quickly. For occasion is balde behind, Galath. 6.10.
and there may (because many things fall between the Cup, and the upper
lip) fall out some let, which we our selves do not forsee, and which
may turn us away from doing that good. Moreover, we our selves are easily
drawn by vanity and vain persuasions, either of our own flesh, or of our
friends, from such godly exercises, While we have time therefore, let us do
good. Is not this think you, a pretty redeemyng time, to spend it away in
Disyng, Cardyng, and such other ungodly exercises, as neither Gods words,
nor godly men either allow or like of? The holy Ghost, 1. Peter. 4.3.
by saint Peter tells us, that it ought to be sufficient for us, that we
have spent the time past of our life after the lusts of the Gentiles, walkyng
in wantonness, lusts, etc. We say on the other side, no it is not enough we
will spend yet a little more time in these wicked delights and pleasures.
What is this else I pray you, but to lie slumbering, in the dead sleep of the
corruption of our own nature, I had almost said, to sin upon presumption?
And besides let us know this, that this our pleasure, will in the end without
repentance, be recompensed with horrible pain and punishment. Thirdly, this
play of Cards and Dise, carries with it a manifest contempt of the
Magistrate, who has forbidden the same, upon good and holy considerations: and
is besides an offense and grief of conscience, not only to the weak, but
also to others, which be of greater strength, who seeing the manifold
mischiefs, and daiely inconveniences, insuyng upon such Plays, are carried
into such a godly hatred and detestation of the same, that they cannot away
at any hand, to behold it or see it. But iolie fellows will think, this
may be easily answered thus: If they list not to look upon it, they may
absent them selves. But to them I say, first that offense rises not only by
sight, but also upon the hearing or knowing of that to be done, which is
unlawful. Secondly, that they declare themselves, to be void of that same
godly and charitable spirit, which ought to be in the children of God. I am
sure that Saint Paul was of an other mind, in a matter of greater
importance then play. For he says thus. 1. Corin. 8.13.
If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands,
that I may not offend my brother. There is no man in the world I think so
blind, but he sees that the use of meat, for the strengthenyng of the body,
is very necessary, and one of the ordinary means, which God has appoincted
for the maintenance of man's life. And yet Paul had such a love to the
brethren (making himself therein an example for us to follow) that he would
willingly forgo, that necessary nourishment, rather then greiue or offend
them. But these men will not leave that, not only which they may leave,
without hurt of their bodies and lives, but also which they ought to leave,
for fear of displeasing God. For my part I cannot see, what this should be
else, but that so sinnyng against the brethren, and woundyng the conscience of
the Godly, they sin against Christ. But perhaps the ungodly runnyng forward
in sin, will say, that S. Paul speaks there, of meats dedicated to
Idols. 1. Corin 8.13.
I grant that. What then? Therefore they say it serves not against play at
Cards and Dise. This is but a shifte, and shows the corrupt nature of man,
who will always gather fig leaves to cover his nakedness, and filthiness
withal. For my own part, though I see no reason to the contrary, why the
use of Idolatrous meats, should not be as tolerable and lawful amongst
Christians, as unlawful and wicked games, yet will I press them with an other
place, from which they shall never be able to shifte them selves, though they
had the wiliness of al men living. In the Epistle to the Romans the Apostle
says thus. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor to do
any thing, whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Their
distintion of Idolatrous meats here, will not serve the turn. For the Apostle
speaks not of any such thing, but shows that both the use of Christian
liberty, and all the life of a Christian man, ought to be referred to this
end, that we should build up one another by good works, in so much, that we
should hold that thing, which of it self is pure and lawful, in respect that
it offends our brother, unclean and unlawful. Besides these general terms
(of any thing) do take away from them, all cloak and color of repliyng. So
that, unless they will open their mouths against heaven, they must needs
yield to this truth: the contempt of which shall be grievously punished, as
may plainly be gathered, by the words of Christ saying, whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones which believe in me, Math. 18.6.
it were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drouned in the depth of the Sea.

Fourthly, this play of Dise and Cards, is appointed and used against the
very nature of that, which we call in Latin Ludus, and in English, Play: and
therefore is a very corruption of lawful exercise, which God has permitted
unto us, and a very turnyng vpside down of true and lawful play. For all
play is appointed for men, and used and received amongst them, for two ends
only: that is to say, either for the exercise of the body, or for the
recreation of the Spirit. And how I pray you, is the body exercised, when
the Plaiers be idle, and do nothing in a manner, but sit still continually? Or
how is the mind of man refreshed, when there is nothing on both sides, till
the end of yt game, but a wearisome toylyng of the mind, sometimes in fear
to lose, sometimes glad when the Dise and Cards go with it, sometimes
frettyng, when they go against it? Besides all this, the loser angry, and
chaffyng for his loss, the winner also having his greedy desire satisfied,
when he has ill gotten and possessed that, which he couetouslie desired of an
other man's. Is not this I pray you, to nourishe in our bosoms, not sparks,
but whole flames of iniquity, the very imbers and ashes whereof, we ought to
cast from us? Notable is that counsel of the Wiseman, Ecclesiast. 21.2
if we would be ruled by it. Fly from sin as from a Serpent: for if thou
come too nere it, it will bite thee: the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a
Lion to slaie the souls of men.

Fiftlie, and lastly, the inconveniences (what say I inconveniences) Naie,
sins and horrible sins, which daily ensue upon the use of these unlawful
Games, make these manner of plaiynges unlawful. What should I reckon up, the
cursings, swearinges, and beastly blasphemies of the name of God, together
with the brawlynges, quarellynges, and fightynges commolie used among the
Gamesters? Of which things, though we our selves had no experience (but here
I must say, that these horrible wickednesses are over rife, and common
amongst us) yet the Civil law would set it out unto us: which does
confiscate the place it self, where men have played at such and such
unlawful Games, as it were nothing, that such a place, by reason of the
evil, that ordinarily has been there committed, is rather a fit Stie for
filthy Swine, then a meet house for any honest man, to dwell in afterward.
Why should I touch the greedy, and coueteous desire of the plaiers, gapyng
continually, and greedelie desiryng, to get that the one from the other, in
the lawful possession whereof, the Lord has placed them? What need I to
speak of the common hypocrisy and deceit used in these Games, whilst many
making choice with whom they play, to believe they have a good Game, they
dissemble and counterfeite, as though they had an ill Game, thereby alluryng
the other to greater losses.

To what end should I rehearse (seeing al men know it) the miserable wastyng
of these good things, which the Lord has given us, as time, money, and
such other like? All which things if they be considered, be manifestly and
directly against the express word of God. I might allege a great number
of other circumstances and reasons, very apt and fit, against this
detestable play, but this that I have hitherto said, will I hope be
sufficient for good men, and such as will embrace good counsel. Touching the
other, as I think it will be very hard, yea, an impossib^e matter, to make
them leave their vanity (so is the pleasure of sin rooted in their hearts)
so I think that the godly Magistrate should take order, for the bridelyng of
such disordered persons, either by saying upon them great penalties, and
mercementes, or by hard and strait imprisonment, or else by some other godly
and lawful mean, which the Magistrate shall think meet to be used. But
here perhaps some will say we can avoid these mischeeus, therefore why
should we not play at these Games? I answer, it may be so, that some
men may in deed in their play forbear al these wickednesses. But shall I
tell you what I think? Surely I am persuaded, that they are as rare birds upon
the earth, as a black Swanne, or a white Raven. Besides, if I should grant,
that men could use play, without these mischiefs, yet it would not follow,
that plaiyng at Cards and Dise were lawful. For I have before proved the
unlawfulness of these games, and beside declared, that whether the play it self
be lawful or unlawful, yet it is at no hand lawful, to play at the same
for money. Now a word or two, out of the fathers and counselles, for the
ouerthrowyng of Dise and Cards. Tertull.
Tertullyan, and some other ancient writers, have accounted that, which we
call Alea, that is Cards and Dise, and other plays of lot, and chance, sin
against the holy ghost. And though they swarne much from the truth, in making
it so heinous a sin, yet have they thereby left, a testimony unto the
world, of their great dislikyng, and utter dissallowyng, and condemnyng of the
same Ambrose and Chrysostom, Ambros. lib. 1. officio. 23. Chrisost tomel. 6.
in Mat.
condemn all manner of plays, and therefore these of Cards and Dise. But if a
Caueller would here say, why do you not so to? I answer, that for that
matter, I have showed some reasons before, in the third Chapter of the
treaty. Alledgyng these Authors at this time, as proofs hereof, that if they
can not allow any manner of Game, much less will they allow, unlawful and
evil Games. Ciprian, in a book which he did write against these plays,
affirms, that they are the Deuilles invention, which he found out and forged,
to have the Idols and Idolatry, in greater use and commendation amongst me^:
and therefore he condemns it. And no doubt upon very good ground. For every
invention of the Devil is accursed, and ought not either to be in use or
estimation emongst those which be Christians. Bernard exhorts certain
souldiars that were at Jerusalem, to whom he did write, to be at utter
defiaunce with Cards and Dise. Nicholaus de Lyra, in a little book of his
named Praeceptorium puts down nine reasons, for every of which, these
kinds of Plays ought to be prohibited amongst Christians, and exiled from the
congregation of God. I will not put down the words and reasons he uses,
because they be somewhat long. It is enough to note his consent with the rest,
in disliking of these wicked and unlawful exercises. Calvin. epla. 374.
Master Calvin a singular instrument of the Church of God, writes thus.
There are other corruptions which shoot at this mark. For Dise and Cards
(as they call the^) howsoever they seemed not to appertain to superstition, yet
were they the means of other vices, and brought in every where, much hurt
and mischief. And as touching these plays, we would not so much condemn
them, if men in vsyng of them would weigh what were lawful. But where I pray
you shall a man find, that sobernes and moderation? First, there is no other
thing any where, by which men are so hindered, even as it were by birdlime, so
that it occupies all their wits and senses, no otherwise then if they were
bewitched.

But as they which are accustomed thereunto, cannot so easily bid them farewell:
so he which has a little withdrawn his foot, shall quickly and easily loath
them all. Now, they which give over them selves to such things, and go on
forward in that madness, whatsoever they be, fall into many miseries and
greifes. It is well enough known, that Games can not pass without
blasphemies, deceites, wrath, braulyng, and other such like inconveniences.
How many good houses, have by the same, bin as it were cut up and rooted out?
For no man keeps a measure, but either he does quickly, or as it were at
once waste him self, or by little and little, consume that which he has.
Chiefly where question is of gaynyng, it can hardly be, but that by some one
mean or other, God himself should he offended. Wherefore it is very
profitable, to be as much as may free from these Games: but best of all it
is, wholly and altogether to abstain from them. And for the more plain proof
and demonstration of these words of Master Calvin, concerning the destruction
and overthrow of families and housholdes, I dare aduouche, and that upon
credit of good Historiographers, that it has undone sondrie Kings of Asia,
and as it were subdued their estate. And one Bohemus writing of the manners,
Bohem. lib. 3. de moribus legibus. etc.
laws and of Countries, shows that the Germans have bin so much given to
this play, that when they have lost all that they had, they would at the last
cast, play for their liberty. Peter Martyr in his Commentaries upon the book
of Judges, both shows his judgment touching plays, and also answers an
objection or two, that the vpholders and maintainers of the same, have usually
in their mouths. His words are these. And if there were nothing else, to fear
us away from plays: Let us for Gods sake weigh this, how great the penury
of time is. The law of God requires so many duties, that not our whole life
is able to perform them: and yet shall we bestow time in Plays? We are
otherwise sufficiently sick with covetousness of money, with ambition to
overcome and excel other. Why do we stir up these diseases with Plays? But
thou will say, these things are never stirred up in me: but now thou must
remember that they may easily be stirred up. And we must see not only to our
selves, but that we bring no other also, unto the same disease. These things
are spoken of the honest kind of plays. If so be there be any which do
play, being intised with covetousness, let these men know, that they rather
like evil Merchants traffic, then play. For they seek no other thing,
but filthy gain. Neither seek they pleasure, which in honest plays is the
chiefest, but they seek their own things, and that by filthy means. And
when they which delight immoderately in plays do say. There must be some
pleasure in the life, whereby we may be recreated, there request is to be
granted: but in the mean time they must be admonished, that there are other
pleasures more honest. Paul to the Ephesians the fifte Chapter says. Ephesians.
5.19.
Speak unto your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, singyng and
making melody in your hearts. And the same writes he unto the Colossians.
Collos. 3.16.
Tertullia^ in Apologetico says, that Christians used to assemble together, to
their moderate Suppers, and when they were refreshed with meat, they sang
divine praises, or recited somethyng out of the holy Scriptures, prouokyng one
an other by them. And by this means they returned sober home. And Master
Dearyng our own Country man, and a dear Saint of God, has these words.
Shall we think we have the spirit of God, or any portion in Jesus Christ,
who in his everlasting continuance, cannot find such pleasure, as in a
visare of a vain life, that suddenly appears, and is no more? Who in the
glory of his presence, In cap. 1. ad Hebri. lect. 5.
and Magestie of his Father, can see no such delight as in Cardyng, Disyng,
Daunsyng, and such like works of reproach and shame and horrible confusion.

In the Canons of the Apostles (which are so called, and counted very
ancient) this play of Dise and Cards is plainly forbidden, and altogether
rejected. Cano. Apost. can 41.
The words there put down are these. A Minister or Elder, or Deacon,
which gives him self to Dise, Cards, and drunkenness, either let him
cease there from, or be deposed. The sixte Counsel of Constantinople,
Concilium Constant. 6. can. 50. and habetur. tom. 20. council. page 148.
has these words. We decree that no man, whether he be Clarke or Lay
manne, from this time forward play at Dise or Cards. Now if any manne shall
from this time forward attempt to do it, if he be a Clergy manne (as we
use to call him commonly, which is of the Ministry) let him be deprived,
if he be a Lay manne, let him be excommunicate. And in the Counsel of
Eliberis, Con. Elibermum can. 79. and habetur tom. 10. council. page 367.
it is thus decreed. If any faithefull manne play at Dise or Cards, let it
please him to abstain: and if he amend and leave of, he may after a years
space, be received to the Communion. Yea, and two godly Synodes, held not
many years since in France, the one at Rochel, the other at Nimaur, by the
Pastors, Elders, and Deacons of the reformed Churches of that kingdom, have
with a full and plain consent, utterly forbidden these unlawful Games. I
think these testimonies and witnesses are sufficient.

See how some altogether condemn it, and other calls it, the invention of
the Devil: an other says, it is best altogether to abstain from them. The
Councelles say, the Clarke shall be deprived if he use it, and the Lay manne
Excommunicated, and not received to the Communion, in a years space after. One
would think that these things were sufficient enough, to discourage men
from these vain and idle exercises, but yet for promise sake, I will add
somewhat more, taken out of the Civil and Canon Law, and out of the Paynimes
them selves against these Plays, that when they shall see in all ages, though
never so corrupt, and amongst all persons, though never so ill and wicked,
these detestable Plays of Cards and Dise, to have been rejected and
condemned, they may learn to walk in better order, and perfectly to forsake
their former vanity and sin.

There is an old Law of the Romans, and is yet at this day, In ff. de
Aleatoribus and habetur. lib. 1. Pandec. tit. 5.
found in the digestes, which says thus. If any one have beaten him, with
whom he played at Cards or at Dise, or have done him any wrong: or if during
the time that an other played with him, some thing has been taken from him, or
his house robbed, I will do no Justice to him says the Praetor. If any have
constrained, or persuaded an other to play, I will punish him according, as
the matter requires, so that he shall be cast, either into the quarries to dig
stones, or else into the common prisons. Hence I gather the unlawfulness of
these Plays, because the Magistrate, will neither awarde him the money, which
has won it, nor punish the wrong that one of them does to an other, when
they play at these wicked Games. The ground and occasion of which Law, I
take it to be this, that the Magistrate was enforced to use this hard
extremity, of omittyng of administration of Justice, and giuyng liberty to
beat one an other, and to fight one with an other, because that by other
means, the froward and unbridled nature of man, could not be tamed or
subdued. To this add the Decree of the godly Emperor Justinian. Cod Justin.
tit 43. lib. 3.
Having regard (says he) to our Subjects wealth, we by this law, prohibit
in all places, and to all sorts of people, to play either in common houses,
or private houses (it is as much as if he should say, either in Innes,
Tauernes, Alehouses, or in men's own houses (at the plays of Cards and of
Dise, neither so much as to be looker on. And by the same Law he charge
Bishops A little after.
and Pastors, diligently to take heed thereunto, and enioyneth them, that
for the reformation of this evil, they use and imploye the power and
authority, of the Judges and Governors of their Provinces, as is specified in
Autent de Sacrosan. Episc.. Interdicimus. Where also he does prohibit by
name, that no Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, should either play them selves, or
look upon them that play.

By the Laws and Statutes of that godly city Geneua, the very making of
Cards and Dise, The laws of Geneua. fol. 70. page 1. lin. 12. and fol. 80.
page 1. lin. 22.
and such other things, is expresselie forbidden upon pain to forfeite, not
only the things so made, but also three score Shillynges. The ground of which
Law I take to be this, that the cause being taken away, the effect also is
removed and taken away. And therefore they have very godlilie, and
Christianlie prohibited the making of these things, followyng no doubt
therein, the very example and policy of the Lord, who because he would have
his people to abstain from Idolatry, does forbid them the making of all
manner of Idolles. Exodus. 20.4.
Yea the Canon Law, (which came in when the manners of the Church, were
marueilously corrupted, has this play in no less detestation. Distinct. 35.
cap. Episcopi. Either let them cease to play, or let them be condemned.
And Tit. 1. lib. 3. Decretal. cap. Chroni. Let them not play at Dise or
Tables, neither let them be present at such plays. Yea, but they will
say, these Laws have respect to Ecclesiastical persons. That is true. But
what then? Therefore it binds not us. I deny the consequent. For Paul in his
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, 1. Timoth. 3.2. etc. Titus. 1.6.
rehearsyng what qualities ought to be in a Bishop or Pastor of the
Church, declares what good things are to be required of the church
Minister, as, that he must be unreprovable, the housbande of one wife,
sober, modest, not given to filthy lucre, not coueteous, etc. Shall we
therefore say, that none of these things, ought to be in Christians. If we
should so say, the word of GOD would presently stop our mouths, which
both in the old and new Testament requires both these, and many other
duties of godliness and Charity, to be in them that profess Christ's name.

There be some things that be so tied to the persons of Ministers, that in
an ordinary state of the Church, they ought not to be separated from them,
of which sort, I take to be preaching of the word, Ministeryng of the
Sacraments, conceiuyng prayers in the Congregation, etc. Others there are, 1.
Peter. 5.3.
which though they be required in the first place of the Minister, because he
is to make him self an example and pattern of holiness of life to his flock,
yet they do also belong, as it were in the second place, to the Church and
Congregation of GOD, in as much as the Lord does in his holy word, require
of all his children, a sober, honest, and holy life. And in this respect, I
think that the Laws prohibityng these plays in the Ministers and Pastors,
does also disallowe and dislike of the same, in their flocks and
Congregation. Let us come now to show the judgment, that the Heathen men
have had of this matter.

M.T.C. contra. Catilin.
Tullie, in an oration he made against Catalina, vpbradeth him and his
companions after this manner. In those companies were conuersaunt, all that were
Disers and Carders, all that were adulterers, all that were impure and
unshamefast, impudent and shameless men. See with what a route, as Oxen in
one yoke, and vices as it were inseparably joined together, he joins men
given over to these plays of Dise and Cards. And in another Oration, which
he made before all the Senate, against Marcus Antonius, M.T.C. Philip 2.
he casts him in the teeth with this, as one of the most grievous crimes,
which he could lay against him, because he used to play at that Game, which
the Latinistes call Alia, that is to say, according to our time, at the play
of Cards and of Dise and other such Games of lotte and of chance, chargyng
him, that his house was filled with Carders and Disers, and drunken persons.

Augustus Caesar, notwithstanding, Suetonius in vita. Augusti cap. 71.
that he had many excellent and great virtues, yet the very brute which did
run amongst the people, saying that he played at such plays, was turned to
his great dispraise, and made him to he counted dissolute.

It is reported of Claudius Caesar Emperor also of Rome, Idem in vita Claudij.
that by many vices, emongst which his plaiyng at Cards, and Dise is
rehearsed, he showed him self to be a fool, and an ignorant manne.

Gobilon the Lacedemonian, being sent to Corinth, to make truce with the
Corinthians, returned very quickly, without concludyng any thing with them,
because he saw the^ play at such plays, saying: that it was not meet or
seemly, for the Lacedaemonians, to make league, or have any acquaintance, with
such dissolute and rude people, and of who^ no account was to be made.

The King of the Persians, sent to Demetrius King of Asia, Dise of gold,
thereby to reproach him, of folly, lightness, and idleness. Little children
knew this saying of Cato very well, and have it written: Trocho lude, alias
fuge. Play with Top; but flee from Dise and Cards.

Asconius pedianus in 2. lib. diuinationis. M.T.C.
Asconius Pedianus writes, that such plays were at Rome in old time
condemned, to forfeite four times as much, as that which they had played
for. Horace in one verse pre^t^e sets out the inconvenience of whoredom,
and plaiyng at Dise and Cards, sa^yng: Qnem damnosa Venus, Horatius in
epistolis.
quem praecipe alea nudat. That is to say: who harmfull and damnable
whoredom, together with the over rash play of Dise and Cards, do spoil
and make ^a^,

Iuuenal. Satyr 14.
And Iuuenal, puts it among the vices, which most easelie corrupt all the
family, and show most wicked example, in a house, which should be well
ruled. His words in effect are these.

When that the father does begin,
with Cards and Dise to play,
In presence of his children young,
to pass the time away.
His child does then take them in hand
in pleasure spendyng time:
And so at length proceeds to use,
his foolish fathers coin.
I could here allege more, but I take these testimonies and examples to be
sufficient, for the full performaunce and accomplishement, of that which I
promised. Out of which we may gather, that all men, good and badde,
Christians, or not Christians, have as it were with one common voice, showed
both their dislikyng of the same, and given reasons, why other should abstain
there from. So that now, there seems nothing to remain, but the last part
of this treaty, that is: to answer such men's objections, as maintain
these plays, which I will do, in as few words, and as plainly as I can.
In deed I must confess, that I am not skillful in their objections, and
therefore shall neither put down, nor answer all, that they will, or can
bring for them selves. How beit, here I protest, that so many as I can call to
remembrance, I will plainly express, as having had them of other, rather
then framyng the^ my self, and also promise, that if any patron of these
corruptions, shall allege any more, I will be ready to deal with him, either
by friendly conference, or public writing, let him take whether way, shall be
best likyng to him self.

The vij. Chapter.
FIrst, they object a place of Scripture or two. One out of the third Chapter
of the book of the Preacher, whereas it is said, that there is a time to
every purpose under Heaven. Ecclesiast. 3.1.
Whereupon they enforce, that there is a time to play at Cards and Dise, and
other unlawful Games. To this I answer, first that they make an evil
conclusion, out of those general terms of the holy ghost, whose mind is not
in that place, to allot a time to the doings of things unlawful (of which
sort we have before proved this kind of Gamyng to be) for if that were true,
why should there not be a time of whoredom, of drunckennesse, of usury, and
other such like vices: but to set out unto us, that there is nothing in the
world perpetual, and that therefore, 1. Corin. 7.31.
we should use the world, as though we used it not, because the fashion of
this world, and the glory thereof, goes away as Clouds in the wind. They
allege an other place out of the seventh Chapter of the same book. Ecclesia.
7.18.
Be not thou just ouermuche, neither make thy self ouerwise. For that is to
bring in (say they) superstition, and to take away Christian liberty.
Touching Christian liberty, I have spoken somewhat before, so that I need not
to repeat that in this place. Only we are to consider of the place alleged,
and to see, whether superstition will ensue, upon the taking away of unlawful
games from among Christians. In deed I am not ignorant, how that man's nature
is prone to superstition, never keepyng a mean, and therefore it may be, that
if these men should not have that, which they desire and wish, they would
fall into an other extremity as ill, as unlawful games. But you see, that all
play and recreation, is not taken away, but only those which fight so
directly against Gods word, and have bin with such a general consent,
dislyked and disallowed. So that, the danger of falling into superstition and
rigor, is taken away, in as much, as an honest and orderly refreshing of
wearied minds, is left unto Christians. But let us examine the place it
self, and see how well these men apply Scriptures. A wonderful thing it is,
then man's heart should be so evil, to apply that, which God has reueiled
in his word, for the beating down of the pride of ma^s nature, and sin in
him, to a leusenesse and liberty, if not to all sin, yet to a great number
of mischiefs and wickednesses. The mind of the holy Ghost in that place, is
to teach us, 1. Corin. 3.5.
not to think much of any thing, which is in us. For what have we, that we
have not received? And if we have received it, why rejoice we, Isaiah. 64.6.
as though we had not received it? Neither to be puffed up, with the
consideration of our own rightousnesse, for all our rightousnesse before God,
is as filthy cloutes. And yet these men dare apply it, to give thereby
liberty unto the flesh, and the reins to much licentiousness, whereas we
are taught by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
to abstain not only from that which is evil in it self, but also from all
appearaunce of evil. Now these plays of Cards and Dise, and such other like,
which we comprehend under the names of plays, of lot, chance, or hazard,
are (as we have showed before) not only appearyng to be evil, but be in deed
evil and unlawful. Wherefore if the adversary should judge, that this is
over great severity and rigor, to take away from Christians, the use of these
unlawful Gains (which yet in deed is not true, because there is none that
forbids them honestly, and moderately, to play and refreshe them selves, at
all other lawful plays, which may serve either for the recreation and solace
of the spirit, or for healthful, and moderate exercise of the body) then I
might most truly say and affirm, that this should argue, to much
dissoluteness amongst men, and disobedience against God, to approve and
permit them. Chrysostom. homel. 1. a.
Chrysostom has a notable saying, in the first Sermon or Homely that he
made, touching the leusnes and dissolutions of his time, aunswearyng as it
should seem to the like objection. When men says he cut of from the life of
the faithful, the things which are therein superfluous, they bring them not
to over great austeritie of life, but to such a conversation, as they should
walk in. Gregor. in Reg.
And Gregory says he that amendeth not the things, which should be cut
of, commits the self same things, and he has the fault of a doer laid
upon him, who neglects to amend that, which he may and ought to amend.

Thirdly, they obiecte, that seeing they can play at these Games, without
oaths, anger, coueteousnesse, contention brawlynges, and such other like
inconveniences, they may lawfully use the same: I answer to this two manner
of ways. First, that either very hardly, or not all, they shall be able to
persuade to any godly manne, that knows (by what means soever it be, it
skilleth not, whether it be, by experience in him self, or by the truth of
Gods word) the evil and corruption of man's heart, the truth of this their
assertion. For I suppose that, there is not one which uses these Games,
though he play for never so little, much more if he play for a great wager
or sum, but he has in him a greedy desire to win. Which very desire is
evil and naught, because it coueteth that, which is an other man's. And no
doubt of it, as there is in them, this desire to have an other man's: so
there is lothsomnesse and vnwillyngnesse, to forgo their own. Which when
they have lost, though many times they cover it, with a fair countenance,
and abstain from outward anger, yet as Solomon says, Prouer. 14 13.
Even in laughyng the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirthe is
heaviness. For they frette inwardly, and it greeueth them at the heart, that
they are defeated of that hope, which they had to win an other man's, and
have lost their own. And touching the truth of these things, I will ask no
better Judges or witnesses, then the consciences and mouths of men them
selves, most given to this play, if they will freely and truly, with their
tongues confess, that which by daiely experience, they feel in their hearts.

Secondly I say, that though they could play without all these perturbations
(which thing I can hardly be brought to yield unto) yet may not they
lawfully play at these Games, the unlawfulness of which, I have before
showed. Let them rather give them selves to use such lawful and honest
recreation, as they may with good consciences, and not run headlonglie into
these manifold mischeefes: From the least of which, every one of us ought
(so far forth as GOD shall make us able) to keep our selves free and
clean. But they say again, we cannot so well refreshe our selves with any
kind of Game or Play, as with Cards and Dise. Now surely I think they
say true, and that which they allege, as a reason for the use of them, I
will take for a reason against them. For this, to wit that we take such
great pleasure in them, not only ought to make them suspected unto us, but
argues also the unlawfulness of them. For who knows not the Poets saying to
be true. Ruimus per vetitum nefas. We run headlonglie into mischeefes
forbidden us.

And why I pray you, should there not be as great recreation, in the game of
the Chestes, the Philosophers game, and such like, which in all men's
Judgments are counted lawful, as (...) the Cards and Dise, and such other,
which are condemned, with so general a consent, as is before declared. The
defenders of this kind of play, are wont further to obiecte, what if we
will so bestow our money? Are we not Lords of our own things? We do no
wrong to our neighbor. We take not away other men's goods. These things
have they continually in their mouths. But they ought to understand, that it
is their duty, to use your own things well, in performyng whereof if they
be^ slack, then let them know, that both^ they shall render an accounte, for
the (...) bestowyng and abusyng of Gods goo^ gifts, of which the Lord has
made them Stewardes for a time, and also that it is the duty of the
Magistrate, to see too and redress that abuse. Besides they are deeply to
consider, that GOD gives them money, that thereby they might have means, to
provide for their families, and to nourishe them, and to help the poor, and
not to cast them to chance, and to put them to the slippernesse of Fortune.
Further, all, but specially Christians, being Gods children ought to represent
the Image of God, (who governs and rules all things with reason) as in
other things, so in this, that with godly conscience, discretion, and
foresight, they do such things as they ought to do. Again, who can judge
otherwise, then that thus to consume money, as not to be a Lord over his own
things, but a tyrant, even as if a King, because he has the rule and
authority over his Subjects, should not only spoil them of their goods,
but of their life also, without any good reason or lawful cause. Add also
hereunto, that if any thing be gotten by these means, the same is called of
many, filthy gain. And if it were not of it self, filthy gain, but only
gotten by evil name and report (which I think few will deny, yet would
the Poet Minus tell us, that Damnum appellandumest cum mala fama, lucrum, that
is to say: That gain which is gotten,
with an evil name:
Is to be called loss to him,
which gets the same.


And therefore we should avoid it. Neither is it of any force, which some
say. These exercises are most fit for the Winter, when the days are foul,
and the nights long. For the foulness of the weather and the length of the
night, cannot alter the nature of the thing, as of unlawful to make it
lawful. If they will reply thus. If we may not use these, we know not how to
spend the time. To this I answer, that there are honest exercises of
recreation, which a Christian may well and lawfully use. Yea say they, but
we can not play at them, and these we have learned already. Hereto I say,
first that it is and has bin in them. Turpe discere dediscenda, a filthy
thing to learn things, which afterward must be forgotten. Secondly,
that they ought to forget these, and if that by singyng of Psalms, readyng of
the Scriptures, and other good books, and such like heavenly exercises, they
cannot recreate them selves, then to use such lawful and Godly exercise as
becomes Christians, and not to give them selves over, to these wicked plays
of chance or hazard. An other objection they make thus. We are Gentlemen, and
men of good countenance in the common wealth, and many times have resort
both of our equalles, and superiors to us, who would gladly play at such
Games. Will you have us to be so discourteous, that we shall not keep them
company. I answer, that though that, which we call courtesy, consists
partly in this, that a man may play and recreate him self with others, yet
it permits us not, to play at detestable plays with them (such as these
plays are) but only allows us to sport our selves, at honest and lawful
plays, and that in measure to, and so far forth as need shall require. So
that if the one be instructed, he is not in respect of courtesy, to yield to
an unlawful thing, for the others sake. If neither be instructed, then both
are to know, that the use and exercise of these Games, is a thing unlawful
and condemned, and therefore not to be used of them.

FINIS.

