A SHORT, YET sound Commentary; written on that worthy work called; The
Proverbs of Solomon: and now published for the profit of Gods people.

PSALM. 78.1, 2. Hear my doctrine, o my people: incline your ears unto the
words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable. I will plentifully power
out hidden sentences of old.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man.

Decorative Border including depitctions of David and Moses

1589.

To the Honorable and his very good Lady the Lady Bacon: T.VV. wishes
abundance of all felicity outward and inward in this life, and afterward
eternal blessedness through Christ in that life which lasts for ever.
AMongst the great, unmeasurable and infinite benefits, that GOD most rich in
mercy and faithful in performance, has given unto men of all estates and
degrees, in this last (though worst) age of the world, as evident and
infallible testimonies of his singular love and bounty toward them, and as
notable instruments to draw and allure them soundly to know, vnfeignedlie to
love, and reverently to fear him alone that is the only giver thereof: this in
my poor judgment (good Madame) seems unto me (and I hope that others
enlightened from God are of the same mind with me) not the least nor to be
reckoned in the last place, namely, the excellent and most wonderful light,
not of manifold tongues only, as Hebrew, Greek, Caldee, Siriake, Latin, etc.
neither yet of sundry arts alone, as Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Music,
Arithmetic, Geometry, etc. but of the holy Scriptures and Christian religion
specially: all which doubtless being heretofore through Satan's malice and man's
ignorance, not cast aside amongst worms and moathes, by little and little to
wast and consume them; but sumptuously laid in grave, and deeply buried, and
that almost without hope of quickening, God (that always had and has the
fulness of power in his hand) has been pleased now at the last, for the
overthrow of superstition, idolatry, and wicked life, and for the advancement
of his glory, and furtherance of men's salvation, to recall as it were even
from the grave it self, and to revive from the dead. Wherein howsoever the Lord
have graciously vouchafed to declare his incomprehensible power, accomplishing
so miraculous a work, and to manifest his unspeakable love not only in the
multitude and variety, but in the euidencie thereof; so that even bleare eyed
men and barbers (as is in the common by word) may clearly perceive the same,
yet the strength of sin has so not only obscured, but as it were defaced,
though not the sight, yet the power and efficacy of Gods favor, with the
fruits and effects which should follow thereupon; that some through natural
blindness and dimnes of their eyes, cannot behold them: other some again
through dumnes of mouth, and having their tongues tied, will not acknowledge
them: other some again through want of good judgment, do with polluted hands
irreuerently receive them, and almost all through profaneness of heart, and
cursed corruption vnsanctifiedlie (if not irreligiouslie) use them. So few are
there found in the world now adays that profit by them to faith unfeigned,
and humble thankfulness before him that plentifully has provided the same for
their good, if they could tell how to accept and use the same. The
contemplation and memory whereof (I willingly and unfeignedly confess it)
leaves behind it no small skarre, but a great wound rather in mine heart, and
that not only so much for mine own iniquity in that behalf (though I know
the same to be high and heinous) as for the common abomination, that every
where as a mighty stream that will not be stopped, and forcible flood that
cannot be withstood, ouerfloweth all; and for the fearful desolation that in
all probability and likelihood of man's judgment will ensue thereupon, because
howsoever God be of long suffering and of great goodness, yet he cannot, nor
will not (for we are sure he is zealous over his own glory) continually
suffer the vile and abominable of the world to trample and tread under their
beastly feet his exceeding blessings and singular favors. And yet I cannot
hide this within my self, but must of necessity break forth into the
declaration thereof, that I am again somewhat recomforted, in that whether
soever I cast mine eyes whether at home or abroad, I certainly behold, and
that without deceit of sight, some amongst all estates and degrees of men,
high, low, rich, poor, young, old, noble, unnoble, magistrates, ministers,
and people, and sundry of them of my Christian acquaintance, on whose behalf
I daily offer up unto God through Christ the duty of thanks giving,
persuading my self further, that there is upon the face of the earth a mighty
number besides (though not known to me) whom God has pleased in the multitude
of his mercies doubtless, and for much good toward them and others in them, not
only to single and cull out as it were from the huge heap and wicked
fellowship of the polluted and profane, but richly to replenish and adorn
them (as it were with most precious pearls) with the singular graces of sound
knowledge, steadfast faith, comfortable feeling, unfeigned obedience, and
sundry such like holy and heavenly gifts. Amongst whom, your sex rightly
considered, and the place you have been in wisely respected, and your present
estate well weighed, I know few matchable with you (good Madame: flattery is
far from my words, I humbly thank God for it, and I hope pride removed far
from your self in hearing your own praise, as I wish envy may be from
others as in regard of your due commendation) and not many to go beyond you.
For though to be borne not only of worshipful parents, but of a sanctified
stock, be some thing both before God and man: and though learned and holy
education be a good help toward the reformation of our corruption, and as it
were the instilling of another nature into us: and though to be richly joined
in holy matrimony be a token doubtless of Gods great favor and love: and
though to have in the undefiled marriage bed, a blessed seed and lawful issue,
be a special blessing and mercy from God: and though to lead and live a
virtuous and unreprovable life in the sight of men (who are wont neglecting
themselves, with evil and curious eyes to look upon others) be a happy
thing: (with all which favors you have by the divine providence, been even
laden as it were in your birth, bringing up, youth, old age, virginity,
marriage, widowhood and posterity) yet because many be degenerate and start
aside from their ancestors godliness: and some through carelesnes cause to
perish the cost that has been bestowed upon them in good bringing up: and
others make themselves both in single and married life loathsome to the Lord, and
infamous before men, because either they have not begun well, or have not held
on unto the end: and other some by evil example, have done the children of
their womb more hurt in the world, than they have done them good in bringing
them forth to behold the light of the Sun: and other some have added to the
weakness of their sex, not watchfulnes against sin, as their duty
required, but laid the raines of their several iniquities and manifold
inticements to evil in their own necks: and many have misused their places
of honor and credit to all licentiousnes of the flesh, and carelesnes of God,
and of the ways of his worship, and so consequently of eternal salvation:
(from all which inconveniences and mischiefs the Lord has mercifully kept
you in every condition of life wherein he has been pleased to place you) me
thinks you have wherein to rejoice, and that not only so much in the things
themselves, freely and plentifully bestowed upon you, as in the happy
continuance and mighty increase of these his goodnesses in you, you also
having received grace from God to beautify them with an unblameable and holy
conversation. By means whereof it is come to pass, that as you are much
beloved at home in the midst of Gods saints and faithful servants here, and
these not only common professors, but many worthy ministers: (for kindness
toward whom, and particularly toward my self, I do humbly here in all our
names thank GOD, and you as his gracious instrument) so you are made truly
famous abroad in foreign Churches and countries, and highly reverenced of many
worthy men there, endued doubtless with singular graces for Gods glory, and the
building up of the body of the fellowship of Saints. But what mean I to
enter into this broad field of your Christian commendation, where breath would
rather fail me, and time I am sure, with ability to wade into it as I should,
than matter any manner of way be wanting. Give me leave therefore (good
Madame) I beseech you to desist from your praise, (which I know you do not
willingly hear, though it be deserved as on your part, and though perhaps it
might be as a quick spur in the dull sides of others to provoke them to
good things) and to turn my speech to exhortation rather and comfort. The
course that you are entered into, and the race that now you have a long time
run in, is holy and honorable. Hold on therefore in the same chearefullie,
notwithstanding the manifold hindrances that within and without be cast in
your way to turn you aside, if it might be: and be not weary of well doing
at any hand, for as you know that your profession requires it, so God has
promised that the time will come wherein you shall reap (as the saints of God
have done before you) if you faint not. Let the assured faithfulness and
infinite power of him, that has in his word made you large promises, be a
prick unto you herein. And forasmuch as he has given you grace to begin well,
and to hold on hitherto, doubt not, but he that has both the will and the deed
in his own hands to bestow them where and as it pleases him, will make
perfect in you every good work, even till the day of Jesus Christ. Is it
possible, that that incorruptible crown of eternal glory, which in his only
beloved he has prepared for you, should fade away? Upon these things I beseech
you (having cast away worldly cares) fix co^tinuallie the eye of your faith,
that you may end your old years in the Lords peace, and be indeed gathered
unto your fathers comfortablie, saying, as that holy Apostle old Paul said:
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
from henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing. Your learned father, your honorable
husband, your loving brother, your dear sisters some of them, and (if I be
not deceived) some also of your own holy seed (all of them having yielded up
their spirits in the faith and fear of GOD) are I doubt not gone thither
before you: and why should you your self, or any other think that you should
be sundred from them? As for the lengthning of your life, above many before
reckoned, surely God has done it for his own glory, and the good of his
Church, into which also you being religiously gathered as a sound member
thereof, you have even in that an assured testimony given unto you, that
warfaring here with his saints as you do, against sin, the world and the
devil, you shall in good time, through him that has loved you and washed you
in his blood, become more than a conqueror, and eternally triumph together
with them and the rest in heaven. Till which time, as I rest resolved, that God
the author and perfecter of every good thing in all his, will not withdraw his
gracious hand from you in any grace, specially spiritual and heavenly: so I
am certainly persuaded that many such as are led by his spirit, and know you
in Christ Jesus, and love you in the truth, will not (GOD ayding them) neglect
any duty either outward or inward, that possibly they can perform to
further that work. Amongst whom I, though the least and most unworthy, as in
respect of my self, yet tied thereto by the duty of my profession from God,
and bound to it by sundry favors received from you, will in my poor measure
strive to do, though not so much as others, neither yet so much as I owe (which
I freely acknowledge as being privy to mine own disabilitie and
insufficiency that way, and not utterly unacquainted with other men's fulness
and vpheaped store) yet what God has or shall be pleased to enable me to
accomplish. Which that your good Ladyship may be the better assured of, I am
bold now to present unto you, and to publish under your name some short notes
and meditations of mine (long since written for the dearest friend I had in the
world) upon that worthy book of Salomons Proverbs. What it is, I leave to
you, and the Church of GOD to judge of: and yet this much I hope I may without
pride protest, that though it be not exquisite like unto the worthy works of
many Bezaleels in our age, yet it is sound; and though it be not finely
polished, either in fitnes of words, or great store of art, yet the truth it
is I hope, and never a whit the more to be misliked, because it is naked and
plain, but the rather to be embraced of Gods people; who I hope will show me
this favor, that as they will not reject any good thing in it for any evil that
may be found or suspected to be therein, neither yet admit any evil for the
goods sake, but in a discerning spirit refuse the one and receive the other: so
they will assist me with their prayers to God for the increase of any good
thing that is within me, to Gods glory, and the benefit of his people; and in
much love, according to the spirit of love wherewith they are replenished,
either Christianly cover that which is amiss, or courteously cure it. And as
for you (good Madame) though I rest persuaded that it shall be well accepted
of you, yet can I not but again and again beseech you to receive it, not only
as from the hand, but as from the heart of him, who, if either his poor
prayers in absence, or speech in presence, or any thing else either within him
or without him, could any many manner of way, either further you, or answer
some part of that christian kindness which he has received from you, would not
be wanting in any duty toward you or yours that GOD shall enable him to
perform. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout; and grant that
your whole spirit, soul and body may be kept blameles unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. London, the xxv. of this September. 1589.

Your good Ladyships, as very much bounden, so in all things very ready in
Christ to his poor power T.W. the Lords unworthy servant.

To the godly and Christian Reader.
BE advertised J pray thee (gentle Reader) and that for thine own good, and
better understanding of the things thou shall read in this book, that
wheresoever thou shall find this.i. it signifies as much as, that is to say:
and where these two letters q.d. are used, it imports thus much, as though he
would say: and observe withal, that vz. is to wit, etc. Other things I doubt
not but thou will of thy self through Gods blessing well perceive, as the more
learned sort shall also without me: and yet for those that had not such skill,
I could not but note these things; as for those that have attained to more
understanding and knowledge this Distichon.

Sperare in Christum, and vitae tolerare labores,
Et been posse mori disce: beatus eris.
Lord give us understanding in all things, specially in the mysteries of thy
holy Law; that we may like of, and allow those things only which be right
and holy before thee, through Christ: So be it. An Exposition upon the
Proverbs.
THIS whole Book as J take it may be divided into two Parts. Jn the first
Solomon teaches us, how we should stand affected toward God and his truth,
and this is comprehended in the nine first Chapters of this Book. Jn the
second he delivers particular doctrines, specially such as concern

CAP. 1.
THis Chapter (as I suppose) maybe divided into three parts. In the first verse.
1. to the end of the 6. In the seeond is comprehended an exhortation to
goodness, and an verse. 7. to the end of the 19. In the third is declared the
great pains that Gods wisdom takes verse. 20. to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. THe Parables [i. Se.
the figurative and dark kind of speeches (see Psalm. 49.4. also 78.2. see
also Matthew. 13, 3.10, 11.34, 35.) True it is, that the Hebrew word signifies
all kind of figurative speeches whatsoever; of which sort we shall see many
in this Book: sometimes expressed by similitudes, sometimes by Allegories,
sometimes by Metaphores, and sometimes by one means, and sometimes by another:
and yet I think it may very well be taken for sentences, words or speeches,
which as they are gravely and shortly uttered, so do notwithstanding
contain in them plenty of good matter.] of Solomon, [Here we see who was the
penman and vtterer of these grave sentences: see 1. King. 4.32. and when he
says of Solomon, he means, that Solomon spoke them: and these I take as also
all that follow, to be Salomons own words speaking of himself in the third
person] the son of David [vz. who was a man according unto Gods own heart;
and this serves both for the commendation of Solomon and of his Book. So that
we see in this verse the work to be commended: first, for the excellency of
it, under the word Parables: secondly, of the Writer, vz. Solomon the wisest
man that ever was: thirdly, of the Writers Parents, vz. David a very godly
man: and lastly, of the state and condition wherein either the Father or ye
Writer or both were, vz. King of Jsrael: [i. ruler and governor of the people,
yt was called by the name of their great grandfather Iaakob. And though this
word King of Israel, may seem to be referred both to David and Solomon,
because they were both Kings over that people, yet I take it, that it ought
chiefly and only in this place to be referred David.] Verse. 2. To know
[vnderstand here thus much; which parables and grave sentences were written to
this end, that men might learn and know] wisdom, [i. absolute, steadfast and
effectual knowledge both of heavenly and worldly things,] and instruction
[vz. concerning men and their duties, to the end that they that by nature are
rude and unskillful, may by this doctrine be reclaimed to a better trade and
course of life,] to understand [q. d. whereby also a man may vnderstand] the
words of knowledge, [i. such speeches and sentences, as are with skill,
knowledge and judgment uttered and spoken. Some think that there are three
sorts of knowledge set down in this verse, which may be obtained by the reading
of this Book: understanding by wisdom, the certain and assured knowledge of
every thing: by instruction, the ways and means to attain to that
knowledge, which here is set after it, because the other in dignity and
worthiness goes before it: and by understanding the words of knowledge, he
understands prudence; as when by the help of wisdom and knowledge, a man
obteineth ability Verse. 3. To receive [vz. from the mouth of thy teacher, if
thou be a scholar and learner: for in this verse he shows the profit that
it will bring to learners, and in the next verse how it will enable teachers.]
instruction [see verse. 2. meaning also by instruction, good rules, holy
counsel, and right order:] to do wisely, [vz. in all the ways that thou
shall walk, and all the things that thou shall attempt,] by justice, and
judgment, and equity. [This place is turned, as though these things were
means and instruments of a good man's wise dealing: whereas I suppose it should
be turned thus, as also some do turn it] To receive the instruction of
understanding, [i. wise and skillful instruction] of justice, judgment, and
every right thing. [vnderstanding by justice, just, holy, and good works; by
judgment, that sentence whereby every man has his own yielded him; and by
equity, or in the plural number (as it is in the Hebrew text) equities,
(which also makes some to turn it every right thing) upright and equal
dealing one with another.] Verse. 4. To give [vz. unto the simple [i. to him
that not only has little knowledge, and is (as a man would say) unskilled,
but though he have some judgment, is notwithstanding easily and in a moment
(as it were) induced to believe any thing; and is carried (as it were) hither
and thither, from the way of truth: see Proverb. 14.15. where the same word
in our English text is turned, foolish] sharpness of wit, [he understands
hereby, not only quickness of sight to perceive the subtilties of the
enemies; but also soundness of judgment, that he be no more carried away, as
he has been.] and to the child [i. unto him that is unadvised, and wants
discretion it giueth] knowledge, [i. sound judgment,] and discretion, [viz.
how and after what sort to behave himself, and to walk: see Ephesians. 4.14.] Verse.
5. A wise man [q.d. These things profit not the simple and shall hear [vz.
these things: understanding by hearing, not only the bending of the outward
ears, but also the inclining of the mind thereto] and increase [vz. thereby]
in learning: [i. in all manner of knowledge: q.d. he shall be more wise and
learned than he was before.] and a man of understanding [i. he that by
experience (as it were) has attained to a more measure of knowledge and
judgment than others: see ver. 2. of this chap.] shall attain [vz. by this
means, meaning also by attayning, not only the getting, but the possessing,
keeping, and using,] unto wise counsels [vz. not only in himself, but shall
be able to profit others thereby.] Verse. 6. To understand [vz. by a parable
[see verse. 1. of this chapter.] and the interpretation: [vz. of parables, or of
any fine, or eloquent speech whatsoever.] the words of the wise [yea, though
they speak never so wisely] and their dark sayings. [q.d. yea, though they
speak never so darkly also. And all these profits, the holy Ghost
alleges, not only to show the excellency of the book, but also to draw
men to the love and liking of his doctrine.] Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord [i.
a reverence is the beginning of knowledge: [i. is not only the first mean and
way to attain the sound knowledge of God and all goodness, but is as it were
the fountain and foundation of all good things. Solomon in this followed his
father David, as may appear Psalm 111.10.] but fools [i. wicked and ungodly
persons: as generally throughout this book, and more particularly Psalm
14.1.] despise [vz. either proudly, or carelessly, but yet both ways to their
own hurt] wisdom and instruction. [see verse. 2. of this chapter.] Verse. 8.
My son [Salomon speaks this to Psalm 34. 12.] hear [vz. attentively and
diligently, see also verse. 5. of this Chapter] thy fathers instruction, [i.
the instruction and good counsel that thy father gives thee] and forsake not
[vz. at any time, but keep carefully with thee] thy mothers teaching: [i.
those things which thy mother shall instruct and teach thee: he makes mention
of mother, because he had before spoken of father, meaning by both together,
the counsels and commandments of their parents: and yet because mothers
admonitions and persuasions, are of great force in their children, while they
are young, he speaks also particularly Ver. 9. For they [i. the instructions
and doctrines of thy parents, if they be rightly received on thy behalfe]
shall be a comely ornament unto thy head, and as chains for thy neck, [i.
they shall garnish and deck thee very excellently, even as a Crown set upon
the head, or a chain about the neck adorneth a man, meaning that they shall
make him gracious and acceptable both before God and men. And this is a reason
of his exhortation, having respect therein, to the very manners and affections
of children, who are much moved with gifts, and sundry sorts of ornaments:
even so men should be drawn to the obedience of Gods will, by his great and
large promises.] V. 10. My [see verse. 8. of this chapt.] if sinners [1.
notorious wicked men, as Psalm. 1.1, 5.] do intise thee [vz. to any manner of
wickedness whatsoever, their intisements he rehearses afterward, verse. 11,
12, 13, 14.] consent thou not [vz. at any hand, to those their ungodly
prouocations, much less do the Verse. 11. If they [i. those wicked ones] say
[vz. either openly or closely, and that either by word or deed, for a man's
gestures and actions, speak after a sort,] come, [vz. and go with us, that is,
be a companion with us in the mischief we will perform.] we will lay wait
[vz. closely and craftelie] for blood, [i. for men's lives to take them away,
meaning that they would commit murder, and all manner of outrage to other men's
hurt: see Esaias. 1.15. also Psalm. 5.6. also Psalm. 51.14. and sundry other
places.] and lie priuelie [vz. in wait: see Psalm. 10.8.9.10.] for the
innocent [vz. to catch and snare him: see Psalm. 141.9.] without a cause [vz.
on their behalf given, to practice so against them: see Psalm. 119.161. and
these may be either the wicked men's words, who in the testimony of their own
conscience say, they persecute the godly without any cause at all, or else the
words of the holy Ghost justifying the good; but I incline rather to the
former. And note, that as in this verse they brag, what mischief they will
closely and craftelie perform against them, so in the next verse, they do
shamefullie Verse. 12. We [vz. in the pride and cruelty of our own hearts]
will swallow them up [i. will quite and clean destroy the godlie] alive [i.
being either in good health and sound, or else flourishing in glory, wealth,
etc. but the former is the better, though the Rabbis allow of the latter.]
like a grave [i. even as a grave does receive and take in dead corpses, and
never is satisfied: see Proverb. 30.15, 16. so will they destroy the good, and
never leave off.] even whole [i. we will spare no part or piece of them,
neither skin, flesh, nor bones] as those that go down into the pit. [i. as
those that are buried whole, so shall these be destroyed whole.] Verse. 13. We
shall find [i. not only certainly find, but assuredly all precious riches,
[i. all manner of precious and rich things: and this persuasion is drawn from
profit.] and fill our houses [i. we shall have great store and aboundance]
with spoil [vz. of the good people: meaning that they should have, as a
plentiful pray, all manner of rich and precious things.] Verse. 14. Cast in thy
lot amongst us, [i. have a q.d. Look what part we have, thou shall have the
same: and we look for none but good, therefore thy portion shall be
plentiful.] we will all have one purse. [this is another intisement of the
wicked: q.d. we will be share and share like, and as we put all into one bag;
so we will have it equally divided, and none shall be preferred before
another.] Verse. 15. My son, [see verse. 8. of this Chapter.] walk not [i. be
not conversant with them at any hand, neither have any fellowship or dealing
with them, either openly nor privately.] refrain thy foot from their path,
[i. walk not in their wicked ways, least thou be partaker with them, as of
the same sins, so of the same punishments.] Verse. 16. For their feet run
to evil [i. they are swift to commit and make have to shed blood: [i. to
murder and kill men, and to take away their lives: see verse. 11. of this
Chapter: and this is a reason, why the godly should not hearken to the
intisements of the wicked.] Verse. 17. and 18. as they are read in the Geneua
text, seem to carry with for in vain [i. to no purpose at all.] is the net
[vz. of the Fowler] spread before the eyes [i. openly and in the sight] of all
that has wing, [i. of every bird and foul, q.d. though these men make an
account, as though they had gotten the pray, yet they can no more certainly
say that they can bring to pass their counsels and purposes, than an
unskillful fowler (which lays his snares and grinns openly) can certainly
affirm, that he will catch the birds that fly by, and observe his nets: and
so it is as another reason; that as before he had persuaded them not to yield
to the inticements of the wicked, because all things they did tended to
injustice and cruelty: so here he disswadeth them, because they can look for
no certain event of their purposes.] Verse. 18. Moreover, [q.d. this is an they
themselves [i. the wicked and vngodlie] lay wait for their own blood: [i.
work mischief, even to the destruction of themselues] in that they hide
themselves: [vz. thinking thereby to catch and ensnare others:] it is against
their own souls, [i. it is hurtful to themselves: see to this end Psalm.
7.14, 15, 16. And so here is a third argument, taken from the heavy
destruction of the wicked, V. 19. Such [i. so dangerous and deadlie] are the
ways [i. the purposes and practises] of every one [i. of what state or
condition soever he or they be of] that is greedy of gain, [i. that is given
to it, and gapeth after unjust gain,] he [i. the wicked] would take away [vz.
for the satisfying of his own greedy and covetous desire] the life of the
owners thereof. [i. of such gain or good things as other men have and they
desire. Some reads it otherwise, and make an other sense of the latter part
of the verse thus;] in such state [vz. both for wicked purposes and great
dangers] are the companies [i. the societies, fellowships, or corporations (as
a man would say): for he seems to allude to that which was spoken before
verse. 14. see Genesis 37.25. where mention is made of a company of Ishmaelitish
merchants also,] of all that are given to gain. [i. to unjust gain: and in
that term also he shows, that none of them can escape death and destruction;
because the judgment which God will lay upon them cannot be avoided.] Gain
[i. unjust gaine] takes away the soul of them [i. the life of them] that are
given theretoo. [vz. greedelie and above measure. This is it (as I take it)
that the holy Ghost does sententiouslie conclude, that the wicked shall not
escape unpunished: and all this is done, to draw the godly that they consent
not to their wicked allurements.] Ve. Wisdom [It is in the Hebrew text in the
plural number, by which he notes most high and excellent wisdom, vz. even the
eternal wisdom of God (Jesus Christ) of whom see afterward chapt. 8. and in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Coloss. 2.3.] cries
[vz. earnestly and continually: by which he sets out his great love to the
conversion of men.] without, [i. abroad and openly,] she utters her voice
[i. she speaks freely and plainlie] in the streets: [vz. of the City: both
these laid together, sound q.d. both openly and privately, in the city and
in the fields, Verse. 21. She calls [vz. men to amendment] in the high streate
among the prease, [q.d. she is in the great assembly and concourse of people,
taking thereby the greatest and best opportunity of well doing.] in the
entering of the gates, [vz. whether people were wont to repair for matters of
justice and judgment: as Genesis 34.20. Ruth 4.1. q.d. both in the market place
and in the judgment place, wisdom seeks to draw men unto her,] and
utters her words [vz. very plainly and sensibly, that all may vnderstande]
in the city, [i. in every place and quarter of the city: see Psalm. 55.9,
10, 11.] saying: [vz. unto the Verse. 22. O ye foolish, [or simple rather, as
ver. 4. of this chapter: for he uses one and the self same words in both
places.] how long will ye love foolishness? [q.d. will ye never leave off this
sheepishnesse and simpleness?] and the scornful, [of these see Psalm. 1.1.
who turn all things into scoffs, the wickedst people that can be] take their
pleasure in scorning? [i. how long will you delight in it, to your own hurt and
destruction in the end, unless you repent?] and the fools [this word does not
only comprehend such as are spoken of before verse. 7. of this chapter, who are
given to false opinions, and follow ways directly contrary to wisdom; but
also want wisdom, and give not their minds thereto] hate knowledge? [vz.
offered them. Mark how in this verse he passes suddenly from the second
person to the third.] Verse. 23. Turn you [vz. from your evil ways: neither at
my correction, [i. now that I do by words and speeches labor to correct and
amend you,] lo [q.d. if you will do this, see what benefits you shall draw
and pull to your self.] J will power out my mind unto you, [i. I will make you
plentifully acquainted with the fullness of all good things which dwell in
me,] and make you understand my words. [i. the words which I shall speak for
your ame^dment: q.d. till I give you understanding thereof, they can be no
otherwise to you, but as a sealed or closed book.] Verse. 24. Because I have
called earnestly unto you, for your amendment and good] and ye refused; [vz.
to hearken and yield obedience unto my voice.] J have stretched out mine hand,
[q.d. I have beckened unto you with my hand, and given you signs and tokens of
my calling and protection,] and none [vz. amongst you] would regard. [vz.
these testimonies and tokens of my love toward you.] Verse. 25. But [q.d.
moreover and besides all this] ye have despised, [i. through your rebellion you
have contemptuously cast from you, all that I purposed and offered unto you
for your good:] and would none of my correction. [i. would not accept or regard
any mean that I used, either of word or chastisement for your bettering and
amendment. In these two verses, he reckons up their sins, in the next
follows their judgments.] Verse. 26. I will also laugh (i. I will not care
for you or regard Psalm. 2.4.] at your destruction, [The word properly
signifies a vapor, exhalation, or cloud; but here by a Metaphore it is taken
for calamity or misery, which brings destruction upon men; and that in a
double respect, because as clouds and vapors darken the day, so calamity and
misery make dark many times the glory and renown of men: again, as vapors
and exhalations arise suddenly, and suddenly depart again: so does the
glory of the wicked when the tempest of misery begins once to blow upon
it.] and mock [vz you in your misery: and this is spoken of God according to
man's capacitie] when your fear comes [vz. suddenly, as in the next verse
upon you: understanding by fear, not only the things which the wicked fear,
but also the time of their calamity, in which they shall be in great fear and
doubting; yea the very anguish and grief of their heart also.] Ver. 27. When
your fear [see ve. 26. comes upon you, and that certainly and assuredly,
which he signifies by speaking in the present tense.] like sudden desolation,
[i. like such destruction and wasting, as for the sodainnes of it, can neither
be easily borne, nor well prevented. That word which is here turned desolation,
does properly signify, a sudden and furious breach or destruction of any
thing, breaking and overthrowing every thing that it meets with.] and your
destruction [i. the destruction which is appointed for you] shall come [vz.
upon you] like a whirlewind, [i. both suddenly and with great violence: he
expresses one thing under sundry termes] when affliction and anguish [i. when
trouble and grief, either outward in the body, or inward in the minde] shall
come upon you [vz. justly from God: q.d. I will not only then laugh at your
destruction, Verse. 28. Then [i. in the time of their trouble and sorrowe] shall
they [i. the wicked: mark the sudden change of the person, from the second to
the third] call upon me [i. pray unto me, as Psalm 50.15.] but I will not
answer: [i. grant them their requests: yea, by withholding the things they
pray for, I will testify my wrath against them,] they shall seek me early
[i. very diligently, carefully, and as it were incessantly: q.d. they shall
spare no pains, yea they shall break their sleeps in the morning.] but shall
not find me, [vz. gracious and merciful unto them in their griefs, because
God will be found of none but of such as seek him according to his will
revealed in his word, and that Verse. 29 Because they hated knowledge, [see
verse. 22. of this Chapter, he does here again repeat the causes of the ruin
and destruction of the wicked.] and did not choose [vz. when it was graciously
tendered and offered them.] the fear see verse. 7. of this Chapter.] Verse. 30.
They would none of my counsel, but despised all my correction. [see verse. 25.
of this Chapter. He means that in the pride of their own hearts, they were
set, to contemn and Verse. 31. Therefore [vz. for this their great contempt and
rebellion] shall they eat [vz. in all abundance, plenty and fulnes] of the
fruit of their own way [i. they shall be satisfied, with their wicked
counsels, and have just punishments laid upon them for the same, even the
wickedness which they have sown, they shall reap with all fulness: see
Chapter 22.8.] and be filled with their own devices: [i. with the punishments
and mischiefs, which they themselves had devised against Verse. 32. For ease
[i. not only the peace and quietness which they here enjoy, but their
stubbornnes and setlednes in evil, wherein they please themselves, and promise
unto themselves all prosperity: see Jeremiah 48.11. Zephani. 1.12.] slaieth
the foolish [i. the simple, which know not how to use it, as verse. 22. of this
Chapter] and the prosperity of fools [i. that prosperity which fools and
wicked persons enioy] destroys them [i. plungeth Verse. 33. But he that
obeieth me [vz. in doing the things which I command him] shall dwell safely
[vz. from all naughty men, or any mischief they can imagine against him: see
Psalm. 4.8.] and be quiet from fear of evil [i. not only, no evil it self,
but no suspicion or fear of it shall go to his heart, he shall be so
strengthened through Gods promises, and defended by his almighty power.

Verse. 1. Teaches us, that it is a great blessing, Do.
when God gives to any country or common wealth, wise and godly Princes.
Verse. 2. Teaches us, that Gods word is, and ought to be the ground of all our
knowledge. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that it ought to be the rule of all our
actions, either public or private. Verse. 4. Proves, that the knowledge of
Gods word belongs even to the simple, contrary to the Popish assertion,
which would have none meddle with it, but great scholars and learned men.
Verse. 5.6. Show, that even the wisest also may out of the same learn, for
increase of judgment and knowledge: so that we may rightly say, that, the
word are waters, wherein the great Elephant may swim, and the little Lamb
wade and go. Verse.7. Teaches us, that we can never come to sound knowledge
of God and his truth, unless there be a right reverence of his Majesty in
our hearts. Verse. 8. Teaches us, first that it is parents duties, to instruct
those, whom God has given them. Secondly, that children should reverently
hearken unto the wholesome counsel of their friends and parents. Verse. 9.
Teaches us, that it is a notable grace to be bowable to the good words of
exhortation. Verse. 10. Teaches us, at no hand to consent, to wicked
persuasions and inticements. Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. Teach us, that the wicked
will leave no stone vnrolled, to the end they may draw some to commit
wickedness with them, sometimes setting before them pleasure, sometimes
profit, and sometimes one thing, and sometimes another. Verse. 15. Teaches us
two things: first to avoid the company of the wicked: secondly, not to be
like unto them in outward conversation. Verse. 16. Shows, how egar and sharp
set, the wicked are upon mischief. Verse. 17. Teaches us, that the wicked are
not so sure of the acco^plishment of their practices, as they suppose. Verse.
18. Teaches us, that through Gods just judgments, the ungodly are many times
taken in the mischievous imaginations of their own hearts. Verse. 19. Teaches
us, that there is no wicked man, of what estate or condition so ever he be,
which continues in his sin, that shall escape unpunished. Verse. 20, 21, 22.
Teaches us, that the heavenly wisdom uses all means and opportunities, to
bring men unto it, which are straggling from it. Verse. 22. Shows, that the
wicked prefer vanity and sin, before all goodness whatsoever. Verse. 23.
Teaches us, that those which vnfeignedlie turn to the Lord, shall not only
escape judgments in this life, and in the life to come, but shall be
thoroughly instructed in all the ways of God. Verse.24, 25. Teaches us, that
there can be no greater sin committed against God, than rebellion, and the
contempt of his majesty. Verse. 26. Teaches, that the Lord will have no care
of them, that have no care of him. Verse. 27. Shows, that both sudden and
fearful destruction shall fall upon all wicked contemners of God and his
truth. Verse. 28. Teaches us, that those which refuse to hear God when he
speaks, shall not be heard when they pray unto him. Verse. 29. Teaches us,
that this is a great sin against God, even the contempt and refusal of
graces offered: the same thing does verse. 30. teach us. Verse. 31. Teaches us,
that it is a just with God, to punish sin with sin in the wicked, though he
himself delight not in sin. Verse. 32. Teaches us, that even the very good
things that the wicked have, tend to their greater judgment and condemnation.
Verse. 33. Teaches us, that obedience to Gods law, is a good pledge to his
children, that God will in his provident and fatherly care, continually watch
over them.

CHAP. 2.
Co.
Solomon in the end of the other Chapter, had brought in Gods wisdom
speaking unto men, and calling them to amendment, which being done, he
begins again, either in his own person, or in the person of wisdom
(choose whether you will accept of) to exhort men to embrace her, and
reverently and rightly to esteem of her.

Di.
Solomon, admonishes us to obey her, both because it teaches us the fear of
God, and also instructs us in his verse. 1 to the end of the 9. verse: and the
second from verse. 10. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. MY son [see chapt. 1.8.] if thou will receive [i. even as it were
greedelie, earnestly, reverently and rightlie] my words, [i. the matters that
I shall propound and speak unto thee] and hide [vz. as most precious and dear
things: see Psalm. 119 11.] my commandments, [i. the things and words which I
command thee] within thee: [vz. in thy heart; yet so that they may be expressed
also in thy outward conversation.] Verse. 2. And cause thine ears [vz. both of
thy body and of thy minde] to hearken [vz. reverently, attentively, and
diligentlie] unto wisdom: [vz. that speaks so often and so openly unto
thee, as chapt. 1. ver. 20. etc.] and incline [vz. willingly and vnfeinedlie]
thine heart [vz. wholly and altogether] to understanding. [i. to obtain and
get sound knowledge of Gods will revealed Verse. 3. For [this word would be
better turned yea: q.d. if thou addest this further, that thou have a mind to
pray for wisdom.] if thou call after knowledge [i. bend thy speech
toward her, that thou may (as it were) call her unto thee, as when one
calls another, and so by that means she may become familiar and acquainted
with thee.] and criest [vz. aloud and earnestly: by which he notes care and
diligence] for understanding. [i. for the obteining of it: as men when some are
going apace from them cry aloud that they may be heard. Some read this verse
thus] Yea if thou call upon wisdom, [i. reverently call upon God for the
obteining of wisdom, as Solomon did 1. King. 3.6.] and criest aloud to
understanding, [i. prayest earnestly to God, as God himself commands Iam.
1.5. And indeed I take this to be the better sense, by reason of that which
follows ver. 6. of this chapter.] Ver. 4. If thou seek her [vz. as
diligently and paynfullie] as silver, [i. as thou thy self would or any
other man seek silver lost or hidden,] and searchest for her [vz. as
carefully and as narrowlie] as for treasures [vz. which are hidden in some
close, strong, and secret place, as in the earth, or otherwise, whether men
cannot come, but by great labor and toil: q.d. if thou seek it, with as
earnest an affection, as silver is sought, and treasures dug up, and that
thou art not content with a common kind of searching; but if thou find it not
at once, thou will still seek, till thou have found, then thus and thus shall
it be with thee. And mark here what degrees the holy Ghost uses: first he
would have us to be careful to receive, and to hold fast the doctrine of God.
verse. 1. Then he would have us to be careful, by diligent attention, for the
receiving and remembering of it. ver. 2. Thirdly, he would have us to use
earnest prayer for the obtaining of it. ver. 3 And lastly, he would have us to
bestow all labor, study and industry. verse. 4.] Verse. 5. Then [i. when thou
have carefully striuen, to the performance shall thou understand [vz. plainly,
familiarly, rightly and soundly] the fear of the Lord, [see Chapt. 1. verse.
7.] and find [vz. so that thou shall obtain and possesse] the knowledge of
God. [i. such knowledge of him, as thou ought to have, of which see John
17.3. and also shall know by experience, that he knows thee, that is, cares
for thee, as may appear by verse. 6, 7. following.] Verse. 6. For the Lord [vz.
alone, and none but he] gives [vz. freely of his own mercie] wisdom [i.
true and heavenly wisdom. James 3.15, 17. q.d. I said before, that thou
should find wisdom and knowledge, but now least thou should ascribe it
to thine own strength, I tell thee, it must come from God which gives it
plentifully, etc. James 1.5.] out of his mouth [he means Gods good will and
pleasure manifested unto us by his word, understanding his word also thereby:
see Deutr. 8.3. Math. 4.4.] comes knowledge, [i. all sound knowledge of his
maiestie] and understanding [i. right understanding, of his holy mysteries.]
Verse. 7. He [i. God] preserves [vz. by his almighty power and prouidence] the
state of the righteous [i. he vpholdeth them that have care and conscience of a
righteous conversation, in a good estate and condition. Some read it thus] He
has every thing [vz. that is in deed good] laid up in store for the righteous
[i. God so knows and provides for the righteous, that he causes them to
abound with all things, that are good in deede] he is a shield to them that
walk uprightly, [i. he does by his power, save, preserve, and defend Verse. 8.
That they may keep [vz. through strength and grace from him] the ways of
judgment [i. such upright paths, as tend to judgment and right toward all,
specially toward their neighbor, to which the Hebrew word should most
properly be referred, (as I suppose) not declining any whit at all, from right
and equitie] and he [i. God alone, without the help or aid of others]
preserves [see verse. 7. of this Chapter] the way [i. the whole course or trade
of his life, whatsoever he thinks, speaks, does, or takes in hand: meaning
that the Lord prospers it also: see Psalm 1.3, 6.] of his Saints. [i. of
those which Psalm 16.3. also Psalm 149.1.] Verse. 9. Then [vz. when thou shall
be instructed with knowledge and wisdom from the Lord] shall thou understand
[vz. through the light which God shall bestow upon thee] righteousness, and
judgment, and equity, [see these words expounded before, cap. 1. verse. 3. And
here he notes another fruit of the study of wisdom, which is properly to
be understood toward men: as the first, mentioned verse. 5. was toward God.]
and every good path [i. every right course and order, to frame thy life, well
and religiously, yea thou shall Verse. 10. When wisdom enters into thy
heart [i. finds a fast and deep seat in thee] and knowledge delights thy
soul; [vz. above all: the end of the sentence, Verse. 11. Then shall counsel
[vz. which thou shall learn out of Gods word] preserve thee, [vz. from all
evil: see verse. 7.8. of this Chapter] and understanding [vz. of Gods will
revealed in his worde] shall keep thee [vz. safe and sound.] Verse. 12. And
deliver thee [i. from every thing that is evil: so that thou shall not attempt
nor take in hand any evil thing: yea from a disordred life, into which thou
slippest through infirmity of nature; or, whereunto thou art provoked by the
words and deeds of the ungodly.] and from the man [i. from men: for it is
one number put for another.] that speaks [vz. not only in his heart, but with
his mouth] froward things [vz. both Verse. 13. And from them [q.d. it will set
the free also from such and such persons: and mark how suddenly he changes
the numbers from the singular to the plural. Some join it to the former verse
thus] which [vz. men, speaking perverse things] leave the ways of
righteousness, [i. upright, good, and holy ways: and he means by this
speech, that the wicked many times put out the light that God has bestowed
upon them.] to walk in the ways of darkness. [i. in corrupt and evil
courses: for every one that does evil hates the light. John 3.20. also Romans
13.12, Which rejoice [vz. greatlie] in doing evil, [i. when either they
themselves do any, or hear of others which commit it.] and delight [vz.
very much] in the frowardness of the wicked, [vz. man: yet I had rather turn
it thus, in the frowardnesses of evil, that is, in the worst and most evil
frowardnesses. Some refer the word rejoicing to the mind, inwardly; and the
word delight to the body, outwardly; because the motions of the mind many
times appear outwardly in the body: q. d. both outwardly and inwardly they
are glad at all naughtiness.] Verse. Whose ways [i. whose lives and dealings
both toward God and men] are crooked, [i. wicked and ungodly, and lead not
only to trouble, but to destruction also] and they are leawd in their paths.
[i. their whole trade and course of life sauoreth of nothing but leawdnesse.]
Verse 16. And it [i. wisdom shall deliver thee [see verse 12. of this chapter]
from the strange woman, [i. from the whore or harlot: who in the scripture is
called by this name, because she estrangeth her self from her husband, and
gives over the use of her body to a stranger.] even from the stranger [i. the
harlot] which flattereth [vz. very sweetly and pleasantlie] with her words.
[i. with her intising speeches: see Prouer. 7.10, 11, etc.] Verse 17. Which
forsakes [vz. both in action and affection, though Prou. 7.19.] the guide of
her youth, [i. her husband which God gave her in her youth, to guide and
govern her; not only then, but for ever: for the husband is the head of the
wife 1. Cor. 11.3.] and forgets [vz. utterly and altogether] the covenant
of her God. [that is the bond of marriage solemnlie passed between the parties,
God himself being Author thereof, and his name being called upon at the
contract made: see Malach. 2.14.] Verse 18. Surely [or as some read it For,
q.d. it is no small her house [i. even the very entrance and going into her
house: q.d. the very first beginning of familiarity and acquaintance] tends
to death, [i. brings death and destruction with it if it be pursued] and her
paths [i. the treading in her paths and walking in her order of life and
conversation: see chapter 1.15. understand here, tend, or lead] unto the dead.
[i. unto them that are dead already and buried: see Psalm 88.10. He means
that to follow the ways of the harlot, brings with it death and destruction
both of body and soul.] Verse 19. All they of what state or condition soever
they be] that go unto her, [i. that have but some familiarity or beginning of
acquaintance with hir] return not again, [vz. without touch or taint of some
mischief: meaning also, that they hardly return to the Lord by unfeigned
repentance] neither take they hold of the ways of life. [i. they live not
again, or return into life: meaning also by life, and the ways thereof, a
better order or course of life, than they lead before. And though he speak the
same things in many words, meaning that they shall not at any hand escape
destruction, yet the words must be understood, of eternal death rather, than
of temporal and bodily death, which yet notwithstanding the adulterers
purchase and procure to themselves, by their incessant Verse. 20. Therefore
[q.d. seeing thou see what judgments shall fall upon the wicked, join thou
thy self to the good: others read it otherwise, but me thinks this is
plain enough] walk thou in the way of good men, [i. be conversant with them,
and order thy life well, according to the good orders and courses of their
life] and keep the ways of the righteous: [vz. in thy conversation and
behavior: q.d. in thy life, follow Verse. 21. For [he shows here a reason,
taken from the just judgments of God, toward the good in this verse, and
toward the wicked verse. 22.] the just [1. those that have care and conscience
of justice and well doing] shall dwell in the land, [vz. which the Lord has
mercifully given them, for I take it, that he alludeth to the promises made in
the law Exodus 20.12. and other places. Yet so, that under the same he means
all manner of blessings whatsoever: see Psalm 37.29.] and the upright men [see
Psalm 119.1.] shall remain in it [vz. a long season.] Verse. 22. But the
wicked shall be cut off from the earth [vz. through the just judgment of God
against them for their sinnes] and the transgressors [i. such as transgress
against God and his lawe] shall be rooted out of it. [vnder this word, he
means, that the wicked shall assuredly, suddenly, and utterly be
destroyed: see Psalm 37.36, 38. also Psalm 52.5. And here understand, by
these outward and corporal things, inward, spiritual, and eternal, either life
or death: and mark that this is usual with him to amplify by the contrary,
as Chapt. 1.32, 33. Chapt. 3.35. and in sundry other places.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches, to bring with us, a mind ready and prepared to receive
good things. Verse. 2. Teaches us, to have care, faithfully to retain and
keep those good things which we have heard and learned. Verse. 3. Teaches us,
to use earnest and continual prayer for the obtaining of al good things
whatsoever. Verse. 4. Teaches us, to spare no labor or cost, for the obtaining
of good things, yea the better that the things are which we seek for, the more
earnestly to travail therein. Verse 5. Teaches us, that if we seek for the
things of God with that affection, that he requires, and to the end he
commands, we shall not lose our labor. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that the gift
of wisdom, knowledge, judgment, and every good gift whatsoever comes from
the Lord. Verse. 7. Teaches us, Gods great care and singular providence over
those that be his. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that God reuealeth knowledge and
wisdom unto those that be his, to the end, that they might learn according
to the same to direct all their ways. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that we know
nothing of goodness, till God make the same manifest unto us. Verse. 10. Teaches
us, both in the inward man, and in the outward man, to take delight and
pleasure in good things. Verse. 11, 12. etc. Teach us, what great benefits,
sound and sincere knowledge of Gods heavenly will, wisdom shall bring with it,
to the^, that have attained through Gods goodness to the same. Verse. 12.
Teaches us, to avoid al frowardnes, whether it be in heart or speech. Verse.
13. Teaches us, to take heed that we bleare not the light, which God has made
manifest unto us. Verse. 14. Teaches us, to beware of rejoicing in evil and
naughtiness, for that is the height and top of all sin. Verse. 15. Teaches
us, that when men delight in crooked ways, they more and more go astray from
God in following the leaudnes of their own souls. Verse. 16. Painteth out very
lively the qualities and conditions of a harlot, or strumpet. Verse. 17.
Shows, that in adultery, there is a double transgression committed, one
against God, and another against man, which is the husband. Verse. 18.19. Show
how dangerous and deadly a thing it is, to have any familiarity or
acquaintance at all with light and dishonest women. Verse. 20 Teaches us, to
set good men, in their goodness, before our eyes, to be examples and
patterns of good life and conversation unto us. Verse. 21, 22. Set out the
difference between the reward of the good and the bad, both in this life, but
especially in the life to come.

CHAP. 3.
Co.
IN the other Chapter, the holy Ghost had exhorted men to embrace and obey
wisdom, and now because this doctrine is not easily yielded unto, yea man's
nature does wholly rebel against the same, he begins new and fresh
exhortations, provoking men to earnest and unfeigned embracing of Gods word.

Di.
THe Chapter may be divided into three parts. In the first he sets out verse.
1. to the end of the 12. In the second part he cites promises and blessings,
assuring us verse 13. to the end of the 26. In the third he labors verse 27.
to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. MY son, [see Chapter 1.8.] forget not thou [vz. at any time] my
law [i. my doctrine and instruction: and he calls it his, not because he was
the author of it, but the vtterer or penner of it [but let thine heart [whollie
and soundlie] keep [vz. within it, in respect of knowledge] my commandments
[i. both the things that I command, and the words in which I express them.]
Verse. 2. For they [i. the not forgetting and keeping of them] shall increase
the length of thy days, and the years of life, [i. of thy life. He means
not, that the days and terms which the Lord has set us, shall be lengthened
or shortened, but he speaks it according to the custom of the law, Exodus
20.12.] and thy prosperity. [or as it is in the Hebrew, thy peace,
understanding thereby all manner of prosperity, as it is sundry times used in
scripture, without which, long time should be but miserable.] Verse. 3. Let not
mercy [i. the service and worship of God, prescribed in his law, which he
calls mercy, because God in mercy only made the same manifest unto men]
and truth [i. upright and true dealing toward men, commanded in the second
table] forsake thee, [vz. at any time, but have them in continual remembrance
to do and perform them: see Deuteronomy. 5.29.] bind them on thy neck, [vz. as a
chain or Jewel: see Chapt. 1.9. And he seems to allude to that which is
written Deuteronomy. 6.8. where they are commanded to bind them upon their hands, and
to have them as frontlets between their eyes: meaning nothing but the great
care, which they should have to remember Gods word: see Exodus 13.9. see also
verse 21. of this Chapter] and write them upon the table of thine heart [i. lay
them up in thine heart, and think often upon them, as men do those things
which they have in writings or tables. Under these two words, binding and
writing, and the words joined with them, the holy Ghost means nothing else
but this, but that he should continually think upon them in his mind, and
speak of them in his talk, that thereby he might be the more provoked to obey
them in his Verse. 4. So [i. by this means if thou strive to perform these
counsels and commandements] shall thou find [vz. assuredly and without all
doubt] favor [i. acceptance and good liking] and good understanding [i. sound
judgment and wisdom, in devising and performing thy matters] in the sight of
God [who will accompany thee with his prouidence] and man. [i. men, as Chapt.
2. verse. 1. whose hearts God would bow to approve and Verse. 5. Trust in the
Lord [vz. only, and at all times, either in prosperity or aduersitie] with all
thine heart, [i. unfeignedly: for God hates men of two hearts and hypocrites]
and lean not unto [i. trust not in: see Isaiah 36.6.] thine own wisdom [i.
man's wisdom, or the wisdom of flesh and blood, whether thou have it in and
of thy self, or from others: for it is nothing else but foolishnes before God.
Roma. 8.6, 7. James In all thy ways [i. whatsoever thou do purpose,
enterprise or perform,] acknowledge him, [i. steadfastly believe, and
vnfeignedlie confess, that all is done by his exceeding great power, excellent
wisdom, and wonderful providence: see to this end David's exhortation to
Solomon 1. Chron. 28.9.] and he shall direct thy ways. [i. he shall so govern
and guide all thy matters, that thou shall not be frustrate of thy hope: see
Psalm. 37.5. Psalm 55.22.] Verse. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, [i. in thine
own judgment and opinion: q.d. think not that thine own wisdom is
sufficient to dispatch thine affairs withal, without the wisdom and word
of God, but beware of such conceites] but fear the Lord, [i. worship and serve
him, hanging only upon him] and depart [vz. with speed and vnfeignedly] from
evil. [i. every thing that is evil: see Psalm. 37.77. Job. 1.1.] Verse. 8. So
[i. by this means, or as some read it But [vz. fearing the Lord and departing
from evil [health [i. all blessings, by one understanding all, either outward
or inward] shall be unto thy navel, [i. unto thee thy self, putting one part
of the man for the whole man] and marrowe unto thy bones. [i. strength unto thy
whole man: it is as much, as if under these two terms he should say, both
inwardly and outwardly, in body and in mind thou shall be well affected:
but these promises are expressed under an allegory, or allegories, by which
the godly, that are fostered in the Church, are compared to children in their
mothers wombes, and therefore the word turned here navel, would rather be
turned womb or belly: for as by the means of the womb, nourishment is
ministered unto them, yea even to the strengthening of the inward parts: so the
godly in the Church, are fed and brought up by the faith, knowledge, fear,
and obedience of God: and as without marrowe in the bones, no part of man, no
not that which is of greatest value and force, is able to do any thing: so the
strength that they have from God, is as the marrowe which strengthens the
bones, and makes them apt to do good things: see Job 21.24. for this phrase.]
Verse. 9. Honor the Lord with thy [though I deny not, but that it is to be
understood of things given for the maintenance of the Priests and Levites, and
of their Sacrifices dedicated to the Lord: yet I would have it to be understood
so generally, that look which way so ever our riches might advance Gods
glory, even that way we should willingly employ the same, understanding by
riches, gold, silver, precious stones, etc.] and with the first fruits of
thine increase [vz. whether it be of beasts and cattle] to be offered to the
Lord, or of the fruits of the earth: see for this Exodus 23.19. also Deuteronomy.
26.2. etc. meaning notwithstanding under first fruits, even the best and
chiefest of any thing they had, to offer unto the Lord: see Malach. 1.8. etc.
Verse. 10. So shall thy [i. all thy places, wherein thou laiest up thy store, as
sellers, warehouses, etc.] be filled with abundance, [vz. of all good things]
and thy presses shall burst with new wine. [i. there shall be such abundance
and plenty of new wine, as thy presses shall not be able to press it out,
but shall break in pieces through the abundance of it: see Deutero. 28. and
Malach. 3.10.] Verse. 11. My son, [see Chapt. 1.8.] refuse not [vz. at any
hand, as though [the chastening of the Lord, [i. such corrections, whether they
be outward in the body, or inward in the mind, as the Lord shall lay upon
thee] neither be grieved [vz. either against him, or it; as though thou
would murmur against him, or repine at it] with his correction: [i. with his
fatherly chastising of thee to thy amendment, as may appear in the next verse:
see this place largely expounded Hebr. 12.5. etc. and Reuelat. 3.19.] Verse. 12.
For [this is a reason why they should not be faint hearted, or murmur against
God in their afflictions] the Lord corrects [vz. mercifully and graciouslie]
him, whom he loves; [i. every one whom it pleases him of his own good will
only to favor and affect] even as the father does [vz. correct] the child [i.
his natural son or daughter] in whom [vz. notwithstanding his correction] he
delights. [vz. greatly or very much. His purpose is to show, first that
afflictions come not upon the godly by chance, but by Gods providence and
appointment. Secondly, that they proceed not from him, as from one that is
angry with us, but are rather Verse. 13. Blessed is the man [i. he has
abundance of blessings, as Psalm. 119.1. understanding by one many also] that
finds [i. through earnest labor and study obtaineth] wisdom, [i. true and
heavenly wisedome] and the man [i. men as before in this verse, to wit, are
blessed [that gets [vz. from the Lord, and through his blessing, by the
means mentioned chapt. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. verses] understanding: [i. sound and
sincere knowledge of his will revealed in his word.] Ver. 14. For the
merchandise thereof [i. both the pains taken for obtaining of it, as the
merchants are wont to travail sore for their goods, and the thing it self
being once obtained] is better [i. both more profitable, and more of value, and
therefore the better to be esteemed] than the merchandise of silver, [i. than
the gain or increase that arises of silver, though a man might multiply it
unto mountaines] and the gain thereof [i. the increase that comes by it] is
better [see before in this verse] than gold, [yea than most fine gold: see
Psalm. 19.10. The reason is plain, because these things are temporal, but the
fruits which she yields are eternal: and this verse comprehends a Verse.
15. It [vz. wisdom and vnderstanding] is more precious [vz. in it self, and
ought so to be esteemed of them that be truly touched] than pearls: [i. than
all sorts of precious Psalm 119.14, 72.] Verse. 16. Length of days [vz. of a
man's life: q.d. long life: see verse 2. of this Chapter] is in her right hand,
[i. in her power to give to all those that apprehend and take hold of her] and
in her left hand [i. on the other side of her, are] riches and glory [i.
abundance of other worldly blessings whatsoever. I take it that wisdom is set
out here, as some honorable woman or great personage, that with both hands
gives good things to such as follow her: q.d. she has all good things in
her, and does with both hands ( i. plentifully bestow the fame)
understanding also by these outward blessings, inward and spiritual no doubt,
else Verse. 17. Her ways [i. the courses and orders that she takes and
prescribeth] are ways of pleasure, [i. are pleasant ways, so that a godly
man shall take great pleasure to be conversant in the same] and all her paths
[by paths he understands the same, that he did by peace before] prosperity:
[or as it is in the Hebrew peace, that is, abounding with all manner of
prosperity: see verse 2. of this Chapter. It is worth the noting, that he
says the ways of wisdom, are not only pleasant, but prosperous and safe:
for there are many ways which are pleasant, but yet dangerous; and on the
other side, there are many safe, but yet without pleasure; but in the ways of
wisdom, we shall find both these commodities.] Verse. 18. She [i. wisedome]
is a tree of life [i. a tree Genes. 2.9. also Genes. 3.22.] to them [i. to all
them] that lay hold on her [vz. surely, never letting their hold slip, for so
much I suppose the Hebrew word may well import] and blessed is he [vz. of what
state or condition so ever he be: see verse 13. of this Chapter] that retains
her [vz. fast and sure with him, having an earnest care and endeavor never to
let her go.] Ver. 19. The Lord [vz. himselfe] by wisdom [i. by his eternal
word: see Chapter 8.30.] has laid the foundation of the earth, [i. has
founded it so firmly, that it shall not be moved: see Psalm 102.25. also
Psalm 104.5.] and has stablished the heavens through understanding. [i. by
his eternal wisdom he has established them and all the powers thereof, in
that comelines and beauty, that we now see] Verse. 20. By his knowledge the
depths are broken [by depths he understands fountains and floods, breaking
out, and as it were flowing from the nethermost parts of the earth, even as
though the earth did cleave it self in sunder to give them passage] and the
clouds [vz. of the ayre] drop down the deaw [vz. from heaven: and here he
speaks of deaw, because it is very profitable for the increase of trees,
herbs, plants, etc. Giving us to understand hereby, that all things are
directed and kept in their courses, by the eternal wisdom, knowledge, and
providence of almighty God.] Verse. 21. My son, [see Chapter 1.8.] let not
these [i. neither wisdom nor knowledge it self, nor the reasons which I have
used to move thee to obey it] depart from thine eyes, [i. be never forgotten
of thee, because we best remember those things that are in our sight] but
observe [i. diligently marke] wisdom and counsel, [i. that wisdom and
counsel, which alone is true and holy, that thou may be acquainted with
it, and be partaker of the fruits of it.] Verse 22. So [i. by that means, and
they [i. the wisdom and word of God] shall be life unto thy soul, [i. shall
quicken thee in the inner man, and shall be as it were the seeds and
nourishments of eternal life in thee] and grace [i. comelines, and an
ornament] unto thy neck. [i. to thy whole man, or to thee thy self, a part
put for the whole: see also Chapter 1. verse 9.] Verse. 23. Then [vz. shall thou
walk safely by thy way, [i. thou shall prosperously perform whatsoever thou
have to doo] and thy foot shall not stumble. [vz. so that thou should be
grieuouslie hurt thereby: q.d. all things, which thou attemptest, shall have
good success, and thou shall live peaceable, and plentifullie] Verse. 24. If
thou sleep [vz. in any place, thou shall not be afraid, [vz. of any hurt or
evil that may decide thee: because thou staiest thy self upon his power and
providence, that neither slumbereth nor sleepeth] and when thou sleep [vz.
in any place, as before] thy sleep [i. the sleep that thou shall take, and
shall be given thee from God] shall be sweet [i. comfortable and profitable
unto thee] Verse. 25. Thou shall not fear [i. thou shall not be astonished or
overcome with feare] for any sudden fear, [i. for any thing that coming
suddenly upon men does commonly make them afraied, and as it were take away
their wits and spirits from them] neither for the destruction of the wicked
[i. that great destruction that shall come upon the wicked: for then the Lord
will either miraculouslie deliver thee, or else howsoever thy body fall with
the wicked, yet thy soul, yea and thy body also at the last shall be
received into everlasting ioy] when it comes: [vz. fearcelie, and suddenly
upon thee: 1.27.] Verse. 26. For the Lord shall be for thine assurance, [i. he
shall be in stead of a defense, and an assured place of refuge unto thee] and
shall preserve [vz. by his almighty power] thy foot [i. thee thy self: a
part for the whole: and yet he does not without cause use this speech, because
things are many times taken by the foote] from taking. [i. that thine enemy
shall not catch thee, or thou thy self stick fast in any manner of evil: see
for all these promises, Psalm 91. verse. 1, 2, etc. where thou shall find the
like Verse. 27. Withhold not the good [vz. which thou have of another mans] from
the owners thereof, [i. from them to whom it belongs, as by the way of debt,
or of Christian duty, as in giving alms, counselling, etc.] though there be
power in thine hand [i. though thou be presently and fully able] to do it.
[i. to hurt him and harm him, by the detaining of Verse. 28. Say not thou unto
thy neighbor [vz. when he is in distress and neede] go [vz. from me now] and
come again, [vz. another time, as we are wont to say] and to morrow [i. some
other time hereafter] will I give thee, [vz. somewhat toward the relief of thy
need: see James 2.16.] if thou have it. [vz. in thy power and keeping: he
means the same thing, that he did in the other sentence, saving that he
teaches not only to do well, but quickly and with speed to do well: for as
it is in the Proverb, he does a double good turn, that does a good turn in
good season: and again, the favor that comes too late, is little or nothing
Verse 29. Intend none hurt [vz. by thought, word, or deed, but specially in
thought, for if that be repressed, the rest will easlie be beaten downe]
against thine neighbor, [i. against any: but chiefly against those that dwell
about thee, and have dealt friendly with thee] seeing that he does dwell [vz.
as he supposes and thinketh] without fear [vz. of any hurt from thee:
meaning, that he does not so much as suspect, that thou will do him any harme]
by thee. [i. nigh unto thee, and thy house.] Verse. 30. Strive not [vz. either
by private quarrelling, or public iustice] with a man [i. with any man, or
sundry men, as verse 13. of this Chapt.] causeles, [i. without just and good
cause why,] when he has done thee no harm [i. injured or wronged thee, either
by word or deed. He means that we should not without cause debate any
matter with any man, specially with him that has wrought no evil against us:
for it is a great offense, and will utterly overthrow humanity and
fellowship, to complain of one, and to thunder out against him, that has
nothing at all offended him: and yet in the mean while, no law of God or man
forbids us, to expostulate either priuatlie or publikelie, before the
Magistrate with him, which has offended and wronged us, yea to convince him of
the injury if we be able, always provided, that we do it not, with a
revenging mind, nor burst forth into private revenge.] Verse. 31. Be not [vz.
either inwardly or outwardly] for the wicked man, [i for the good success, and
abundance of prosperity, that thou see him to inioye: see Psalm 37.11.]
neither choose any of his ways: [i. follow not his order and trade of life: he
yields a reason in the next verse, why he would not have men to do so.]
Verse. 32. For the froward [vz. person, understanding by this is an abomination
unto the Lord, [i. the Lord hates, abhors, and cannot abide such a one: see
Psalm 37.20.] but his secret is with the righteous. [i. continually abides
with them: understanding by secret, a most close, but yet most familiar
communicating of his good will toward them, as may appear by the verses
following.] Verse. 33. The curse of the Lord [i. just plagues and punishments
sent from God: see Malach. 2.2. etc.] is in the house of the wicked, [i.
continues and abides there, howsoever they seem to abound and flourish in
all worldly wealth] but he blesses [vz. continually with his fauour] the
habitation of the righteous. [i. not only the place where he dwells, but
even him himself, and all that he has.] Verse. 34. With the scornful [i. such
as give themselves to jesting, he scorneth, [i. he laugheth at them, or mocketh
them, and deceives their hope: see Psalm 2.4. also Psalm 18.26. Proverb.
1.26.] but he gives [vz. freely, and of his own mercie] grace [i. all manner
of goodness both outward and inward] to the humble. [i. such as think lowly of
themselves: see James 4.6. also 1. Pet. 5.5.] Verse. 35. The wise [i. such as
are instructed with heavenly wisedome] shall inherit glory, [i. shall have
renown and good report as a perpetual inheritance] but fools [vz. shall
inherit or possesse] dishonor [i. shame and contempt, and that before God and
man] though they be exalted, [i. how much soever they be exalted, by their
flatterers and clawbackes. Others read this latter part thus] but shame
takes away the foolish. [i. it carries both them and their hope away in a
pinch of time, or twinkling of the eye as it were. The other sense and
reading, is in my judgment, as good as this, if not better.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to have good counsels in continual remembrance, to the
end we may be guided thereby. Verse. 2. Teaches us, that all blessings shall be
to such as obediently walk in the law of the Lord. Verse. 3. Teaches us to
have care and conscience of the performance of our duties toward God and our
brethren. Verse. 4. Teaches us, that obedience to the word, makes us
acceptable before God and man. Verse. 5. Teaches us two things: first,
unfeignedly to hang upon the Lord: secondly, not to trust in our selves, or any
thing that is in us. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that the mean to have all our ways
and works blessed, is to believe and confess Gods wonderful power and
providence. Verse. 7. Teaches us, first not to stand too much in our own
conceits: secondly, that Christianity consists of doing good, specially to
Godward, and of absteining from evil. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that obedience to
God procures all blessings. Verse 9. Teaches us, that this is one principal
end of our riches, to refer them to the advancement of Gods honor and
glory. Verse 10. Teaches us, that God is no niggard in his gifts to his
servants. Verse. 11. Teaches us, not to murmr or repine against GOD, for his
fatherly corrections upon us. Verse 12. Teaches us, that Gods visitations upon
his children, are testimonies, not of his displeasure, but of his great good
will toward us. Verse. 13. Teaches us, that true blessedness consists in sound
and holy wisdom. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that Gods word must be preferred
before all earthly treasure. Verse. 15. Teaches us that nothing in the world is
matchable with the holy wisdom that we learn out of Gods word. Verse. 16.
Teaches us, that long life, riches, estimation, etc. they are Gods gifts.
Verse. 17. Teaches us, that true pleasure is no where else to be found, but in
the heavenly wisdom. Verse. 18. Teaches us, that there is no true life,
without the knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word. Verse. 19, 20. Teach
us, that all the things in heaven, and earth, are guided in their natural
course, by the power and providence of God. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that it
behooves us to have Gods word in continual remembrance. Verse. 22. Teaches us,
that there is neither true life, nor true glory in this life, without sound
and sufficient knowledge of Gods heavenly wisdom. Verse. 23. Teaches us,
that if we live by the line and rule of the word, we cannot do amiss. Verse
24. Teaches us, that if Gods word be once rooted and grounded in our hearts,
our sleep and all things else shall be sweet and pleasant unto us. Verse. 25,
26. Teach us, that staying our selves steadfastly upon the truth of Gods
providence, and promises, no hurtful thing shall be able to dismay us. Verse.
27. Teaches us, not to do injury, though we be able to do it. Verse. 28.
Teaches us, not to d^ferre and put off doing of good, when we are able to
perform it. Verse. 29. Teaches us, not to hurt any, specially such as are
tied to us, by the bond of friendship, neighborhood, or such like. Verse. 30.
Teaches us, to avoid all manner of quarrelling and contending, either public
or private. Verse. 31. Teaches us, not only not to grudge at the wicked men's
prosperity, but also not to be drawn thereby to allow or like of their evil
behavior. Verse. 32. Teaches us, that as the Lord can at no hand away with the
wicked: so he greatly delights in the good, and is familiar with them. Verse.
33. Sets out the unlikely reward that the good and the bad receive of the
Lord. Verse. 34. Teaches us, first that the wicked shall not carry their
sins away without punishment: secondly the way to obtain grace from God, is
to humble ourselves unfeignedly, both before him and our brethren. Verse. 35.
Teaches us, that howsoever flatterers exalt fools, yet they shall inherit
dishonor; and again, that howsoever the wicked oppress Gods children, yet
they shall be truly honored and exalted.

CHAP. 4.
Co.
HE proceeds in this Chapter, as in the other before, to exhort men to
delight in, and to seek after heavenly wisdom. Jn deed he does it in other
words and sentences, but that is, that we should not be weary of the often
repeating of one and the self same thing. And yet if we would look unto it,
this often exhortation is profitable for us, who are carried hither and thither
from it, with sundry matters, and are as it were benumbed and frosen, from
careful seeking after heavenly wisdom.

Di.
THis Chapter may be divided into four parts. In the first he labors verse
1. to the end of the 4. In the second he exhorts men carefully to labor
for the attainement verse. 5. to the end of the 13. In the third he teaches the
godly to take heed and verse 14. to the end of the 19. And in the last part
he provoke men to hearken reverently to Gods verse 20. to the end of the
Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. Hear [vz. with the ears, both of your understanding and minde] O ye
children [before he spoke to them, in the name of one: as Chapter 1.8. Chapter
2.1. Chapter 3.1, 11, 21. Now he speaks unto many, understanding hereby all
the favorers and lovers of wisdom, whom he instructs, as a father does his
children, delivering them wholesome precepts] the instruction of a father, [i.
the instruction that your father gives you, according to his duetie] and give
care [vz. diligently and attentiuely] to learn [vz. from him, both by word
and example] understanding, [vz. of the heavenly and holy wisdom.] Verse. 2.
For J do give you [i. deliver and teach unto you] a good doctrine: [i. a
wholesome, profitable, and pleasant doctrine] therefore [vz. because it is
good] forsake ye not [vz. at any hand, or by any meanes] my law, [i. the
things that I command you: meaning, that he would not have them in their lives
and conversation to depart from the same. Now he calls it his law, not
because he was the author of it, for that title properly belongs to God, but
Verse. 3. For I [vz. my self: q.d. I lay no other burden upon you, but that
which I have borne my self in the time of my youth: and so he commends his
doctrine from his own example] was my fathers son, [i. tenderly and dearly
beloved of him, in so much that I was seldom or never out of his presence]
tender and dear in the sight of my mother. [q.d. I was also dearly beloved of
her: the word that is turned here dear, imports, only son, as you would
say, that is chiefly beloved above the rest, and brought up with a singular
affection, and not as though his mother had had no more, for we see 1. Chron.
3.5.] Verse. 4. When he taught me [vz. as I do you now the fathers duty,
consisting specially in the instruction of his children. How David performed
this duty see 1. Chron. 28.9.] and said unto me, [vz. in the words
following] let thine heart hold fast [vz. so fast, that they be never pulled
out of the same by any means: q.d. have continual care of them, and
remembrance to keep them: see Chapt. 3.1.] my words [i. both my speeches, and
the matters comprised therein] keep my commandments [i. the things which I
command thee, keep them I say; that is, labor to keep them, by thought,
word, and deed, and thou shall live: [vz. both in this life, and in the life
to come. And here I suppose that David's words or speech do end (howsoever
some would have them to be continued to the end of verse 9.) Solomon building
the exhortations following upon these speeches.] Verse. 5. Get wisdom; [i.
take all pains to obtain heavenly wisedome] get understanding: [i. sound and
sincere judgment in the same] forget not, [vz. at any time: see Chapt. 3.1.]
neither decline [i. go aside either on the right hand or on the left, Deutro.
5.37.] from the words of my mouth. from the good things which I have spoken and
uttered.] Verse. 6. Forsake her not, [vz. by any means: speaking of wisdom:
see verse 2. of this Chapter] and she shall keep thee: [vz. from all danger or
hurt] love her [vz. vnfeignedlie and with a sincere affection] and she shall
preserve thee. [vz. safe 2.11.] Verse. 7. Wisdom is the beginning: [vz. of all
goodness: for this word beginning, see Chapt. 1.7.] get wisdom therefore [q.d.
seeing she is so excellent, spare no pains to attain her] and above all thy
possession get understanding, [q.d. do not only prefer it before all the
riches thou have, but have such a desire to obtain it, that thou will be
ready to adventure all thy goods, and to spare no cost for the atchieuing of
it: Math. 13.44.] Verse. 8. Exalt her, [vz. both in judgment and speech:
meaning, that he would have his children to prefer her before all] all she
shall exalt thee, [vz. both before God and man, and that with true glory and
exaltation in deed: this seems to be spoken according to 1. Sam. 2.30.] she
shall bring thee [i. advance thee] to honor [i. to great and true honour] if
thou embrace her. [vz. willingly and vnfeignedlie.] Verse. 9. She [i. wisdom
shall give [vz. freelie] a comely ornament unto thy head [see Chapter 1.9.] yea
she shall give thee a crown of glory [q.d. she shall plentifully crown thee
with exceeding glory.] Ver. 10 Hear [see verse 1. of this Chapter] my son,
[see Chapter 1.8.] and receive [vz. with reverence and readines] my words, [i.
the speeches and matters which I utter: see verse 5. of this Chapter] and the
years of thy life shall be many. [i. thou shall live many years through Gods
favor, and the obedience of his truth: see Chapter 3.16.] Verse. 11. I have
taught thee in the way of [q.d. that that I have spoken, has tended all and
every part of it, to bring thee the high and ready way to true and holy
wisedome] and led thee in the paths of righteousness. [i. I have been a guide
unto thee, to every good and righteous thing: see Psalm 23.3.] Verse. 12. When
thou go [vz. about thy gate [i. the way that thou shall go or walk in]
shall not be strait, [i. dangerous; for strait and narrow ways are
commonly perilous: see Psalm. 18.36.] and when thou runnest [q.d. yea though
thou runnest, or make have to dispatch thy matters] thou shall not fall. [vz.
to hurt thee any manner of way. The holy Ghost means, that he shall
altogether prosper, and not be overthrown with any adversity: see Psalm. 1.3.
Also Psalm. 91.11. q.d. whatsoever thou take in hand, shall be without danger
of hurt or loss, yea though thou go about it very hastily, yet shall it fall
out well unto thee, if thou follow the paths of that wisdom, which I teach
thee.] Verse. 13. Take hold [i. lay sure and fast holde] of instruction, [i. of
and leave not, [i. let not go thy hold for any thing, but continue it] keep
her [vz. with thee continuallie] for she is thy life. [i. the guider and
governor of thy life, whether it respect God or man: for by it must we be
ruled, both in matters of manners and faith. Verse. 14. Enter not into the way
of the wicked, [i. do not so much as begin to follow their order and course
of life, for hardly can a man be reclaimed, that has tasted of the pleasures
and deceiptfulnes of sinne] and walk not in the way of evil men: [i. follow
not their wicked and ungodly conversation. He disswadeth men from haunting or
using the vngodlies company: see Chapt. 1.15. Chapt. 3.31. also Psalm 1.1.]
Verse. 15. Avoid it, [vz. as much as thou can: yea abhor and go not by it,
[i. come not nigh it, for fear thou be taken and snared with it] turn from
it [vz. with all speed possibly, if thou have so much as set but one foot
forward toward it] and pass by: [vz. lightly, or not at all regarding it. He
speaks the same matter in sundry terms, but yet not Verse. 16. For they
cannot sleep [vz. soundly or sweetlie] except they have done evil, [i.
performed some mischief against some other men] and their sleep departs
[vz. from them] except they cause some to fall: [vz. into their snares: either
by violence, or flattery, or both. He notes a wonderful desire that they
have to work wickedness, that can neglect or break sleep, one of the
necessary means to maintain man's life by, to perform it: and it seems to
be a metaphore or a similitude, taken from men that are empty stomacked, who
can hardly sleep, but for want of meat are ever and anon awaked: as if he
should say, even so do these: for they prefer ill doing before meat and
drink, as the other in greedines do meat before sleep: and therefore never
rest, unless they themselves commit some wickedness, or draw on others to do
it.] Verse. For they eat [that is to say, with greedines and great pleasure]
the bread of wickedness, [that is, not only bread gotten by wicked means,
and cruel oppression, as the note in the Geneua Bible goes: but also he
means that it is banqueting dishes and dainties to them, to do wickedly] and
drink [vz. with great pleasure and delight] the wine of violence: [i. they
take as much pleasure in all manner of violence, as in most strong, sweet and
pleasant wines. And mark that he here uses this fine similitude, because he
had before made mention of sleep, which arises of such vapors from the
stomach, as after meat taken, ascend into the brain; it is therefore as much
q.d. they sleep not soundly and sweetly, till such time as they have
received this meat. Besides, as the meat is turned into the very nourishment
and substance of it that uses it: so these are nourished with Verse. 18. But
the way of the righteous [i. the life and conversation of such as fear God]
shines as the light [vz. either of the morning, or of the sunne] that shines
more and more [vz. clearly even until the noonetide] unto the perfect day.
[i. until the noonetide (as before) which is the clearest part of the day:
meaning, that the godly grow forward daily in the wisdom and fear of the
Lord, even as the Verse. 19. The way of the wicked [i. their life and
conuersation] is as the darkness, [i. fearful and most perilous, because
darkness, unless it may be turned into light, which the reprobate can never
look for, brings with it great horror and danger] they know not [vz. so
far of are they from being able to shun or avoid their iudgements] wherein
[i. into what danger and mischiefe] they shall fall. [vz. suddenly Verse. 20.
My son [see Chapt. 1.8.] hearken [vz. diligentlie] unto my words, [i. the
things that I shall speak and utter in my words: see verse. 4.10. of this
Chapter] incline thine ear [i. be pressed and ready with attention to marke]
unto my sayings, [this doubling of one and the self same thing, sets out
the great love of the holy Ghost, and our Verse. 21. Let them not depart from
thy eyes [see Chapter 3.21.] but keep them [vz. safely and stedfastlie] in
the midst of thy heart: [i. within thy heart: q.d. hide them deeply and
surely in thy mind, as Chapter 2.1. In these two verses he mentions three
principal parts of man's body, the ear, the eyes, and the heart, that he
might thereby teach us, to lend all our senses thereto, and to occupy all our
affections about that: and yet we must specially understand him of the ears
and eyes of the mind.] Verse. 22. For they [i. the words of holy are life [i.
are effectual means of right life in this life, and of eternal life in the
life to come: see Chapter 3.18, 22. also verse 13. of this Chapter, in which
respect it is called the word of life, Philip. 2.16.] unto those [i. unto all
those of what state and condition so ever they be] that find them, [i. obtain
them, hearing them, laying the^ up in their hearts, and performing them] and
health unto all their flesh. [i. it shall bring soundnes unto their whole man.
And note, that by these outward blessings there are signified inward and
spiritual blessings also: see Chap. 3.8.] Verse. 23. Keep thine heart [vz. from
filthiness, corruption and sinne] with all diligence, [i. be more diligent to
watch and keep it, than any other thing whatsoever: meaning, by keeping of his
heart, a watching over it, a trying of it, and endeavor to purge it from the
evil that is in it, or else might otherwise assault it] for thereout comes
life. [i. as it is the fountain of natural life, so it should be the
fountain of good life in this world: for the heart and purging of it, see
Math. 12.35. also Math. 15.18, 19.] Verse. 24. Put away [vz. by all means from
thee [i. as far as thou maist] a froward mouth, [i. a mouth that speaks
froward things: for otherwise the mouth is not froward of it selfe] and put
wicked lips far from thee. [i. let not thy lips utter wicked things:
because the mouth, lips, and tongue, are hardly ruled, he doubleth his
exhortation: see James 3.2, 3. etc.] Verse. 25. Let thine eyes behold [i. right,
good, and holy things only, looking upon nothing, wickedly, indirectly, or
inconstantly: see Psalm. 119.37. also Job. 31.1.] and let thine eye liddes
direct thy way before thee. [i. let not thine eyes be wandering hither and
thither, for then thou shall easily go out of the way. It is a metaphore taken
from trauailers or runners, whose eyes must not wander hither and thither, but
attend diligently upon their way and journey.] Verse. 26. Ponder diligently and
carefully, to see whether they be right yea or no] the paths of thy feet: [i.
all thy endeavors and actions: which things the scripture does many times
attribute to the feet, because they are instruments to carry us about the
doing of them] and let all thy ways [i. all thy affairs and whole life, and
conuersation] be ordered aright. [i. have an eye that they may be rightly
guided by the rule of holy wisdom and Gods word. Mark how in these four
verses 23, 24, 25, 26. the holy ghost requires, that our mind be upright and
pure from evil: secondly, that our words be holy and good: thirdly, that our
eyes be chaste: and lastly, that our endeavors and actions be holy.] Verse. 27.
Turn not [vz. from the right way of the word of God] to the right hand or to
the left, [i. to any side, whether it be of thine own devise, or of other men's
corruptions] but remove thy foot from evil. [i. from al manner of evil, of
what sort, or in what persons soever; understanding by removing the foot, a
quick and speedy departure from it. And I take this to be the conclusion of
the former doctrines: q.d. show thy self upright in all things, and a most
diligent obseruer of that way, which God himself has commanded: see Deutero.
4.2. also Deutero. 5.32, 33. see also verse 5. of this Chapter.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us: first, that it is parents duty to teach their
children: secondly, that is childrens duty to hearken reverently, and to
perform diligently the good things taught them. Verse. 2. Teaches us, that
parents must propound nothing but good and holy things to their children.
Verse. 3. Teaches us, that the care which our parents have had over us, should
be an argument to provoke us to have the like care over our children. Verse. 4.
Teaches us, to lay up Gods law within our hearts, and to keep it so sure
there, that nothing may pull it from them. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to take all
labor and pain, that we may attain heavenly wisdom. Verse. 6. Teaches us,
that whosoever is endued with true wisdom indeed, shall be kept safe and
sound from perishing by any hurts. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that wisdom must be
preferred before all treasures and possessions whatsoever, or else she is not
rightly esteemed. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that the way to come to true honor and
preferment, is reverently to esteem and to seek the exaltation of Gods
wisdom and word. The same doctrine does verse 9. deliver. Verse. 10. Teaches
us, that long life is a blessing given from God to his children, for the care
and conscience that they have of obedience. Verse. 11 Teaches us, that parents
should be good guides and teachers unto their children. Verse. 12. Teaches us,
that all things shall prosper with them which unfeignedly embrace Gods
wisdom. Verse. 13. Teaches us, to take sure hold, and to continue in the care
of holy wisdom. Verse. 14.15. Teach two things: first, that the company and
fellowship of the wicked is very dangerous: secondly, that we should take
heed, that we come not at any hand nigh unto it. Verse. 16. Shows, that the
wicked are so set on mischief, that the very desire they have to do it
breaks their sleep Verse. 17. That to perform wickedness, is meat and
drink to the ungodly, and that they take as great delight and pleasure in the
one, as in the other. Verse. 18. Does not only show the great difference, that
God in his account makes between the good and the bad, but also teaches, how
that the faithful do daily proceed and grow up in all goodness. Verse. 19.
Teaches us, that the wicked are ignorant of their own destruction, and
therefore use no means to prevent it. Verse. 20. Teaches young folks and
children to be attentive to the words of good counsel and exhortation. Verse.
21. Teaches them, to keep them in continual remembrance, to the end they
may do them. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that there is no health, soundnes, or life
indeed, without the knowledge and obedience of Gods truth. Verse. 23. Teaches
us, to have a special eye to the guiding and clensing of the affections, and
corruptions of our heart: and to begin first there, because it is the seat and
fountain from whence all things flow. Verse. 24. Teaches the brideling of our
tongues and words, and also to put away from us frowardness, and hastiness
of speech. Verse. 25. Teaches us, to master our eyes, because they are the
shop windows, by which wickedness is conveyed into our hearts. Verse. 26.
Teaches us, narrowly and nighlie to look unto our steps: and by this
particular enumeration of sundry, we may learn this general doctrine, that
all the parts and actions of our bodies, should be directed to the advancement
of Gods glory, and the good of others. Verse. 27. Teaches us, in all our
actions and affairs to keep even that kingly broad way which the Lord has
sanctified, and set forth unto us in his word.

CHAP. 5.
Co.
THe holy Ghost proceeds on in exhortation of men to embrace wisdom,
showing by the effects and fruits, which it will bring forth, that it is a
very notable thing and worthy to be had in great regard and account: so that
J take the beginning of this Chapter, to be the continuance of that
exhortation that was begun, Chapter 4.20. because the first verse differs
little or nothing from it, either in words or matter: as plainly appears to
him that will look into it.

Di.
I Suppose this Chapter may very well be divided into two parts. In the verse
1. to the end of the 14. In the second, he puts verse 15. to the end of the
Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. MY son, [this is sundry times expounded before, and namely Cap.
1.8.] hearken [vz. diligently, and that not with thy bodily ears only, but
with the ears of thy minde] unto my wisdom, [i. unto that wisdom which I
teach thee,] and incline thine ear [vz. earnestly and attentiuely] unto my
knowledge, [i. unto the things which I utter, not only sauouring of knowledge,
but tending also to this end, to bring thee to wisdom and knowledge: see
Chapt. 4.20.] Verse. 2. That thou may regard [i. esteem, and that rightly,
to thine own good and profite] counsel, [vz. in disposing and performing of
thy things, that thou be not deceiued] and thy lips observe knowledge: [i.
keep it: yet so, that thou may utter the knowledge which thou have obtained
by my rules: he means, that he might use and declare wisdom, both in his
works, and in his words] Verse. 3. For the lips [these words must be set
against the former commandment: q.d. hearken unto me, and not unto the
counterfeit words of an harlot: and why so? for though she speak fair, yet
she will destroy thee in the end: and by lips, he understands words,
because that by the lips they are uttered: see Chapt. 4.24. [of a strange
woman [i. of an harlot: see Chapt. 2.16.] drop as an honey comb, [i. seem
to have plenty of pleasure and sweetness in them] and her mouth [i. the words
of her mouth: see Chapt. 4. 24.] is more soft than oil: [vz. in outward
appearance and show: meaning by this manner of speech that they seem
outwardly gentle and sweet, but Verse. 4. But the end of her [i. not only of
her her self, but of those which communicate with her] is bitter as wormwood,
[i. is most bitter, for there are few things more bitter than it: and in this
place he seems to allude to the constitution of the body, as though that a
harlot were comely in the foreparts; but most filthy and vile on the backe]
and sharp as a two edged sword, [i. she wounds deadly, as a sharp two
edged sword does, which may soever it strike: see Chapter 2.18, 19.] Her feet
[i. her devises and deeds: see Chapt. 4.26.] go down to death, [or, to the
grave: q.d. she, and those that she carries after her, are as nigh to
destruction, as they whose feet are at the graves brincke, and ready to be
put into it: see Chapt. 2.18.] and her steps take hold on hell. [i. carry
her self and others that follow her, headlong thither: the holy ghost
means, that she and her companions run with have to destruction, both of
body Verse. 6. She weighs not [i. she little or nothing at all regardeth] the
way of life, [i. of true and holy life here, which indeed leads to life
eternall] her paths are moveable, [i. her orders and ways are uncertain: one
while she uses one way, and another while another way] thou can not know
them. [vz. for the variety and uncertainty of them. Some read Verse. 7. Hear
[see Chap. 4.1.] ye me [vz. counselling, teaching, and instructing you] now [i.
while I instruct you, and you have time to learne] therefore [q.d. seeing the
dangers are so great, hearken to my counsell] O children, [i. see chap. 4.1.]
and depart not [vz. at any hand, or on any side] from the words of my mouth;
[i. from the precepts I give you, and the rules which I utter and 4.5.] Verse.
8. Keep thy way far from her, [q.d. come not nigh her, for there is
infection and contagion with her company: see Chapter 4.14, 15. for the
phrase, or manner of speach] and come not near the door of her house, [i. be
so far off from having familiarity with her, that look thou come not into
her house, nor once draw nigh to her door.] Verse. 9. Least [this verse and
some others following contain thou give [i. bestow, and that with present
pleasure, though pain insue] thine honor [i. whatsoever within thee or without
thee may make thee honorable or esteemed, as the flower of thy age, the
comelines of thy body, yea and thy body, thy strength, wit, riches, etc.]
unto others, [i. to the harlot her self, the children begotten by her, and
those that appertain unto her] and thy years [i. thy young years, and the
best part of thy life] to the cruel, [i. to the harlot who is cruel, for she
consumes both men's substance, and the powers both of their bodies and minds.]
Verse. 10. Least the stranger [vz. whom thou should be filled with thy
strength, [i. with goods and riches which thou have gotten through the
strength of thy bodie] and thy labors [i. the things that thou have labored
for, as wealth, money, household stuff, etc.] be in the house of a stranger,
[i. in his possession and keeping, serving to deck up his house, and not thine
own, this is another reason.] Verse. 11. And thou mourn [vz. pitiouslie and
greeuouslie, as one that roreth for paine] at thine end, [i. either at the end
of thy life, or else when thou beginnest to finish and end that wicked course]
when thou have consumed [i. utterly wasted, and that through whores and
whoredome] thy flesh and thy body, [i. thou thy self being consumed so, that
both thy bones and marrowe, be as it were eaten up, either with insatiable
satisfying of thy filthy mind, or with grievous diseases which follow that
sin, and al thy wealth and substance utterly wasted, with whatsoever
appertains unto thee.] Verse. 12. And [vz. when thou art thus spoiled: here is
an excellent description of one that does somewhat late repent him of his
euill] how [i. how much] have I hated [vz. even from my heart, utterly
contemning and despising the same] instruction, [vz. given me by such as loved
me, and my welfare] and mine heart despised correction? [he means not by
correction, bodily chastisement; but the word of exhortation and sharp
reproof, by which God went about to correct and amend men; but he could at no
hand away with it.] Verse. 13. And [vz. either inwardly in thought, or
outwardly in word or deede] the voice [i. the words and sayings, and the
good things which by those words they delivered unto mee] of them that taught
me, [vz. good and holy things: q.d. how have I refused even God himself, and
the good means that he appointed for my reformation and bettering?] nor
inclined mine ear [i. I showed not my self attentive, or willing to learne]
to them that instructed me, [vz. in all good ways, which I did forsake: he
repeateth the same thing, that is, his own contempt, the more to express his
perverseness and frowardnes.] Verse. 14. I [vz. my selfe] was almost brought [vz.
through into all evil [i. into all misery, that possibly could fall upon a
man in this life] in the midst of the congregation and assembly. [i. openly
and before all men, so that they might easily behold my state: he speaks
this, because private and secret miseries are better borne, Verse. 15. Drink
the water of thy cesterne, [i. take heed of wrongful getting, and wicked
using other men's goods: look that thou use thine own, and that lightly: he
alludeth to the custom of the people of Israel, amongst whom there was great
abundance of pittes, cesternes, and wells for the use of water for themselves:
which thing at this day is observed (as writers affirm) in Venice, and some
places thereabout] and of the rivers [vz. of water which flowe] out of the
midst of thine own well. [vz. which thou have in possession, and does truly
belong unto thee.] Verse. Let thy fountains flow forth, [vz. from thee unto
others] and the rivers of waters [vz. which thou have at thy use and
commandement] in the streates, [i. openly and publikelie; that other men may
glorify God thereby, and be Verse. 17. But let them [i. the goods that God has
blessed thee withall] be thine, [i. appertain unto thee, as in the right
possession whereof God has placed thee] even thine only, [hee means not,
but that others also should have the use of them, as need requires, but that
he would have the special propriety to rest in him, avoiding always
prodigalitie] and not the strangers with thee. [q.d. bring not to pass, by thy
folly and sin, that being carried away, through lust and liking, thou
should 10. of this Chapter.] Verse. 18. Let thy fountain be blessed, [vz.
from God, understanding by fountain, the graces that God has bestowed upon
him: q.d. have a care, that the blessings which thou have received from God,
may be used to his glory, and the good of others, specially of his seruants]
and rejoice [vz. lovingly and comfortablie, and that all the days of thy
life] with the wife of thy youth: [i. either with her, that thou did marry
in thine own youth, or else did marry, she being young: for in the days of
youth men are more inclined to love, Verse. 19. Let her be [vz. in thy
judgment, and to thee thy self [as the loving Hind, [vz. is to the Heart or
Stagge] and pleasant Roe, [he means nothing else by these allegories, or
metaphores, but the earnest affection and loving mind yt men should bear
toward their wives: of the nature of these beasts and their great love toward
their females, he that lists to read, may see Aristotle libro sexto de
historijs animalium, cap. 29. and Plinius lib. 8. cap. 32. and specially one
Appianus, who has written de Ceruis.] Let her breasts [vz. alone:
understanding by one part of her, her whole person as it were] satisfy thee at
all times, [i. content thee] and delight [i. take singular pleasure] in her love
continually: [i. in loving her only: and these things which he speaks of the
love of man toward his wife, must not be referred to the bodies only, and the
use thereof, but both to body and mind Verse. 20. For why [i. what reason is
there] should thou delight [vz. at any time] my son,] see Chapter 1.8.] in
a strange woman, [i. in a harlot: see verse 3. of this Chapter] or embrace [i.
affect, love or like of: see Chapter 4.8.] the bosom of a stranger [i. her, or
any part of her: and mark, how under honest words, he expresses filthy
things: q.d. why should thou do this, and that, and not stay thy self only
in thine own wife, and sound love to herward?] Verse. 21. For the ways of man
[i. all that man thinks, speaks, are before the eyes of the Lord, [vz.
naked and open, as Hebr. 4.13. meaning that God knows them all] and he
pondereth [i. vprightlie weigheth] all his paths, [i. whatsoever he attempteth
or takes in hand: he means, that seeing Gods eyes go through the whole
world, Zechar. 4.10 and behold al things, how closely or secretly soever done,
that therefore they should think, it is not their close dealing can cause them
to escape. Verse. 22. His own iniquities [i. either the abundance of sins
which he himself has wrought, or else the wickednesses which he had devised
against others] shall take [vz. both certainly and sodainlie] the wicked
himself, [vz. for all his might and cunning] and he shall be holden [vz. fast
and sure] with the cords of his own sin, [i. his own iniquity shall be
cords to tie him, so that he shall not escape: q.d. he staying himself upon
his wickednesses, works his own hurt, and makes a halter to hang himself
in: so that God needs no tormentor, seeing he is so tied with his own sin,
that he cannot only not escape punishment, but also is punished in them.]
Verse. 23. He shall dye [i. for fault of instruction, [i. because he would not
receive it when it was given him, and not for want of it, for he had it
bestowed upon him, as verse 13. of this Chapter] and go astray [vz. from the
right way prescribed him] through his great folly. [i. by reason of his
grievous sins: q.d. he shall certainly be punished for his sins, and
never find favor; but living he shall abide in perpetual death.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to yield to good counsel, while it is offered us. Verse.
2. Teaches us, that our words and all that comes from us, should savor of
holy wisdom. Verse. 3. Teaches us, what flattery and intising persuasions
harlots will use to draw men to filthiness. Verse. 4. Teaches us, that every
thing is not continually good and sweet that seems so at the beginning.
Verse. 5. Teaches men to beware of whores, seeing they carry death and
destruction with them. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that persons or parties given to
filthiness, have little or no regard of godliness and eternal life. Verse. 7.
Teaches us in time to yield obedience to the word of good exhortation. Verse.
8. Teaches us to withstand the beginning of evil, and the first prouocations
to sin. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that whoredom carries with it the impayring
of a man's good name, credit, and power. Verse. 10. Teaches us, that whoredom
and adultery consumes men's goods and substance. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that
it wastes even their bodies and bones also. Verse. 12, 13. Teach us, that the
contempt of good counsel, is the mother and cause of all corruption and
naughtines. Verse. 14. Teaches us, to have an eye in time to return from
wickedness and sin. Verse. 15. Teaches us, to live soberly and contentedly
with those things that God has blessed us withal, and not to catch and
snatch other men's goods. Verse. 16. Teaches us, to avoid niggardlines, and to
strive to use true liberality. Verse. 17. Teaches us, to beware of
prodigality, inspending wastfully either our own, or other men's goods. Verse.
18. Teaches men to live joyfully and peaceably with their wives. Verse. 19.
Teaches men, to love and affect their own wives only, and that continually
also. Verse. 20. Teaches us, that there is no goodness or profit at all that
can come by following strange flesh, but much hurt rather, as verse 9, 10. etc.
of this Chapter do sufficiently prove. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that nothing that
we do, though we do it never so secretly, can be hidden from Gods knowledge.
Verse. 22. Teaches us, that the more sin the wicked and ungodly commit, the
faster they do bind themselves with the cords of justice, punishment and
wrath. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that whosoever will not regard good counsel out
of Gods word, shall surely dye the death.

CHAP. 6.
Co.
Solomon in the other Chapter taught them to beware of whoredom, and other
wickednesses: and continuing his exhortation, he instructs them in this
Chapter, to fly from rashness and hastines, in doing anything, to avoid
idleness, and many other wickednesses, whereunto men are very prone, through the
continual malice of Satan provoking them, and their own natural corruption
stirring them.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of verse 11. In the second there is lively set out the
nature of wicked men, and their destruction, with a particular enumeration of
certain things which God abhors: verse 12. to the end of the 19. In the
third part he exhorts to embrace Gods word, which rightly received, shall
deliver us, as from the subjection of all sin generally, so particularly of
whoredom: and this reaches from verse. 20. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. MY son, [see Chapter 1.8.] if thou be surety [i. have given thy
word or promise] for thy neighbor, [i. for thy friend or companion; for so
much I think does the word import; because men be not surety, but for them
whom they knowe] and have stricken hands [i. have given thy faith, or made a
bargain to pay that thou promisest, he puts the sign for the thing it
self, for we use giving and striking of hands for assurance and performance
of a bargaine] with the stranger, [i. with an other man, whom thou know not
so well as he. His meaning is not here, utterly to forbid suretiship, for we
see the contrary practiced by good men, Genes. 42.37. Also Genes. 43.8, 9. but
to teach men to take heed that they be not rash in giving their word or
hand, by writing or otherwise: and if they have been overtaken, to seek to set
themselves free from the same, as soon as can be.] Verse. 2. Thou art snared
[i. thou have certainly (though at with the words of thy mouth, [i. with
these words which thou speakest] thou art even taken [vz. fast, so that thou
can not escape, till thou have paid and performed] with the words of thine
own mouth. [q.d. thou may thank thine own hasty and rash speech for
thine intanglement: for whereas perhaps thou tookest them to be but bare and
naked words, thou feast thou art snared; for bargains (even as nature and the
Lawiers say) are free before they are made, but when they are made, they bind
ye parties bargaining: and therefore they say, words bind men.] Verse. 3. Do this
[vz. that follows, and which I counsel thee] now [i. very my son, [see
Chapter 1.8. and sundry other places in this booke] and deliver thy self,
[vz. from the dangers thou art in: and in this verse he shows two means
whereby he may perform it: the first is, submitting thy self to him to whom
thou art bound: the second, entreating him, for whom thou art bound and other
thy friends, to pity thy case, and their own in thee] seeing thou art come
[vz. through thine own carelesnes and rashnes] into the hand of thy neighbor,
[i. into his power, by giving thy hand or word] go [vz. quickly, without any
delay: Math. 5.25.] and humble thy self, [vz. to him, to whom thou have given
thy word: understanding by humbling, all things whereby a man may be moved to
pity, as beseeching words, pitiful countenances, and al other means, either
inward and outward whatsoeuer] and solicit [i. earnestly call upon, and by
words labor to soften, and make gentle toward thee] thy friends. [i. both him
to whom thou art bound, him for whom thou art bound, and others of thine
acquaintance which be able to help thee: tell the one, doubt not of your debt,
I will pay you God willing, though you forbear for a while: tell the other,
for your cause it is that I endure and bear this in my self, therefore
destitute not your self in me, I pray you: and the third sort, that they would
pardon your negligence, and help you out of this breach, hoping never to fall
into the like again.] Verse. 4. Give [i. take little or no rest at all,] nor
slumber to thine eye-liddes, [vz. till thou be delivered from that suretiship:
he does not mean that men should not sleep, for so they might easily kill
themselves, because sleep is a necessary mean for the maintenance of our
lives, but that they should use all carefulnes and diligence that possibly
they might.] Verse. 5. Deliver thy self [i. have care, and labor what thou
can to set thy self free] as a Do [vz. does labor by swiftnes of running to
be deliuered] from the hand of the hunter, [i. from his power who seeks to
kill her] and as a bird [vz. seeks by flying to deliver her selfe] from the
hand of the fouler. [vz. who would feign catch her with his hand: q.d. thou art
in the same state that the Do is before the Hunter, and the bird before the
fouler: and seeing this is the chiefest way of delivery, vz. swiftnes and
speed, use it, or else thou art Verse. 6. Go [vz. with speed and in good season]
to the Pismire [vz. that little beast, and learn of her, diligence] O
sluggard, [i. thou whosoever thou art that art given to idleness and sloth]
behold [vz. diligently, and with consideration] her ways, [i. the singular
orders which she observes: of which see Aristotle, de historijs animalium lib.
6. cap. 38. And Plin. lib. 11. cap. 30.] and be wise: [i. learn wisely by her
example to avoid idleness. God would have a lively image of virtues and vices
to be in the creatures, that even in them, we might be provoked to virtue, and
deterred from vice.] Verse. 7. For she having no guide, governor, or ruler,
[vz. over her, to check or control her, if she be negligent. He means, that
there is none amongst them that bears rule one over another, and takes upon
them to govern the actions of the rest, as other beasts have, and namely the
Bees: concerning this matter of the Pismire, see Aristotle, de historijs
animalium lib. 1. Great marvel is it then, that men having so many laws and
rulers, can Verse. 8. Prepares [q.d. notwithstanding she lack all these helps
which man has, yet she provides by her trauaile] her meat [i. meat for her
self, or that which shall maintain her] in the summer, [vz. against winter
time to come; in which season by reason of cold and wet, and because there is
nothing to be had upon the earth, she cannot worke] and gathers her food
[vz. for the maintenance of her selfe] in harvest. [i. in the harvest time,
because then there is much Verse. 9. How long will thou sleep O sluggard? [q.d.
seeing there is such pain, labor, and foresight in so small a beast, how long
will thou be idle and sleep for shame?] when will thou arise out of thy
sleep? [q.d. will thou never be awaked? Thus he sharply reproves the sluggish
person, and he makes so much mention of sleep, because that by it the
sluggish person is known.] Verse. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber [he
speaks this, by an Ironia or scoff, in the person of the idle ones: q.d.
bear with us a little, till we take some small rest: and is it but a little
rest that you would have, as you say? well rest on, you shall see what will
come upon you, which thing also he threatens: verse. 11. such a pleasant
speech look upon Math. 26.45.] a little folding of the hands to sleep [i.
that we may sleep both the more, and the more quietly.] Verse. 11. Therefore
[vz. for this thy sluggishnes, and through the same] thy poverty [i. the
poverty that thou have drawn upon thy self therby] comes [vz. upon thee]
as one that trauaileth by the way, [i. suddenly and or ever thou be aware: as
in travailing many men upon the sudden, and when they are not looked for,
join themselves one with another in companie] and thy necessity [i. the want
that thou must feel through slouthfulnes and idlenes] like an armed man. [vz.
which thou art not able to resist: q.d. beggerie will come upon thee, sooner
than thou think, and that with such force, as thou shall have no power
within thee, or without thee to resist it.] Verse. 12. The unthrifty man [the
word seems to signify a man without a q.d. the unbridled man] and the
wicked man [i. he that gives himself to wickednes] walks with a froward
mouth, [i. is altogether given to frowardnes of speech, yea even against God
and men: which fault the holy Ghost had forbidden before, cap. 4.24.] Verse.
13. He makes a sign with [vz. as men do when they wincke] he signifies [vz.
some naughty or lewd thing] with his feet, [as by scraping, stamping, or such
like] he instructs with his fingers. [i. he makes some signs therewith what
he would have done: q.d. he frames all the parts and members of his body, to
falsehood, and other wickedness.] Verse. 14. Lewd things are in his heart,
[this he imagines evil [vz. within himself against other men] at all times,
[i. there is not season almost, wherein he deuiseth not some one mischief or
other] and raises up contentions. [vz. amongst neighbors, friends, and other
men.] Verse. 15. Therefore [vz. for all these his sinnes] shall his destruction
[i. the destruction which God has appointed to fall upon him] come speedily
[vz. and certainly also upon him: see Chap. 1.27.] he shall be destroyed
suddenly, [vz. by judgment from the Lord] without recovery [i. he shall never
be able to recover and help it by any meanes] Verse. 16. These six things [vz.
besides those which have been reckoned heretofore] does the Lord hate [vz.
above some other things: not denying, but that he hates all manner of
iniquitie] yea his soul abhors [i. he can at no hand away with] seven. [i.
one put unto the other six, which in number make seven.] Ver. 17. The hautie
eyes, [i. proud persons, which show forth pride a lying tongue, [i. a man that
is a lier, or given to lying: putting the tongue wherewith lies are uttered,
for the party himself that uses it] and the hands that shed innocent blood,
[i. men that are given to cruelty and bloodshed: and he puts the word
hands here, because they are the instruments of murder: and when he says shed
innocent blood, he means such as kill men, and take away their lives without
any good cause.] Verse. 18. An heart [vz. of a man] that imagines [vz. against
other men, specially those which are good, and mark that the heart is put
here in the fourth place, and in the midst between the six, because it is
as it were the fountain and root of all these euilles] feet that be swift in
running to mischief, [i. to accomplish and perform mischief, he means by
this speech, such as are wholly set upon working of mischief: of whom see
before cap. 4.16, 17.] Verse. 19. A false [i. such a one, as before a
Magistrate, either upon his own word or oath, utters an untruth: and so it
is diverse from the second thing, because the tongue may be given to lying,
without false witness bearing,] and him that raises up [vz. by any manner of
means, as by tale-carrying, etc.] contention [i. any manner of quarrelling or
chiding] among brethren. [vz. who should be joined fast together: he means
here such a Verse. 20. My son keep thy fathers commandment, [i. practice the
thing which thy father commands thee] and forsake not thy mothers
instruction: [i. set not light by at any hand, such good things as thy mother
shall instruct and teach thee in: see 1.8. where you have almost the very same
words.] Verse. 21. Bind them always upon thy heart, [i. think upon them and
remember them continually] and tie them about thy neck. [vz. that thou feeling
and seeing them, 3.3.] Verse. 22. It [i. the wholesome counsel of thy parents,
given thee out of the law and word of God, and received by thee] shall lead
thee [vz. into all truth and weldooing,] when thou walk, [i. whatsoever thou
take in hand, or whether soever thou turnest thee] it shall watch for thee
[vz. to keep thee safe and sound, both in mind and bodie] when thou sleep,
[i. laiest thee down, and take thy natural rest] and when thou wakest, [vz.
to go about thy business and affaires] it shall talk with thee: [i. it shall
not only counsel thee, but also Verse. 23. For the commandment [vz. of God,
meaning by commandment the whole word, because it consists specially of
commandments: see Psalm. 19.8.] is a lantern [vz. to lighten the believers,
and to go before them in the way of eternal life: see Psalm 119.105.] and
instruction, [vz. out of Gods word] a light [vz. to our dark and blind
consciences] and corrections for instructions [i. sharp reproves to instruct
men, specially when they cannot otherwise be reclaimed: for instruction so
used, see Chapt. 5.12.] are the way of life, [i. the high and ready way, or as
a man would say, effectual means to bring us to life: and I would read this
verse by a Parenthesis, and so join the 22. and 24. together.] Verse. 24. To
keep thee [i. the word shall instruct thee, to keep thee farre] from the
wicked woman, [i. from a woman wholly given over to wickednesse] and from the
flattery of the tongue of the strange woman. [i. from the flattery which the
harlot uses in the words which she utters with her tongue: of this see
before Chapter 5.3. He means that heavenly wisdom out of Gods word, shall
keep him untouched from all the assaults of pleasure, and from all hindrances
in the doing of his duty, so that neither by fleshly Verse. 25. Desire not her
beauty in thine heart, [i. take heed that thy heart be not overtaken with
desire and lust of her beauty: see Math. 5 28.] neither let her take thee [vz.
leading thee from the right way, and stealing thy heart from thee] with her eye
lids: [i. either with the fairenes of her eyes, or with the twinkling of the
eyes, or with setting thy eyes upon her, or else with any other, Verse. 26. For
because of the whorish woman [i. for satisfying of her in her greedy desire] a
man is brought [vz. to seeke] to a morsel of bread, [i. to extreme need and
beggerie, so that begging from door to door, he would be glad of a morsel of
bread: see Prouer. 29.3.] and a woman [i. a wicked, adulterous, and whorish
woman] will hunt for [i. by all the means that she can seek, and never leave
of laboring, till she have gotten] the precious life of a man, [i. man's life,
which is a very precious and dear thing: and in this verse is contained a
reason, why adultery is vile, to wit, because it brings with it loss of
goods, and destruction both of body and soul.] Verse. 27. Can a man take fire
in his bosom, and his [q.d. It is impossible.] Verse. 28. Or can a man go upon
[i. hot burning coals, and without any thing upon his feete] and his feet not
be burnt? [q.d. it cannot be, for by this propounding of it in the way of a
question, he notes the hardness, or impossibility rather of the thing. And
here note that he compares whoredom to a fire, of which see Job. 31.12.
showing by two very apt similitudes, that he cannot avoid both bodily hurt,
and spiritual danger that has any thing to do with a harlot, or has any
acquaintance or familiarity with her.] Verse. 29. So he that goes [i. lies
with her, and knows her: he uses an honest and sober speech, to express a
filthy and vile act: see 2. Sam. 16.21. see also Psalm 51. in the title]
shall not be innocent. [i. clear either before God or man, but subject to
judgment, not only to that which is inward and eternal from God, but also
that which is outward amongst men, to which he is subject, if he be taken in
it: and this sense is confirmed by that which follows, where he compares an
adulterer to a chief, showing the one to be a greater offense than the
other.] Verse. 30. Men do not despise [vz. very a thief [i. he that steals
any thing] when he steals [q.d. no though he be taken in the fact of
theeuerie, if it be] to satisfy his soul [i. his life, and maintain it, when
he stands in need, for we know that the soul eats not] because he is
hungry [vz. and he steals to satisfy his hunger only.] Verse. 31. But if he
be found [q.d. yea though the hardest fall out, that he be he shall restore
[vz. to him, from whom he has stollen] seven fold, [i. very much: for
otherwise the Scripture makes mention what he shall restore, and in what
cases: see Exodus 22.1, 2, etc.] or [vz. if he be not able to restore] he shall
give all the substance of his house: [i. whatsoever he has, yea and he
himself to be sold, if he be not able to satisfy it in goods: Exodus 22.3.]
Verse. 32. But he [vz. whosoever he be] that commits [i. with another man's
wife] he is destitute of understanding. [i. he has no spark of spiritual or
heavenly knowledge, how wise soever he be in worldly affaires] he that does
it destroys his own soul, [i. casts himself headlong into destruction
both of body and soul.] Verse. 33. He [i. the adulterer] shall find a wound
[vz. either from the who will stone him and put him to death according to the
lawe] and dishonor, [vz. both before God and man] and his reproach [vz. which
he has drawn unto himself by filthines] shall never be put away: [vz. out of
the remembrance of God and man. He means that his body shall be punished,
Verse. 34. For jealousy is the rage of a man, [i. it stirs him up to wrath
and rage] therefore he will not spare [vz. him, that has committed that
villainy against him] in the day of vengeance. [i. at any time, when either he
himself shall strike, or demand public Verse. 35. He [i. the husband so
iniured] can not bear the sight of any ransom, [i. cannot abide to look upon
any thing given for the deflowring of his wife] neither will he consent [vz.
that thou should not be punished] though thou augment [vz. even as much as
thou canst] the gifts. [vz. which thou would give him, to satisfy and
please him withal.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to beware of rash giving either our words or hands for
any. Verse. 2. Shows, that when a man's word is once passed, he is bound to
perform that which he has promised, though it be to his hinderance. Verse. 3.
Teaches us, to use all lawful means to be rid out of danger which we fall
into, either through rashness, or negligence. Verse. 4. Teaches us, that we
should not delay to work or procure our own good. Verse. 5. Delivers even
the same doctrine, under two very apt and fit similitudes. Verse 6. Shows,
that for the correction of things which are amiss in us, God does many times
send us to the dumb and insensible creatures. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that if
without prouokers, we should perform our duties, much more should we do
it, when he has given us means and aids thereto. Verse. 8. Teaches us, in
the time of plenty and peace to provide against the days of affliction and
scarsitie to come. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that it is not good to give over our
selves to much sleep, because that is the mother of idleness. Verse. 10.
Teaches us, that the idle use all means to continue them in the sin of
sloth. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that sudden and unavoidable beggerie comes
upon the slothful person. Verse. 12. Teaches us, that frowardnes of speech, is
a good note to discern a wicked man by. Verse. 13. Teaches, that the ungodly
abuse all the parts and members of their bodies, to provoke others to
wickedness, and in their own persons to perform it. Verse. 14. Shows,
first, that the wicked man's heart is always devising naughtines: secondly,
that this is a sure mark of a naughty man, to be the author of contentions
and strife. Verse. 15. Teaches us, that the destruction of the wicked, shall
be, as sudden, so without hope of recovery. Verse. 16. Teaches us, first,
that God is a God that can not away with wickedness at any hand: secondly,
that there is a difference of sins, because God abhors some more than
other some. Verse. 17. Teaches us to fly from pride, lying, and murder. Verse.
18. Teaches us, to beware of wicked devises, and pursuing naughtines with
greedines and delight. Verse. 19. Teaches us, to shun false witness bearing,
and the sowing of strife and contentions among friends. Verse. 20. Teaches
children carefully to endeavor to keep the holy and wholesome instruction of
their parents. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that obedience to good counsel out of
Gods word, is the best and most profitable thing we can attain to in this
life. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that Gods word is a lantern unto our feet, and a
true light unto all our steps. Verse. 24. Teaches us, that there is no better
bridle against whoredom, than sound knowledge out of Gods word. Verse. 25.
Teaches us, to withstand the beginning of evil and sin in our selves, and
to beware of such prouocations, as others will use to draw us on thereto. Verse.
26. Teaches us, that the end of whoredom is beggerie on the one side, and
destruction of body and soul on the other side. Verse. 27, 28. Do teach us by
two apt similitudes, taken from the fire, that the sin of adultery carries
with it great and fearful danger. Verse. 29. Teaches us, to strive to
modesty, and cleanenes in our speech, yea even then when we speak of immodest
and unclean things: secondly, that man, of what state or condition soever he
be, committing that sin, shall not escape unpunished. Verse. 30, 31. Teach us,
that howsoever amongst us, theeuerie is thought a greater transgression than
adultery, yet before GOD, and such men as be lightened by Gods word, adultery
is by many degrees more vile. Verse. 32. Teaches us, that the adulterer by his
sin, does not only bewray his own folly, but also lays violent hands upon
his own life. Verse. 33. Shows, that the adulterer shall never escape
unpunished, either before God or man, or both. Verse. 34. Teaches us, that we
may safely pursue before a Magistrate, our just causes, against an adulterer:
and that without showing any favor or pity to the offending party. Verse. 35.
Teaches us, to be altogether estranged from receiving gifts, or setting on
sale our wives deflowring. Now let us see, wherein theeuerie is less than
adultery: which appears to be so out of this text, because the thief that
steals to satisfy his need, shall neither lose life nor honor, no though he
be found sundry times doing the deed, but shall be only bound to restore to
the owner, according to the law. But the adulterers condition seems to be
far otherwise: for his life and honor is in danger, both by public and
private right, if the matter be once known, and there will be nothing taken
for the satisfaction of his sin.

CHAP. 7.
Co.
Solomon had before delivered certain instructions of wisdom and knowledge,
now in this Chapter he puts down certain confirmations and proofs of the
same, alleging his own testimony, and that experience which he had observed
in the state and cursed end of miserable men, following the intisements of
pleasure and sin.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 5. In the second is comprehended a pithie
narration or lively description of the accursed manners of a harlot, from verse
6. to the end of the 23. verse. In the third part, the holy Ghost puts
down a dehortatorie conclusion, moving men to shun and avoid to their
uttermost, harlots, and their company, from verse 24. to the end of the
Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. MY son keep my words, [i. the things that I speak to thee,
understanding by keeping an earnest endeavor to observe them in thought, word,
and deede] and hide [vz. as precious Iewelles, and things of great importance]
my commandments [i. the things which I command] with thee, [i. in thy mind:
meaning also hereby a fast 2.1.] Verse. 2. Keep my commandments, and thou
shall live, [i. surely thou shall live, not only in this life, but in the life
to come: see Chapter 4.4. where Solomon makes them his fathers words unto him]
and mine instruction [i. the good and wholesome instruction, that I give or
shall leave thee, vz. see that thou observe and keep it] as the apple of thine
eyes, [i. most carefully and diligently: see Psalm. 17.8.] Bind them on thy
fingers, [he seems to allude to Deutero. 6.8. and Deutero. 11.18.] and write
them upon the table of thy heart: [see Chapter 3.3. q.d. have them continually
in thy hands, and let them be always before thine eyes, and think upon them
in thy heart, that thou may do them: Exodus 13.9.] Verse. 4. Say [vz. with an
unfeigned heart] unto wisdom [i. unto the wisdom and word of God] thou art
my sister, [i. very near and dear unto me, as sisters commonly be to their
brethren: see Genes. 34.31. Also 2. Samuel 13.20, 22, 29. etc.] and call [i.
be not ashamed boldly to say and professe] understanding [vz. of the will and
word of God] thy kinswoman, [i. dear and familiar unto thee: all is as much
q.d. do thou even naturally as it were esteem and love holy wisdom, and
make thy self as familiar with her, as possibly can be.] Verse. 5. That they
[i. wisdom and may keep thee [vz. safe and sound] from the strange woman,
[i. from the harlot, as sundry times heretofore] even from the stranger [i.
the harlot] that is smooth in her words, [i. that cunningly and craftelie
flattereth: see Chapter 2.16. and 5.3. q.d. Thou have great need of the holy
wisdom and commandments which I deliver thee, that thou may take heed of
whorish intisements, and of every way of pleasure and corruption, which are in
deed so great and dangerous, that thou may easily be taken in them, and
drawn from the right way, unless thou do carefully shun them, through the
aid and help of wisdom.] Verse. 6. As [vz. standing] in the window of mine
house, [vz. for my recreation] I looked through my window, [vz. into the
streates. Whether this was a thing done, or that Solomon spoke it in the way of
a parable, it is not much material. This chiefly is to be marked, that he does
lively paint out the disposition, both of the vnheedie young man that seeks
after harlots, and of harlots themselves.] Verse. 7. And J saw amongst the
fools, [i. such as were and considered [i. earnestly beheld] among the
children [i. amongst the youth which were in the streate] a young man [i. one
above the rest] destitute of understanding [i. void of holy understanding and
wisdom: see Chapter 6.32.] Verse 8. Who passed [vz. from his company, and that
through the streate [i. through diverse streates, til he came so, that he went]
by her corner, [i. by the corner of the whores house, or else by some corner of
a streate that led that way] and went toward her house [vz contrary to the
commandment given before, Chap. 5.8.] Verse. 9. In the [i. a little before it
begun to wax dark. Now he shows the time wherein the adulterer went about
his wickednes] in the evening, [vz. somewhat late] when the night began to be
black and dark, [and so supposed that none should see him, but I perceived him
well enough.] Verse. 10. And behold [vz. even such a one as he looked for] with
a harlots behavior, [i. one that behaved her self like an harlot, as she was
indeed] and subtle in heart, [i. craftelie devising by all means, to hide her
deceit, that she might the more cunningly lay baits for the unwary: see
Chapter 5.6.] Verse. 11. She [i. the harlot: here he digresseth somewhat from
his is babbling [i. full of words and tattle: see 1. Timoth. 5.13.] and loud,
[vz. in her speeches. This word I take it, may better be turned perverse, or
stubborn, departing from the rule of her husband, and refusing to be subject
to him: under the first word, the holy Ghost means, that she abounds in
words, which are apt to persuade, see verse 21. of this Chapter: and under the
second, that she is disobedient to God, to her husband, and the very laws of
nature and honestie] whose feet cannot abide [vz. any long time] in her house,
[i. in her own house, but she must be running from place to place, as
follows verse. 12. He means by this, that she is a stragler, which is
against the duty and behavior of an honest matrone: see Judge. 5.24. Psalm
68.12. 1. Timoth. 5.13. Titus 2.5.] Now [i. one while] she is without, [i.
abroad in some one place or other, as in the fields, etc.] now [i. another
while] in the streates, [i. she is abroad in the streates of the citie] and
lies in wait [vz. to catch unwary young men, and to bring them home to her
house] at every corner, [vz. almost of all the streates of the city: now in
the next verse, he passes from the description Verse. 13. So she caught him
[vz. fast, even as it were by the hand, or embraced him with her armes] and
kissed him, [vz. contrary to womanlike modestie] and with an impudent face [i.
without any manner of blushing, even as it were with a countenance past said
unto him, [vz. as followeth] Verse. 14. J have peace offerings, [i. part of
that, which was offered: for in peace offerings by the law, the people that
brought the sacrifices had somewhat allowed them: see Leuit. 7. verse. 11, 12,
etc. q. d. I have good store of meat; we will make good cheer, for that is
the nurse of whoredome] this day [vz. and no longer ago] have I paid my vows,
[vz. which I vowed unto the Lord: of which see also Leuit. 7.16.] Verse. 15.
Therefore [i. because I have these and these good things prepared] J came
forth, [vz. out of my house, and that even of purpose] to meet thee [q.d. and
see now how readily I have found thee, whereas any other would have contented
her, as well as he; but all this she utters to draw him the more on] that I
might seek thy face, [i. thee thy self, and yet she mentions the face,
because she would insinuate, as though she were overtaken with his beautie] and
I have found thee, [vz. even as I wished and desired; for such an Emphasis this
manner of speech includes, as I Verse. 16. I have decked [vz. very finely] my
bed [vz. wherein I lye] with ornaments, [vz. of sundry sorts] with carpets and
laces of Egypt: [i. which are made of the flax coming out of Egypt, which
for whitenes and softnes, is preferred before all other, as Pliny shows lib.
18. cap. 1.] Verse. 17. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cynamom,
[i. I have made it most sweet and pleasant: they did use belike in those days
to perfume with myrrh and aloes: see Psalm 45.8. All these I take to be the
harlots words, spoken after supper, alluring thereby, the young man to tarry
Verse. 18. Come, [q.d. seeing all these things are so pleasantly made readie]
let us take our fill of love, [i. of the things which we love and like of]
until the morning, [i. all night long, and never be wearie] let us take our
pleasure in daliance: [q.d. you see all things prepared to satisfy lust, Verse.
19. For mine husband [q.d. fear not him, but be bold] is not at home, [vz.
now, neither will be this good while] he is gone a journey far of, [i. he is
gone a very long journey from this place.] Verse. 20. He has taken with him a
bag of silver, [i. good store of money, for the charges of his travail and
journey, and therefore thou may see, he is gone a long journey, and will not
return shortly] and will come home at the day appointed. [vz. and not before:
q.d. if thou fear his return, know thou, that he will not be here till such a
time, for I have his word for it. Behold the force of a harlots speech and
persuasion.] Verse. 21. Thus with her great [vz. both of heart and speach] she
caused him to yield, [vz. to her inticements and filthines] and with her
flattering lips [i. the flattering speeches which she uttered with her
lippes] she enticed him, [vz. to lewdnes and sin.] Verse. 22. And he followed
her straight ways, [vz. without any striving or as an ox that goes to the
slaughter, [i. willingly, not knowing whether he goes, but supposing to go to
good, he goes to destruction] and as a fool to the stocks [i. willingly
also, and chearefully, not thinking the time of his punishment to be nigh] for
correction, [i. to be corrected and chastised.] Verse. 23. Till a dart strikes
through [i. till he be deadly wounded, and that not in body only, but in soul
also. It seems to be a metaphore, taken from Archers in war, who hit so
right, that with darts and arrows they strike even to the heart] as a bird
hastes to a snare, not knowing that he is in danger. [vz. to be taken: under
this similitude, the holy Ghost notes two things: the one is, the haste that
the wicked use to perform wickedness: the other is their ignorance, and lack
of heed, who are so carried away with pleasure, that they are trapped in an
unavoidable danger before they be ware.] Verse. 24. Hear [vz. me [vz. thy
father, who does give thee good instruction and counsell] now [q.d. even while
it is time, delay not] therefore [vz. because of the dangers before rehearsed]
O children, [see Chapter 4.1.] and hearken [vz. attentively and diligently] to
the words of my mouth, [i. both to the words and matter that I shall utter.
This, and the like sentences have been sundry times repeated heretofore in
this book.] Verse. 25. Let not thy heart decline [i. do not so much as in thy
mind affect or like of her lewd and wicked dealing, yea, if it be possible
think not upon it] and wander thou not [vz. neither in word nor deed] in her
paths, [i. in the things which she would have thee to perform: for the further
thou straiest that way, the less hope of returning.] Verse. 26. For [this is a
reason of his exhortation] she [i. the has caused many to fall down wounded,
[vz. very sore and greeuouslie, as Sampson, and Solomon himself who writ this
book: q.d. learn by other men's dangers to beware] and the strong men, [q.d.
yea the mighty and powerful men] are slain by her: [i. by her means, have
been brought to death and destruction, both of body and soul, without the
great grace of God.] Verse. 27. Her house [i. the knowledge, familiarity and
acquaintance is the way [i. the high and ready way] unto the grave [i. even
unto death it selfe] which [vz. way, or ways of her] goes down [or go down
in the plural number: meaning, that they run hastily, as things that be
carried downward doo] to the chambers of death. [i. to most certain, yea
eternal death, from which men's steps are hardly called back: see Chapter
2.18. He means, that the fellowship and familiarity of an harlot, does bring
with it assured and certain death, both of body and soul.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us to yield obedience and reverence to good and holy
counsel. Verse. 2. Teaches us two things, first, that true life depends
upon the observation of Gods law: secondly, that we should most dearly
esteem it. Verse. 3. Teaches us, to have good and wholesome lessons in
continual remembrance to do them. Verse. 4. Teaches us carefully to strive
to be familiarly acquainted with holy and heavenly wisdom. Verse. 5.
Teaches us, that there is no better buckler against whoredom, and the
intising words of harlots, than Gods word it self. Verse. 6, 7. Teaches us,
now and then to have an eye over others, not only to instruct them if they go
awrie, but also to learn by their examples to avoid evil. Verse. 8. Teaches
us, that it is a perilous thing to draw nigh to suspected places. Verse. 9.
Teaches us, that every one that does evil, flies and hates the light. Verse.
10. Teaches us, that even men's and women's behauiours, many times bewray what
they are. Verse. 11, 12. Teach us, that these be two things that womankind
specially should avoid: vz. tatling and loud speech: and also much gadding
abroad. Verse. 13. Teaches us, that harlots, when they once take upon them that
profession, do utterly put off shamefastnes. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that
arrant strumpets will many times pretend great show of religion and godliness.
Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18. Do lively set out all the whorish and strumpet-like
inticements that harlots do use: wherein also their condemnation, is and
shall, without repentance be the greater, because they abuse the good things
of God, to the more greedy satisfying and fulfilling of their lust. Verse. 19,
20. Teach us, that the wicked take every light and little occasion, for the
satisfying of their filthy desires, specially, opportunity and seasonablenes
of time, as they think. Also they teach, that the ungodly more fear the face
and countenance of men, than the sight and presence of the Almighty God.
Verse. 21. Teaches us, that flattering and intising words have great force in
them to draw, if Gods spirit do not mightily prevail against the same. Verse.
22, 23. Do under three fit similitudes taken from oxen, birds, and fools,
express two notable points: the one is, how readily, and willingly the wicked
run to their own destruction: the other is, how suddenly, and as it were
unawares, they are through ignorance intrapped in wonderful dangers. Verse. 24.
Teaches us, when good counsel is offered, in good time to accept of it. Verse.
25. Teaches us, neither in affection, nor in action to consent to whores.
Verse. 26. Teaches us, that our own wisdom and strength, are but weak
things to overcome whorish persuasions by, unless we be better stayed from
above: because great and wise men have been overtaken therewith. Verse. 27.
Sets out the great danger and assured destruction, that follows the
familiarity and haunting of harlots.

CHAP. 8.
Co.
IN the next Chapter before going, be confirmed the excellency of holy and
heavenly wisdom, even by that experience which God had given him: now he
proceeds in this, and the next Chapter following, in the same matter, adding
more confirmations for the same thing, which are fet from the very testimony
of God himself, and his eternal wisdom.

Di.
THis Chapter may be divided into three parts: the first is a short narration,
verse 4. to the end of 31. In the third, is contained her exhortation, verse
32. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. Does not Wisdom [i. good, holy, and heavenly wisedome] cry, [vz.
aloude and openly, and not whistining, and in the dark, as harlots do. For
against them, spoken of in the other Chapter, he opposes Gods holy wisdom
here: see Chapter 1.20. and he utters it by the way of a question, that it
might have greater force: q.d. certainly she does so] and understanding [vz.
of Gods will revealed in his word] utter her voice? [vz. openly and plainly, so
that none can pretend ignorance.] Verse. 2. She stands in the top of [vz. to
the end she may be the better and more plainly heard] by the way [i. at every
ways side, watching her opportunity to do good unto men] in the place of the
paths, [i. in every place, that has paths where men use to walk: q.d.
wheresoever there is any resort of men, and where men use to meet, there she
is, and offers her self.] Verse. 3. She [i. wisedome] cries [vz. very loud
and plain: In the Hebrew text it is a verb of the plural number, and then it
must be referred to wisdom and understanding, as verse 1. of this Chapter]
besides the gates, [vz. of the city: and this he mentions, because the
people repaired to the gates of the city for justice: see Chapter 1.21.]
before the city, [this may either be referred to wisdom, thus, as though
she called to men before they entered into the city: or else to the gates,
which stand before the city, and be as it were the doors of the city, to
which I rather incline] at the entry of the doors. [vz. of every man's
particular house: q.d. both publicly and privately, she calls unto Verse. 4. O
men [vz. of what state and condition so ever you be] I call [vz. plainly and
with a loud voyce] unto you [vz. for your good] and utter my voice [vz.
plainly and sensibly, as verse 1. of this Chapter] to the children of men.
[q.d. even unto the young ones: meaning, that he would have none exempted from
the embracing of Verse. 5. O ye foolish men [i. O ye that are simple, and ready
to be deceived with every thing. These are called simple: Chapt. 1.4. See also
verse 32. of the first Chap.] understand wisdom, [i. labor to attain her,
while you may have her, and she offers her self unto you] and ye O fools
[hereby he means such as are altogether void of understanding, as Chapt.
1.22.] be wise in heart, [i. apply your hearts unto wisdom, least Verse. 6.
Give ear [i. be attentive and diligent] for I will speak [vz. plainly and
openly unto you] of excellent things, [i. of high and noble things, even such
as it becomes Princes and great personages to speak of, and their inferiors
duetifully to hear: such a reason of attention is to be found Psalm. 49.34.]
and the opening of my lips [i. even the very beginning of my speach] shall
teach things that be right: [i. shall propound and deliver nothing else, but
Verse. 7. For my mouth [i. I my self putting the mouth, and the instruments
therein contained, by which the voice is framed for the person himself
speaking] shall speak the truth, [i. the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth] and my lips abhor [vz. to speak: or else we may take this word
lips, as mouth before in this verse, for the person him selfe] wickedness.
[i. false and untrue things, wherewith the ungodly are Verse. 8. All the words
of my mouth are righteous, [i. both the words which I speak, and the things
that I command, tend to righteousness and well doing, both before God and man]
there is no lewdnes nor frowardnes in them, [i. there is no wicked or ungodly
thing in them, or commanded by them: and in these two verses he commends his
doctrine, Verse. 9. They [i. the words which I vtter] are all [vz. and every one
of them] plain [i. easy, and manifest] to him [vz. whosoever he bee] that
will understand, [vz. them: not meaning that any either will or can understand,
till God have given both the one and the other, but alluring men rather, who
are discouraged with hard things] and straight [i. manifest and evident,
without any turning or winding] to them [i. to all them of what state and
condition soever they be] that would find knowledge. [i. that have a care and
endeavor to attain it, and to seek Verse. 10. Receive [vz. readily and with a
good will] mine instruction [i. the instruction that I shall give you] and not
silver [i. rather than silver, as may appear by that which follows: for it
is not his purpose here to condemn silver, but to show that Gods word must
be preferred before it] and knowledge [vz. of the heavenly mysteries, and that
from me] rather than fine gold, [vz. how pure and precious so ever it be. And
note, that in this verse, and in the next he commends his doctrine, because
it is most precious and profitable.] Verse. 11. For wisdom [i. the wisdom of
God] is better [vz. by thousands than precious stones, [though they be most
rich, and never so much esteemed] and all pleasures [vz. of this life, how
great, many, or sundry soever they be] are not to be compared [vz. at any
hand, or in any respect] unto her, [i. unto true and holy wisdom: see Chap.
3.14, 15.] Verse. 12. I wisdom [i. who am the eternal wisdom of the father:
for this must be understood, not of the written word only, but of the person
of the Son, who is made of God unto us wisdom, 1. Corint. 1.24, 30.] dwell
with prudence, [i. after some, am most familiarly acquainted with her: after
other some, am most prudent and wise my self: both are good, but I rather
allow of this latter: q.d. I call you not to me without cause, for I am she
without whom no man can be wise] and I find forth [i. not only of my self,
but cause also them, that reverence and esteem me, to seek and find]
knowledge and counsels. [vz. of the will of God revealed in his word, which
otherwise should be but a sealed book to all them that looked into it.] Verse.
13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil [This appertains (though perhaps
it seem not so to some) to the praise of wisdom, because the reverence and
fear of God is the speciallest part of wisdom, as Chap. 1.7. Also Chap.
9.10. Some join it with the former verse thus:] I have with me the fear of
the Lord, and the hatred of evil, [q.d. I am most just, teaching to do every
good thing, and to loathe every wicked thing: and then addeth] J hate [vz.
vnfeignedly] pride and arrogancy, [vz. both of heart, body, and countenance]
and the evil way, [i. every wicked order and course of life whatsoeuer] and a
mouth that speaks lewd things, [i. every person or man that gives his mouth
to speak wicked and perverse matters.] Verse. 14. I have [vz. with counsel and
wisdom, [i. abundance of all good foresight, counsel and holy knowledge] J
am understanding, [q.d. without me there can be no sound iudgement] and I have
strength. [vz. in my self, meaning by strength, power and authority also to
do what he would: all this verse is as much: q.d. I am most wise in taking of
counsel, and I am most mighty in performing my devises.] Verse. 15. By me [i.
by the authority Kings [i. all Kings, how great or little so ever they be]
reign [vz. upon earth, and amongst their own people: meaning, that all the
authority they have, they have it from him, as Daniel 2.21. Romans 13.1.] and
Princes [vz. of the earth] decree justice, [i. establish, ordain, and execute
just and holy things.] Verse. 16. By me [i. by my permission Princes rule, [vz.
others] and the Nobles [vz. do so likewise] and all the Judges of the earth.
[vz. do the self same thing by the authority which I have given unto them.
And mark, that in these two verses, the holy Ghost uses four words, which
though they serve all to express one thing, yet every word in signification
differs from another. He puts Kings in the first place, as the highest and
greatest of all: to these he joins Princes, who were as it were of counsel
with Kings, and did under them constitute and ordain laws: concerning both
these, see Psalm 2.2. Next he adds Nobles, who have their name of the
largenes and liberality which they exercise to their underlings: and lastly
in a general term of Judges, he comprehends all them that govern the
world, and handle matters Verse. 17. I love them [vz. unfeignedly, and
continually] that love me, [vz. with a good heart. He means that Gods grace,
by his means, flows upon all such as love him: see John 14.21.] and they
that seek me early [i. painfully, carefully, and diligently] shall find me
[vz. assuredly and without all fail: q.d. I will voutchsafe to show my self
unto them.] Verse. 18. Riches and honor [i. true riches and honor, specially
Gods great blessings upon the minde] are with me, [i. in my power, to give and
bestow them, when and upon whom I list] even durable riches [i. such riches as
shall continue, when other men's melts away, as wax before the Sunne] and
righteousness. [i. upright dealing, which indeed is one good mean to make
3.16.] Verse. 19. My fruit [vz. which I communicate to them that love me I
dwelling in them, and they also walking in the righteousness that I prescribe:
understanding by fruit, the graces also which he bestows upon them: of which
he seems to make two sorts, the one temporal for this life, verse. 20. the
other eternal for the life to come, verse. 21.] is better [vz. by many degrees]
than gold, [vz. how pure or precious soever it bee] yea than fine gold [q.d.
yea than all the finest gold that can be got] and my revenues [i. the gifts
which I bestow upon mine, speaking here as great Princes do, who according
to the largenes of their rents and revenues, give great gifts to their subjects
and seruants] better than fine silver. [q.d. yea though it have been never so
often fined and Psalm 12.6.] Verse. 20. I cause [vz. men, and those that
embrace me] to walk [vz. uprightly, without going either on the right hand or
on the left, and that continually also] in the way of righteousness, [i. in
equal, upright and just ways: meaning thereby a holy order and conversation
of life] and in the midst of the paths of judgment, [i. in such a plain
way of upright dealing, that it is impossible for them to go out of the way:
and this Verse. 21. That [vz. by the means of guiding them in the right way] I
may cause them that love me [vz. unfeignedly: meaning, that for their sakes he
might bring this to passe] to inherit substance, [i. the thing that is, and
shall never cease to be, to wit, eternal life] and I will fill [vz. with all
abundance and store] their treasures. [meaning it, not only of worldly, but
also of spiritual and heavenly blessings: and thus hitherto he has commended
wisdom for her excellent effects, as afterward he commends her for her
antiquity, great power, etc.] Verse. 22. The Lord [vz. the eternal God] has
possessed me [vz. his eternal son and wisedome] in the beginning of his way
[i. before he began to make or create any thing. He commends this wisdom,
of the nature of it, because he is one eternal God, with the Father and the
holy Ghost: q.d. I was with God even then, when by the creation of al things
he manifested plain testimonies of his Majesty. See John 1.1, 2, etc. Coloss.
1.16.] I was [vz. eternal, and God with him, for nothing is eternal but God
only] before his works [i. before al, or any work that ever he made] of old.
[i. which he made of old, or long time ago: see Psalm. 93.2. Verse. 23. I was
set up [or after some anointed: meaning, that by Gods eternal decree he was
placed in his office, of Kingdom, Priesthood and Prophecy: for such a
metaphore he uses in this place] from everlasting, [i. from before all
beginnings whatsoeuer] from the beginning [vz. of the world: neither does the
word from, note, that then he began, as 1. Ioh. 1.1.] and before the earth. [vz
was created: all this tends to set out the perpetuity and eternity of this
great wisdom.] Verse. 24. When there were no depthes, [vz. either of water was
I begotten, [vz. of the father] when there were no fountains [vz. made, nor
yet] abounding with water. [i. having plenty of water within them: q.d. before
all these, and whatsoever things else was I, who was the eternal son of the
eternal father, and begotten of him before any thing that is or was, as may
appear by the verses following] Ver. 25. Before the [vz. were created] was J
begotten. [vz. of the eternal father: q.d. I was God eternal before the
earth, mentioned generally, verse 23. or any part thereof, spoken in this verse,
was] Verse. 26. He had not yet [vz. when I was] made the earth, [vz. no nor
begun nor the open places, [vz. of the world: meaning hereby the champion and
plain countries] nor the height of the dust in the world. [he understands by
height, the excellent creatures; and by dust, though all were made of the
earth, the more base creatures: q.d. when neither the one sort, nor the other
were created, I was.] Verse. 27. When he [i. God the prepared [i. created and
framed as we see] the heavens, [i. that same great frame which is over our
heads, passing as it were from the earth to it] I was there, [vz. together with
him, and was a creator in that most excellent workmanship: see John 1.3.] when
he set the compass [i. the earth, which he calls by this name, because it
seems to be round] upon the deep. [i. upon the waters: see Psalm 24.2.]
Verse. 28. When he established [i. appointed the clouds above, [vz. in the
firmament, that they might be kept there, as it were in tons and bottles,
till he would have them to power down their deaw or raine] when he confirmed
[vz. to keep within the bounds and compasses which he had set them] the
fountains of the deep, [vz. below in the earth, which fountains yield forth
water, and make them to grow as it were into bottomless pits: q.d. before the
waterie clouds above, and the waters under the earth were created, I Verse. 29.
When he gave his decrees to the sea, [vz. touching the bounds and listes of the
same, how far it should go, and how far it should not goe] that the waters
[vz. of the sea, and of the flouds] should not pass his commandment: [i. go
beyond the bounds, which by his word and commandment he had set them] when he
appointed the foundations of the earth, [i. when he founded and laid it, that
it should Verse. 30. Then was I with him [vz. working together with him in that
great work of his creation] as a nourisher, [i. as a maintainer and vpholder
of that his excellent workmanship of creation] and I was daily [i. alwaies]
his delight [i. one whom the father took continual pleasure in, as Math.
3.17. and Math. 17.5.] rejoicing always before him, [i. being continually in
his sight, even as his dear and tenderly beloved Verse. 31. And took my solace
in the compass of his earth: [i. not only rejoiced at the excellent
workmanship, but also blessed all things created in the earth] and my delight
is with the children of men. [i. as I powered upon all creatures abundance of my
sweet blessings, so chiefly upon man, induing him with all bodily and
spiritual graces: and amongst men, Verse. 32. Therefore [q.d. seeing my
commendations and graces which I give be so great] now [vz. while you have
time, and grace is offered you] hearken, [vz. diligently and attentiuely] O
children, [see Chapter 7.24.] unto me: [vz. Gods heavenly wisdom, who calls
you to goodnes] for blessed are they [i. abundance of blessings shall light
upon them, and he speaks it in the present tense, as though they had the
things in possession alreadie] that keep [vz. unfeignedly and with a good
heart] my ways. [i. the ways that I prescribe them: understanding Verse. 33.
Hear instruction, [vz. from me, or the instruction which I give you] and be ye
wise, [i. learn to be wisely ordered and governed thereby] and refuse it not:
[vz. least it turn to your own hurt and destruction] blessed is the man [see
verse 32. of this Chapter. Also Psalm 1.1.] that hears me, [vz. speaking unto
him, understanding by hearing, obedience also of the things propounded, as Ioh.
10.27.] watching daily [i. continually] at my gates, [i. at the doors of my
house. He means such, as both continually, though with great labor and
pain, and also unfeignedly, even with their whole heart and soul seek him. It
may be a metaphore taken from clients, who will not depart from their Advocates
or counselors doors, till they have talked with them. Or it may be taken from
painful scholars, who watch the school doors so, that they be first in upon
the opening of them, and last out upon the shutting of them] and giving
attendance [vz. diligently, least I escape] at the posts of my doors. [vz.
where I should come out.] Verse. 34. For he [vz. whosoever he bee] that finds
me [vz. seeking carefully and painfully for me] finds life, [i. me that am
life, as John 11.25. Also John 14.6. Meaning it also both of temporal and
eternal life] and shall obtain favor of the Lord: [i. great and exceeding
grace from him.] Verse. 35. But [now he amplifieth by the contrarie] he [vz.
whosoever he bee] that sins against me [i. that does not reverently esteem
me, nor apply himself diligently to obtain me: for we can not neglect
Christ, but with great offence] hurts his own soul, [i. destroys
himself, both here, and in the life to come] and all that hate me [vz. of what
state or condition soever they be] love death. [vz. both of body and soul,
how much soever they would seem to abhor it and fly from it.

Verse. 1. Teaches us, that the Lord speaks clearly unto us, to the end we
might be the sooner and more effectually drawn unto him.] Verse. 2, 3. Sets
out Gods great mercy, who neglects no occasion, time, or place, to do us
good. Verse 4. Teaches us, that God does generally direct his word unto all,
though happily it be fruitful but in some. Verse 5. Teaches us in time to
return from our folly and dulnes of spirit. Verse 6. Teaches us, that the
more excellent things are offered us, the more attentive we should be to hear
and learn the same. Verse 7. Teaches us, and that even in the example of God
himself, to speak nothing but the truth, and to abhor al wickedness of
words whatsoever. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that Gods word is righteous, just,
pure and holy. Verse. 9. Is profitable for doctrine, because it shows that
God speaks plainly and familiarly unto us in his word, which may teach us,
not to be discouraged from the hearing or reading of it, through the hardness of
it, and it is profitable also for confutation of Papists, who accuse it of
darkness. Verse 10, 11. Teach us, co prefer Gods word, before all the
pleasures and profits of this life whatsoever. Verse 12. Teaches us, that
nothing can be rightly or wisely done, without sound knowledge out of Gods
word. Verse 13. Teaches us, that seeing God our father abhors pride,
wickedness, and ungodly speech, we should likewise hate and loathe the same
things. Verse 14. Teaches us, that the Lord is most wise in all his counsels;
and most mighty to perform whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and earth.
Verse 15, 16. Teach us, that all earthly authority is from the Lord only,
whatsoever it be. Verse 17. Teaches us, to love the Lord, and if we will
obtain him and his favor, earnestly and diligently to seek after the same.
Verse. 18. Teaches us, that true riches and honor are to be found only with
the Lord. Verse 19. Teaches us, that Gods graces bestowed upon his children
are more precious, than all the things of this life whatsoever. Verse 20.
Teaches us, that without light from Christ, we walk in by paths, and wander
continually from the Lords ways. Verse 21. Teaches us, that there is an
everlasting inheritance, and plenty of all blessings laid up for the
faithful. Verse 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.27, 28. Do prove the eternal deity or
Godhead of our Savior Christ, contrary to the Arrian heresy. Verse 28.
Sets forth Gods great power, in upholding the clouds, and the rain in the
same from drowning the world. Verse 29. Teaches us, that even the sea is
obedient unto him, so that look what courses and bounds he sets it, it
walks in the same. Verse. 30. Shows, that by our Savior him self all
things were made and maintained. Verse. 31. Teaches us, that though Christ be
careful for all, yet chiefly for mankind, and specially for his Church
gathered out of it. Verse. 32. Teaches us, that obedience to Gods
commandments, is a mean to bring blessings upon us. Verse. 33. Teaches us, to
give diligent attendance upon God and his truth, least it do at any time, or
by any manner of way escape us. Verse. 34. Teaches us, that without Christ,
there is no favor nor life to be had from God, but in and with him we have all
things. Verse. 35. Teaches, that it is in vain to offend against Christ: for
besides that our displeasing of him can do him no hurt, we do utterly destroy
our selves.

CHAP. 9.
Co.
THe holy Ghost continues in this Chapter that which he had begun in the
other two, but specially in the eight Chapter before going: to wit, by the
testimony of God, and his own eternal wisdom, he confirms those
doctrines and instructions which he had delivered, concerning the embracing of
this heavenly wisdom. And here by another similitude he teaches the same
which he did before, vz. that Wisdom calls all such unto her, as be
desirous to embrace her: and this he does, by supposing her to be building her
house, that she might receive her guestes into it; by preparing her dainties,
etc.

Di.
verse 1. to the 6. In the second, the holy Ghost describes the wayward
nature of the ungodly, and shows what fruits wisdom yields, from verse
7. to the end of the 12. In the third, he does lively paint out the loathsome
qualities and conditions of an harlot, from verse 13. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. Wisdom [i. Gods eternal Son: of which has been spoken of
before, Chapt. 1.20. Also Chap. 8. through out] has built [vz. very
beautifullie and stronglie] her house [that is, his spiritual Church, which is
called the house of God, 1. Timoth. 3.15. which Christ begins in this life,
but perfecteth the same in heauen] and hewne out [vz. very artificially and
finely] her seven pillars. [i. he has made the Church very full and perfect.
For we know, that the number of seven in Scripture, signifies fulness and
perfection: and all this is spoken in an allegory concerning the Church, as
also that which follows touching the great banquet: meaning nothing thereby,
but the absolute founding, establishing, and perfect decking of it.] Verse. 2.
She [i. Gods eternal wisedome] has killed her [i. has minded to prepare and
to perform a banquet for you, as may appear, by killing meate] drawn [vz.
out of the vessels] her wine, [i. the wine that she will give you: q.d. you
must therefore come quickly, seeing all things are in such readiness. The word
that is turned here drawn, signifies in the Hebrew mingled, [vz. with water,
speaking according to the manner of those hot countries] and prepared her table
[vz. for the guestes to sit at: q.d. all things are in a readiness, there
lacks nothing but guestes to furnish the board. To allegorise upon the
words, vittailes, wine, tables, etc. were vain: the Scriptures must be handled
with greater sobriety.] Verse. She has sent forth her maidens [vz. to call men
to her banquet] and [vz. she her selfe] cries [vz. aloude, so that al men may
hear: q.d. Gods heavenly wisdom, both by himself, and his messengers,
inuiteth men to come] upon the highest places of the city, [i. openly and
every where, so that none can pretend ignorance: see such a like parable Math.
22.1, 2, 3. etc.] saying, [vz. after this manner] Verse. 4. Who so is simple,
[see Chapt. 1.4. and yet Psalm 116.6. and Math. 10.16.] let him come hither,
[vz. to my house and feast, and he shall have his simplicity reformed] and to
him that is destitute of wisdom, [i. lacks the true and holy wisdom of
God] she says, [vz. also: q.d. I refuse to take pains with none, how simple
or foolish soever they be, so that they will diligently apply their ears, and
willingly hearken to my voice.] Verse. 5. Come, [vz. willingly and quickly] and
eat of my meat, and drink of my wine [i. be partakers of all the good
things which the father has given to communicate unto you, and to bestow
upon you] that I have drawn. [see verse 2. of this Chapter: and mark, how
that which wisdom speaks here somewhat darkly, he speaks in the next
verse more plainly.] Verse. 6. Forsake [vz. with all speed possiblie] your way,
[vz. wherein you walk, meaning, the imaginations and devises of their own
hearts, and the corrupt work of their own flesh] ye foolish, [he calls them
here foolish, whom he called verse 4. simple,] and ye shall live: [vz. not only
here in this life, but for ever also with God: and that word shall, notes the
certainty of it] and walk [vz. carefully and diligently] in the way of
understanding. [i. in those ways and orders of life, which understanding
sets before you: q.d. apply your mind to wisdom, and frame and fashion
your whole life, according to the rules thereof.] Verse. 7. He [vz. whosoever he
be] that reproves [i. a scorner, [i. a man that wickedly scoffeth both at the
truth, and the person uttering it, and barketh like a dog, or grunteth as a
swine against it: see Psalm 1.1.] purchases, [vz. not by the doing of it,
but by reason of the perverseness of the party, who will do nothing else, but
labor, either by taunting to make him blush, or else by slaundering to
discredit him] to himself shame: [vz. before men: see Math. 11.16, 17, etc.]
and he that rebukes the wicked [vz. whether it be sharply or mildely done]
gets himself a blot. [vz. because that Verse. 8. Rebuke not a scorner, least
he hate thee: [he means not that we should abstain from reproving others,
for fear of their displeasure and hatred: for that is not to be esteemed, if
he would hearken unto wholesome counsel: but because it is to be doubted least
we should lose our labor and receive nothing but hatred for our paines] but
rebuke [vz. for his offense: see Leuit. 19.17. and do it plainlie] a wise man,
[i. such a one as is so prepared in mind, that he will not scoff at thee and
thy admonitions, but willingly hears wisdom, and gladly suffers himself
to be informed according thereto: see Prouer. 10.8.] and he will love thee.
[vz. the better, and the more unfeignedly for that.] Verse. 9. Give admonition
to the wise, [i. admonish him that is wise of any thing that is amiss in him]
and he will be the wiser: [i. he will thrive in wisdom by that admonition and
reproof, and become the better, both in practice and obedience thereby] teach
[vz. good things, and that in the spirit of meekness and of loue] a
righteous man, [i. he that has care of an upright conuersation] and he will
increase in learning. [vz. by the means of those admonitions, and under the
name learning, he comprehends not knowledge only, but obedience and practice
also, for we have learned so much as we know Verse. 10. The beginning of
wisdom is the fear of the Lord, [see Chapt. 1. verse 7. Also Psalm. 111.10.
He shows here what is true wisdom, and what way men must take, if they will
obtain her, to wit, that they bring with them a reverent fear of God in their
hearts. For in vain shall any man think, without the fear of God, to obtain
wisdom, or to make any proceedings in her] and the knowledge of holy things,
[i. of all holy things whatsoever, specially of holy men] is understanding.
[vz. right and sound understanding of Gods will revealed in his word: q.d.
without that, there is no way to know any thing that is good. He makes here
two parts, as it were, of heavenly doctrine: the one is the duty of reverence
toward God, the other is the duty of fellowship with the Saints: and either
of them is called the beginning of wisdom and understanding, because they are
in this life begun in us by the word, and shall not be finished till the
prophecy cease, and we be placed together in the heavenly places with Verse.
11. For thy days [i. the days of thy life] shall be multiplied [vz. very
greatly. He means, that the godly embracing heavenly wisdom, shall obtain
a long life: and this he speaks not, as though the days which God has
numbered unto us, shall be shortened or lengthened, but according to the custom
of the lawe] by me, [vz. if unfeignedly thou receive and embrace me] and the
years of thy life shall be augmented. [vz. exceedingly.] Verse. 12. If thou be
wise, [i. truly and holilie wise] thou shall be wise for thy self, [i. for
thine own good and commodity, not forbidding us to employ our wisdom to do
good unto others also, but showing that we our selves shall reap the special
commodity by it] and if thou be a scorner, [see verse 7. of this Chapter] thou
alone shall suffer. [vz. the just pain and punishment of thy scoffing and
scorning: q.d. thy scorning shall not, as thou think, hurt him, that
tendereth thy salvation, but shall through Gods just judgment light upon thine
own head.] Verse. 13. A foolish woman [i. one is troublesome: [vz. both in word
and deed, it is the same word that he used before Chapt. 7.11.] she is
ignorant, [vz. of every good thing] and knows nothing. [vz. soundly and
uprightly, either of her duty toward God or man.] Verse. 14. But she sits
[vz. as at the door of her house [i. without, for she cannot abide to be within
dores] on a seat [q.d. yea she sits on a seat prepared for her] in the
high places of the city, [i. in the open streates where she may be seen. For
high places, see Chapt. 8.2. He means by this that she is a gadder: see
Chapt. 7.11, 12.] Verse. 15. To call them [vz. that pass by the way, [vz. about
their businesses and affaires] that go right on their way, [i. that are
carefully bent and set upon the performance of the things that they have to
do, without thinking any whit of her, or her lewdnes, till she allure them]
saying, [vz. after this manner also.] Verse. 16. Who so is simple, let him come
[vz. to me] and to him that is destitute of wisdom, she says also, [these
are the same words with verse 4. of this Chapter, but utter to another end,
vz. to draw men from the way of true wisdom, so that we may see here, that
we are not to believe bare words only.] Verse. 17. Stolen waters [I take these
to be the words of the harlot intising the foolish and simple man: q.d. we
will secretly commit whoredom, which to the flesh in deed, seems very
pleasant and sweet: and not only because it is not seen or known, but also
because the desire and use of strange flesh (which is called in this place the
every) is, or at the least seems delectable for the time] and hid bread is
pleasant. [i. bread eaten in corners: which they dare not eat openly, either
because it was forbidden them, or because it was stolen. Under these two
similitudes, she means one thing, that is secret or close committing of
whoredom: and here we may see, that even by the account of whores and harlots,
whoredom is condemned as a vile sin.] Verse. 18. But he [vz. who is so
intised of her] knows not [vz. being deceived through the sweetness and
pleasures of sin, which endure but for a while] that the dead are there, [i.
that such as use her house, and frequent her company, are dead already, as 1.
Timoth. 5.6,] and that her guestes [i. such as she has bidden, and do yield
to her bidding] are in the depth of hell. [i. are already condemned: some
refer it to the grave, but the other sense also is true, unless it please
God to give them unfeigned repentance and amendment of life.

Do.
Verse 1, 2, 3. Set out the great love that God bears toward man, which
teaches us on the otherside, not to requite it with unkindness, as when he
lovingly calls, we should chorlishly refuse to come, but thankfully to
accept of the time of his gracious and fatherly visitation. Verse. 4. Teaches
us, that our ignorance or wickednesses, should be no cause of estranging our
selves from God, but rather spurs to provoke us to draw nigh unto him for
the amendment thereof. Verse 5. Teaches us, reverently and lovingly to
embrace Gods graces offered. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that Christian righteousness
consists of these two parts, in hating the evil, and doing the good things.
Verse. 7. Sets out rather the nature of the wicked, who cannot away with the
word of reproof, than discourage us any whit at all from performing of that
great duty of charity and love. Verse 8. Teaches us, that godly admonition
brings not forth the like fruits and effects in all. Verse 9. Teaches us,
that the godly can always well away to be reproved and admonished. Verse. 10.
Teaches us the right and reverent fear of Gods Majesty, and also the true
feeling of the society and fellowship of the brethren. Verse 11. Teaches us,
that whosoever unfeignedly imbraceth Gods heavenly wisdom, shall have
abundance of graces bestowed upon him. Verse 12. Shows, that scorners and
scoffers shall not escape unpunished. Verse 13. Shows, that these are two
properties of a harlot, brauling, and ignorance. Verse 14. Teaches us, that
this is another note of a light person, gadding, and fisking abroad. Verse. 15.
Teaches us, that harlots are for the most part impudent and shameless. Verse
16. Teaches us, not to believe all words; for harlots many times will labor
to allure with the same words that holy wisdom does, and all to make her
persuasions more plausible. Verse 17. Teaches, that adultery is a notorious
kind of the every or robbing. Verse 18. Teaches, that how pleasant soever the
delights of sin be for a while, yet their end is sharp and miserable.

CHAP. 10.
Co.
Hitherto the holy Ghost was occupied, specially in the commendation of holy
wisdom, which chiefly respects our duties toward God: now having
dispatched and finished that point, he proceeds in this and the other
Chapters following, to speak both of the general and particular duties, that
in God and for God we owe one of us to another: and this he does not in any
curious method or order, no more than they do which take upon them in few
words to deliver rules of life, such as amongst the heathen were sundry, as
Cato, Isocrates, and others. And yet we will endeavor and assay to make as
apt, both connexions and divisions of the Chapters, as it shall please God to
give us grace.

Di.
TRue it is, that sundry and several instructions of doctrine are contained
in this Chapter, as also in the Chapters following, and therefore can hardly
admit any apt division: notwithstanding, I suppose it may well be divided into
three parts. In the first the holy Ghost speaks of wise and verse 1. to the
end of the 11. In the second, he entreats of hatred and love, verse 12. to
the end of the 21. In the third, he entreats of Gods favor, of fools verse
22. unto the end of the Chapter.

Se.
THis Chapter has as it were a title thus:] The Parables of Solomon. [see the
same words expounded before Chapter 1.1.] Verse. 1. A wise son [i. a good and
godly makes a glad father: [i. causes the father much to rejoice:
understanding by father, both the parents and kinsfolks, because he is chief:
see Chapter 15.20.] but a foolish son [i. a wicked and a lewd childe] is an
heaviness [vz. of heart and great griefe] to his mother. [i. to his parents,
etc. as before, one being put for many.] Verse. 2. The treasures of wickedness
[i. such treasures as wicked men Luke 16.9.] profit nothing: [vz. at all, that
is, can not stand him in stead against the evils which are ready to fall upon
him, and death that hangs presently over his head: see Psalm 49.6, 7, etc.
[but righteousness [i. upright and faithful dealing, yea, though a man have no
treasure at all] delivers from death. [i. overcomes all euilles and dangers
whatsoever, and causes that even death it self is not hurtful to the
righteous.] Verse. 3. The Lord [vz. who is faithful and just in all his
promises] will not famish [vz. through any want or neede] the soul of the
righteous: [i. the good man's life: see Psalm 34.10. Also Psalm 37.25. He
means, that howsoever they be afflicted on every side, yet shall they not be
distressed or destituted for ever: see 2. Cor. 4.8.] but he casts away [or
scatters, vz. as a thing of no account] the substance of the wicked. [i. all
that he has and possesses: and this he does, either by taking it utterly from
him, or denying him the use of it, though he have it in possession: or by
taking his blessing of strength and profit from him and it. Verse. 4. A
slothful hand the hand that is given to idleness and sloth, and will not
labor, understanding by one part all the rest that must concur in that
action of worke] makes poor: [vz. him that has it, or is the owner of it.
The word that is turned here slothful, signifies also deceitful: q.d. he
that is sluggish in doing of his duty, and thinks by craft to attain other
men's goods, shall surely come to beggerie] but the hand [i. the labor
performed with the hand and other parts and members of the bodie] of the
diligent [i. of such as diligently go about their own businesses, and abstain
from coveting, or crafty scraping together of other men's goods] makes rich.
[i. makes men rich, and that through Gods especial blessing, for otherwise it
is impossible to Psalm 127.2.] Verse. 5. He that gathers [vz. things meet
and necessary for his maintenance] in summer, [i. while time serves, and he
has a good season. See what is said before concerning the Pismire, Chapt.
6.8.] is the son of wisdom: [i. is a wise and good child, as he proves by
effect, while in his understanding and knowledge he takes heed before hand, to
keep him and his from shameful beggerie] but he that sleeps [i. he that is
sluggish and slow, and does no more than if he slept soundly: see Chapt.
6.10.] in harvest, [i. when he has fit and convenient time to do things well
in: Chapt. 6.8.] is the son of confusion. [i. is such a one as by his folly
brings shame of face upon himself, and all those that appertain Verse. 6.
Blessings [i. plentifulnes and abundance of all manner of blessings, which he
notes by speaking in the plural number] are upon the head of the righteous:
[i. are plentifully powered upon the righteous man himself, putting a part for
the whole, as Chap. 11.26. And yet because every good gift comes from above,
James 1.17. he does chiefly speak of the head, because it lights first upon
it, and so from it descends to the rest of the members: see Psalm 113.2.]
but iniquity [i. the sin which the wicked committed against God and men,
after that it is knowne] shall cover the mouths of the wicked. [i. shall so
stop and shut up their mouths, that they shall not only have nothing to say,
but shall be choked as it were with Verse. 7. The memorial [i. the remembrance
or thinking vpon] of the just [vz. whether he be alive or dead] shall be
blessed: [i. shall be esteemed as a sweet and pleasant thing, yea worthy
great praise] but the name of the wicked [i. all his glory, and whatsoever
seems excellent in him] shall rot. [vz. as a corrupt and vile thing: meaning
further, that ever before God and man, it shall be hated and lothed, even as
things that stink through rottennes and corruption.] Verse. 8. The wise in
heart [i. he that is truly and indeed wise, for many outwardly make a show
of wisdom and have it not within] will receive [vz. reverently and willingly,
carrying with him also a purpose to obey the same] commandments: [vz. either
from God and his word, or else from good men according to the same] but the
foolish in talk [i. he whose disorderous heart moves his lips to murmur
against good counsell] shall be beaten. [vz. Verse. 9. He that walks [i.
leads the course of his life] uprightly, [vz. toward God and man, having a
care that he stray not] walks boldly: [vz. because he is assured of Gods good
will toward him, walking faithfully in his calling] but he that peruerteth his
ways [vz. from the rules of righteousness and truth, which God has set him]
shall be known. [vz. at the last, how close or secret soever it be for a
time.] Verse. 10. He that wincketh with the eye, [i. he that secretly deuiseth
6.13.] works sorrow, [vz. both to others, and himself also in the ende] and
he that is foolish in talk, [i. such a one as never fears to utter his
wickednes] shall be beaten. [see verse 8. of this Chap. He compares the evil
which is done dissemblingly, and as it were with the wincking of the eye, with
that which is done openly, and with the manifest railing of the tongue.] Verse.
11. The mouth of a righteous man [i. the words which he utters and is a
welspring of life: [i. bring with them all manner of plenty and continuance of
good things] but iniquity covers the mouth of the wicked. see verse 6. of
this very chapter. Verse. 12. Hatred [vz. once conceived and stirs up [vz.
very forciblie and quicklie] contentions: [vz. both in word and deed amongst
men, and that many times for small causes or none at all: understanding also by
contentions, both backbitings, and quarrellous vpbraidings one of another with
the offenses and sins which they have committed, which is very far off from
the duty of humanity or charitie] but love [vz. if it be unfeigned, of one
of us toward another] covers [vz. from other men's sight, hearing and
knowledge] all trespasses. [vz. committed one of us against another. This
takes not away brotherly admonition, or the Church discipline, but speaks of
private injuries and offenses against our selves, which holy love does keep
close, if in a good faith and holy conscience they may be kept close,
dissembling them as it were, or else does in tender pity and compassion labor
the amendment of them: Leuit. 19.17.] Verse. 13. In the lips of him that has
understanding in the speech and words of a wise man: he puts one instrument
wherewith words be uttered for the words themselues] wisdom is found, [i. a
man shall easily epsy and perceive great wisedome] and a rod [i. punishment
and correction, even as it were with a rod] shall be [vz. sent from God, yea
and many times from men also] for the back of him [i. upon his back [that is
destitute of wisdom. [vz. and yet notwithstanding will speak hand ouerhead
whatsoever comes into his mouth.] Verse. 14. Wise men they that are indeed
truly wise] lay up knowledge: [vz. of good things, meaning by laying of it up,
hiding it as it were within themselves, as chap. 2.1. and Chapt. 7.1. Yet so,
that when need shall require, and occasion be offered, they may bring it
forth and use it: see Math. 12.35. Also Math 13.52.] but the mouth of a fool
[i. the words which a fool or wicked person utters with his mouth] is a
present destruction. [i. bring with them even destruction, not only to the
party uttering, but many times to some person hearing: q.d. the wicked man's
folly and want of knowledge is so great, that he can scarce begin to speak,
but he will utter words tending either to Verse. 15. The rich man's goods [i.
the land, money, and whatsoever else he hath] are his strong city: [i. are as
sure an aid and defense unto him, as he supposes, as if he were in a walled
towne] but the fear of the needy is their poverty. [i. their poverty makes
them to fear this and that, and least one inconvenience or other Verse. 16. The
labor of the righteous [i. those things which good people labor for and get
by their labor: see labor so used, Chapter 5.10.] tends to life: [i. to the
maintenance and upholding of his own life, and other men's too in this life,
see Ephesians. 4.28.] but the revenues of the wicked [i. all the increase how great
or little so ever it be that the wicked hath] to sin. [i. serves not for his
need, but for pleasure, and the satisfying of his wicked affections, one while
in oppression, another while in Verse. 17. He that regards [vz. diligently and
attentiuely] instruction, [vz. whether it be from God, or men as his means
and instruments] is in the way of life: [i. is entered into that course that
will bring him, not only to goodness in this life, but in the end to eternal
life also] but he that refuses correction, [vz. as though he were a
disobedient and rebellious child] goes out of the way. [vz. which leads to
true blessedness either Verse. 18. He that dissembleth hatred [i. the corrupt
affection of his heart] with lying lips, [i. with fained words, which indeed
are but lies, making as though he bare a man good will, whereas indeed he hates
him cruelly, and that unto death] and he that inuenteth slander, [i.
slanderous and false reports against another man] is a fool. [i. a very
wicked person. He notes here two kind of persons, which regard not
instruction, to wit, hypocrites, and obstinate fellows: see before verse 10.
of Verse. 19. Jn many words [vz. spoken rashly and vnaduisedly] there cannot
want iniquity: [i. it cannot be avoided, but that there is great sinne] but he
that refraineth his lips [vz. from rash and hasty speech, see Psalm 34.13.
is wise. [i. is truly wise indeed. He means that a wise man is spare in his
speech, and utters nothing rashly, but does before hand well ponder the
same: otherwise it is a hard matter, but that amongst such as rashly, and
without choice speak many things, there shall be much sin in their speeches.
Neither minds he here to condemn abundance of words Verse. 20. The tongue of
a just man [i. the words and speeches which he utters with his tongue, as
before verse 11. The mouth of a righteous man] is as fined silver: [i. is as
precious and excellent, as the most fine silver: see Chapter 8.19. Meaning by
this manner of speech, that they are most excellent and therefore to be
imbraced] but the heart of the wicked is little worth. [i. is worth little or
nothing at all. Now, if the heart, from whence the speech first comes be of
no regard, then much less to be esteemed are the words themselves: so that he
understands by heart, the words also, which do manifest the same, for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: see Math. 12.34.] Verse. 21. The
lips of the righteous [i. his good and holy words, as verse 13. of this
Chapter] do feed many, [vz. with good things, as with the gift of knowledge,
judgment, utterance and such like] but fools shall dye for want of wisdom.
[q.d. so far off is it, that they can feed many or any by their word and
speech, that for want of sound judgment and knowledge, they shall pull
destruction upon themselves.] Verse. 22. The blessing of the Lord, [vz. only, it
[vz. indeed and nothing but it] makes rich, [i. makes men rich, as verse 4.
of this Chapter. And how true this is, we have it daily confirmed by
experience, and find it written also Psalm 127.1, 2, etc.] and he does add
no sorrows with it. [i. God does most perfectly make men rich, and sets his
far off from al griefs, that the wicked have with their riches.] Verse. 23.
It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly: [i. he takes great delight but
wisdom is understanding to a man. [i. it brings him to great judgment and
understanding, both of Gods matters and men's.] Verse. 24. That [vz. evil which
the wicked fears, [vz. to be powered forth upon him] shall come upon him:
[vz. both suddenly and certainly: see Chapter 1.26, 27.] but God will grant
[vz. in great mercie] the desire of the righteous. [i. such good things as
godly men wish and pray for according to his will.] Verse. 25. As the whirle
wind passes, [vz. away, and that with great vehemency so is the wicked no
more: [vz. to be seen, but he passes from his place with as great swiftnes:
see Psalm 37.37. but the righteous is as an everlasting foundation. [i. shall
remain steadfast for ever and ever, as a foundation that cannot be removed.]
Verse. 26. As vinegar is [vz. to the teeth, [vz. of a man, because the power and
force of it, specially if it be taken in any great quantity, does dull the
teeth] and as smoke [vz. is hurtfull] to the eyes, [vz. of men, because it does
not only trouble them much many times, but also in some is a mean to draw
humors down too fast] so is the slothful [i. idle or negligent person] to
them that send him. [vz. about any affairs, either public or private. He
exhorts men from using heavy and sluggish persons, in performance of any
their businesses, because they can get nothing by such but trouble and grief.]
Verse. 27. The fear [i. an unfeigned reverence of God in men's hearts]
increases the days [vz. of man's life, he means by this speech, that it is a
mean to bring them with greater peace and prosperity to the years which they
should live by Gods appointment, or by their own nature, or by the
constitution of their bodies] but the years of the wicked [i. of their life]
shall be diminished. [vz. very much: And as David says in one of his Psalms,
the ungodly shall not live out half his days.] Verse. 28. The pacient abiding
[vz. for of the righteous [i. which the righteous have and vse] shall be
gladness: [i. shall certainly in the end be recompensed with abundance of
joy, for he speaks of the plural number: and this must be understood, not
only because they hope they shall enjoy gladness, but also because their hope
shall end in gladness, and they obtain that which they hoped for, and so be
made thoroughly glad] but the hope of the wicked [i. both the things which he
hoped for, and the hope he had to receive them] shall perish. [i. come to
naught, and so he shall be overwhelmed with sorrow, Verse. 29. The way of the
Lord [i. both the things which he commands, and the knowledge which good men
have of his providence and gouernment] is strength to the upright man: [i.
matter of great strength and boldness against all evil and sorrow whatsoeuer]
but fear [i. great sorrow and grief, and continual trembling] shall be for
the workers of iniquity. [or to them, when they shall look upon Gods ways
and government: see Hosea 14. verse. 9. And touching these words, workers of see
Psalm 6.8.] Verse. 30. The righteous shall never be removed: [vz. from the hope
and feeling of good things, even in this life] but the wicked shall not dwell
[vz. long] in the land. [vz. but shall shortly be rooted out of Verse. 31. The
mouth of the just shall be fruitful in wisdom: [i. he shall most pleasantly
and plentifully utter wise and holy things, even as fruit yields abundance,
whereupon words are called the fruits of the lips. Isaiah 57.19.] but the
tongue of the froward shall be cut out. [i. he that gives himself to speak
frowardly and peruersly, shall be deprived Verse. 32. The lips of the
righteous know what is acceptable: [i. they know and can speak those
things, which will procure favor, both before GOD and men] but the mouth of
the wicked speaks froward things. [i. the ungodly spare not to speak such
things as may displease both God and men.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches parents to rejoice in the gifts that God bestows upon
their children: and it teaches children to strive to obtain such things, that
they may indeed make glad their parents hearts. Verse. 2. Teaches men to take
heed how they get their goods: vz. that they do it vprightlie and not
deceitfullie. Verse. 3. Does comfortablie express the great care that God has
over his children, and his great judgments against the wicked. Verse. 4.
Teaches every man to walk faithfully and diligently in his calling avoiding
idleness. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to use the opportunities, that GOD in mercy
gives us, for the performance of any good thing. Verse. 6. Teaches, that God
indueth the godly with all manner of blessings, but utterly confounds the
wicked and ungodly. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that nothing that the wicked has,
is of any great continuance. Verse. 8. Teaches us two things: first patiently
to bear the words of admonition and reproof: secondly, to beware of rash and
hasty speech. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that there is no wickedness so secret, but
God will at some one time or other bring it to light. Verse. 10. Teaches us, to
beware of hypocrisy on the one side, and of open workings of evil on the
other side. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that a good man out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth good things. Verse. 12. Teaches us to fly hatred,
and earnestly to embrace sound and sincere love. Verse. 13. Teaches us, that
men's words are many times means to manifest either the wisdom or the folly
of him that speaks. Verse. 14. Teaches us, how dangerous and hurtful rash
and hasty speeches are. Verse. 15. Teaches us, that the wicked many times
repose trust and affiance in the multitude of their riches. Verse. 16. Shows,
both what contentednes the godly have, when it pleases God to bless their
labors, and how the wicked abuse even their riches, and all things they have,
to the increase of judgment against their own souls. Verse. 17. Teaches us,
how dangerous a thing it is to refuse good counsel. Verse. 18. Teaches us to
fly from dissimulation, lying and slandering. Verse. 19. Teaches us to shun
vain babbling, and multitude of words. Verse. 20. Teaches us, that the words of
such as are truly wise be very precious, but the imaginations and devises of
the ungodly are of no account. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that we ought to refer
our wisdom and knowledge to the good of others. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that it
is not man's wit or labor, but the blessing of the Lord only that makes men
rich. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that the wicked rejoice, and take pleasure in the
performance of their wickedness. Verse. 24. Teaches us, that the ungodly shall
have the self same punishments fall upon them that they fear: also that God
will graciously grant the requests of his servants. Verse. 25. Teaches us,
that the ungodly shall be destroyed, but the godly shall flourish continually.
Verse. 26. Teaches us, what hurt a sluggish person does, both to himself, and
them that employ him in any service. Verse. 27. Teaches us, that long years
shall be to the godly, but short and few days to the wicked. Verse. 28.
Teaches us, not only patiently to tarry the Lords leisure, but shows us,
that if we do so, we shall have a joyful issue and end thereof. Verse. 29.
Teaches us, that Gods providence is a great comfort to those that are his, and
his judgments terrible to the wicked. Verse. 30. Teaches us, what difference
there is between the estates of the good and the bad. Verse. 31. Teaches us,
that a godly wise man's words, tend both to his own commendation, and also to
the good and profit of others. Verse. 32. Shows, that it is a great grace to
speak in place and time convenient. Also it teaches, that the wicked give
their tongues liberty to utter whatsoever evil their froward hearts can
imagine.

CHAP. 11.
Co.
IN the other Chapter, specially in the last verse of it, he had taught men to
use good and gracious words, and to avoid all evil and corrupt speeches. Now
in this Chapter, and specially in the first verse of it, he teaches men to
look to their dealings and actions, and so proceeds on to other instructions.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 9. In the second, he entreats of the blessings
which come by good and wise governors, of the hurt that pride, slandering and
idleness yield, and by the contrary he shows, what inconveniences ensue for
want of good governors, etc. from verse. 10. 21. In the third, he deals
against foolish women, niggardlines, covetousness, trust in riches, contention,
and such like: and on the other side, commends liberality, care for obeying
of good things, and for winning of men to God, etc. And this reaches from
verse 22. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. FAlse balances [vz. used in buying and selling, he puts the
balance for all thereto appertaining] are an abomination unto the Lord: [i.
are such things as the Lord abhors and condemns by the Law: see Leuit.
19.35, 36. Deuter. 25.13, 14, 15, 16. And under this he condemns all
fraudulent dealing in buying and selling whatsoeuer] but a perfect weight [i.
an upright and just weight: In the Hebrew text it is stone, because they were
pleases him. [vz. greatly or much.] Verse. 2. When pride comes, [vz. upon
any man, i. when any man begins to wax proud against or above others] then
comes [vz. unto him] shame: [vz. amongst and before men. He means, that
contempt is the companion of pride: see Proverb. 16.18.] but with the lowly
[vz. in heart, as well as in outward shewe] is wisdom. [i. true wisdom,
which lowlines and wisdom joined together do truly exalt a man: see
Proverb. 15.33. Also 18.12.] The vprightnes of the just [i. their upright and
just dealings toward God and men] shall guide them: [vz. even whether they
would come, or else it shall keep them safe and sound for ever, and lead them
through out the whole course of their life, till they come to the haven of
safety here, and of heaven in the life to come, as may appear by the verses
following] but the frowardnes of the transgressors [i. of such as tra^sgresse
Gods law: meaning by perverseness or frowardnes, not only that which is in
themselves, but also that wherewith they do, either on the one side oppress
others, or on the other side pervert, or make them like naught unto themselues]
shall destroy. [i. shall be a forcible mean to pull upon them from God a just
destruction.] Verse. 4. Riches [vz. whether they be gotten justly or avail not
[vz. any whit at all] in the day of wrath: [i. at any time when God shows
himself angry: q.d. such as trust, when God lays any either public or
private calamity upon them, to be delivered through their riches, they are
much deceived: see Ezech. 7.16. Zepha. 1.18.] but righteousness delivers from
death. [i. the righteous are delivered either from bodily punishments in this
life, or else altogether from eternal death: see this expounded before, Chapt.
10.2.] Verse. 5. The righteousness the good conscience and faithful dealing] of
the upright [vz. in heart as well as in word, for both must concurre] shall
direct his way: [i. keeps him upright in this life, and orders the whole
course of the same, so that he has good success in all things, and falls
not, because he labors continually to follow Gods will] but the wicked
shall fall [vz. certainly and assuredly] in his own wickedness. [i. either as
he is walking in his own wicked and crooked ways, or else in that wickedness
that he has devised against others, he shall be snared: but I rather like of
the first sense.] Ver. 6. The righteousness of the just [see before verse 5. of
this Chapter] shall deliver them: [vz. from eternal death, and all hurtful
dangers in this life, as verse 4. of this Chapt.] but the transgressors [vz. of
Gods lawe] shall be taken [vz. certainly and sodainly] in their own wickedness.
[i. in that which they had devised against others, and indeed laid upon them:
see Psalm 7.15. or else expound it as verse 5. of this Chapter.] Verse. 7. When
a wicked man dies, here amongst men] his hope [i. both the hope he himself had
to oppress others, and the hope that other men had in him] perishes, [vz.
utterly, and comes to nothing] and the hope of the unjust shall perish. [q.d.
be assured of this, that his hope shall take no effect: and he repeateth the
thing for the more certainty of it: I know other men read it and expound it
otherwise, but me thinks this is plain.] Verse. 8. The righteous escapes
[vz. through out of trouble, [i. out of sundry and manifold troubles: see
Psalm 34.19.] and the wicked shall come in his stead. [vz. into affliction and
troubles: q.d. we do oftentimes see it fall out, that the wicked man comes
into the place of the righteous man being delivered from trouble, even as it
were a redemption for him.] Verse. 9. An [i. he that thinks one thing with his
heart, and speaks another thing with his mouth] with his mouth [i. with his
false and counterfeit words: mouth, put for words uttered with the mouth, as
sundry times before] hurts his neighbor: [vz. either while he brings men
to the state of dissimulation that he himself is in, or else, while he seems
friendly in words, yet in heart wishing him evil, he labors to destroy him
and his substance] but the righteous shall be delivered [vz. through Gods grace
and goodness, from such hypocrites and dissemblers] by knowledge. [vz. of their
falsehood and hypocrisy, and by a wise foresight shall deliver himself and
others from Verse. 10. In the prosperity of the righteous [i. when good men
prosper, flourish, and are exalted] the city [i. the people of the city, if
they be godly wise, and endued with understanding: and this must not only be
referred to cities, but to kingdoms, he putting a part of a kingdom for the
whole] rejoices, [vz. exceedingly, and as it were with singing and shouting;
for so much I suppose the Hebrew word and text will yeeld] and when the wicked
perish, [vz. from amongst men, meaning when they dye] there is joy. [vz. yea
great joy, amongst the people of the kingdom or city: they rejoice in the
one, because of the good they receive from them, and rejoice at the departure
of the other, because of the euilles they endured under them.] Ver. By the
blessing of the righteous, [i. by the good deeds and good words of godly men,
which are called blessings, because that by them God does after a sort power
blessings upon the people] the city is exalted: [vz. very much, that is, it
has a great name, and florisheth mightelie] but it is subverted [i. quite and
clean destroyed] by the mouth of the wicked. [i. by wicked words and counsels
that the ungodly utter and give, see verse 9. of this Chapter.] Verse. 12. He
that despises [vz. either in countenance, word, or deede] his neighbor, [i.
any man that is any manner of way joined unto him] is destitute of wisdom:
[i. bewraieth himself to be a very foolish man] but a man of understanding
[i. he that is truly wise indeede] will keep silence [i. will temper
himself, and abstain from showing contempt any manner of Verse. 13. He that
goes about as a slanderer, [vz. of other men. It seems to be a metaphore
taken from pedlers, who mingle sundry sorts of ware together, and go from
place to place to utter those things which they have received of others: so
slanderers tell that to one, which they have heard of another, and go hither
and thither to gather up tales to tell to other men, and yet many times tell
them otherwise than they heard them] discovers a secret: [which is a wicked
thing, specially if it be committed to a man: this gadding from place to place
with tales, is forbidden by God. Leuit. 19.16.] but he that is of a faithful
heart, [vz. toward God and his brethren] conceileth [i. keeps close] a
matter. [vz. committed Verse. 14 Where no counsel is, [i. In what place soever,
there is not holy and right counsel: for otherwise there is no state so
corrupt but has a counsel: whereby we see, that a wicked counsel is as no
counsel before God] the people fall: [vz. by sundry means into sundry
mischiefs, that cannot be auoyded] but where many counselors are, [i. where
there is store of grave, wise, and holy men, to give good counsel, and their
counsel be accepted and regarded] there is health. [vz. to the people and
subjects: meaning by health, all outward blessings, as prosperity, peace
abroad, quietness at home, and a great number of such like. The Rabbis refer
this to war; but I take it to be such a sentence as verse 11. of this Chapter
is, and to be general, stretching it self to the right government of
Magistrates, and their wholesome counsels.] Verse. 15. He shall be sore vexed,
[vz. amongst men, and even in himselfe] that is surety [vz. to another man]
for a stranger, [i. for one whom he knows not] and he that hates suretiship,
[vz. unless he have good cause to enter into the same] is sure. [vz. from
danger, grief and vexation. How this must be understood, see Chapt. 6. verse.
1, etc.] Verse. 16. A gracious woman such a one as is endued with a right
reverence of God, and decked with that hidden man of the heart, which
consists in a meek and quiet spirit, which spirit also is acceptable
before God, and obtains favor amongst men. 1. Pet. 3.4.] atteineth honor,
[vz. amongst men, by her good and virtuous demeanes, and so consequently praise
and commendation, as Pro. 31.30.] and and [I suppose this would rather be
turned as] the strong men [in Hebrew it is violent, meaning such as being
terrible, and fearful to others, get riches by all manner of means, whether
lawful or unlawful, it skilleth not] atteine riches. [vz. amongst men.] Verse.
17. He that is merciful [vz. rewards his own soul: [i. does good unto
himself, also as well as unto others; for so it pleases God to reward the
good works of his seruants] but he [vz. whosoever he be] that troubles [vz.
unjustly and without cause, by what means so ever it be, either in word or
deed] his own flesh, [i. his neighbor, or other men: as Isaiah 58.7.] is
cruel. [vz. not only to them, but even against himself also. Some read it
thus] but the cruel man [i. he that is hard hearted and cruelly bent against
others] troubles his own flesh, [i. hurts himself, while he casts from
him all laws of nature and courtesy. Indeed I confess that the Antithesis or
opposition of this verse, more plainly appears so, and yet I see no reason
why the other sense may not as well stand.] Verse. 18. The wicked works a
deceitful work: [vz. both to himself, and but he that sows righteousness,
[i. is plentiful in upright and well doing: see Galath. 6.7, 8, etc.] shall
receive [vz. from the Lord, yea and many times from men also] a sure reward.
[i. a reward that shall not deceive him, neither whereof he shall be deceived.]
Verse. 19. As [vz. both here and in the world to come: understanding by
righteousness the sound fruits of a holy conversation, both toward God and
men] so he that follows evil, [i. fostereth and feeds the same within him,
and seeks the performance therof] seeks his own death. [vz. both of body
and soul, without unfeigned repentance and amendment Verse. 20. They that are
of a froward heart, [vz. either against God or men: meaning such as are never
pleased with any thing] are abomination to the Lord: [i. are such as the Lord
abhors and cannot abide: see verse 1. of this Chapter] but they that are
upright in their way, [i. have care of a holy and just conversation toward
God and man: see Psalm 119.1.] are his [i. are such as he much delights in.]
Verse. 21. Though hand join in hand, [i. though the wicked endeavor by all the
strengthes, subtilties, and aids that they have or can procure] the wicked
shall not be unpunished: [q.d. for all that they cannot escape Gods
punishments: see Chapter 16.5.] but the seed of the righteous [i. even his
posteritie] shall escape. [vz. judgments and punishments sent from God, though
sometimes it pleases him to correct them to their amendment: q.d. not only
the godly, but their posterity shall be delivered; whereas the ungodly,
though he get many to take his part shall not escape, when as the godly shall
deliver both himself and others.] Verse. 22. As a jewel of gold [vz. is an
unseemly thing] in a swines snout, [vz. because the swine will defile it with
dirt and myre] so is a fair woman, [i. so is it unseemly for one to be endued
with beauty, which indeed is a good gift from God] which lacks discretion.
[vz. to govern her self modestly, soberlie, and in the fear of God: q.d.
beauty does as little become a Verse. 23. The desire of the righteous is only
good, [i. they desire nothing but that which is good, for that word only is an
exclusive particle, shutting out evil things. Not meaning, that they never
wish evil, but rather that for the most part they desire good] but the hope of
the wicked [i. the wicked may hope or look for nothing els] but indignation.
[i. vengeance from God, or else such things Verse. 24. There is [vz. a man,
putting it also for a certain number of men] that scatters, [i. liberally
bestows the goods and possessions, which God has blessed him with all: see
Psalm 112.9.] and is more increased: [vz. in riches and abundance, through the
special blessing of God, and the right use of these things] but he that
spares more [vz. either from himself or others, which is the common fault of
covetous persons and niggards] then is right, [i. than he may and ought to doo]
surely comes to poverty. [vz. notwithstanding all his pinching and sparing:
q.d. so far off is it, that the niggardly man shall increase and wax rich,
as the liberal does, that he shall have every day less Verse. 25. The liberal
person [vz. toward others, but specially toward the godly poore] shall have
plenty: [vz. given him from the Lord] and he that waters, [vz. others with
his store] shall also have rain. [vz. given him from the Lord, that he may
more and more do good unto others. The metaphores of watering, and having
rain, would be considered, and mark that this verse differs not much Verse.
26. He [vz. whosoever he be] that withdraws the corn, [vz. from the market,
where it should be sold, keep^^^ (...) against a dear time] the people will
curse him: [i. speak, as justly they have occasion, all manner of evil of
him, as that he is covetous, miserable, etc. see for this fault Amos 8.5, 6,
etc.] but blessing shall be upon the head of him [i. he himself shall be
blessed and well spoken of amongst men, whosoever he be, see Chapter 10.6.]
that sells corn. [vz. plentifully and good cheap, so that the poor may be
provided for: understanding by corn in this verse, all manner of vittaile and
provision.] Verse. 27. He that seeks [vz. carefully good things [vz. not only
for himself, but for other men also] gets favor: [vz. thereby, and that
both before God and men] but he that seeks evil, [vz. either against
himself or others, whether it be of ignorance or of knowledge, see verse 19.
of this Chapter, where he turns it by following euill] it shall come to him.
[vz. certainly and assuredly, and that many times before he think of it, or
be aware of it.] Verse. 28. He that trusts [vz. any whit at all, yea in his
riches, [i. in the riches which GOD has given him, or he has gotten] shall
fall: [vz. as a withered leaf, or rotten bow, falls from the tree: see the
truth of this Luke 12.15, 16, etc.] but the righteous shall flourish [vz.
exceedingly, or very much: meaning by flourishing, prospering] as a leaf. [vz.
which shall not fall or fade, as Psalm 1.3. The word turned here a leaf,
signifies also a branch, as Nehem. 8.15.] Verse. 29. He that troubles his own
house, [vz. by unwise government of the his own house, all the things that God
has blessed him withal, as patrimony, goods, etc.] shall inherit the wind,
[i. shall bring to pass, that his possession shall go into the wind as it
were, and he have nothing left him: q.d. he shall be brought to such
extremity, that he shall have nothing left him but the ayre] and the fool [i.
the wicked man brought into such want] shall be servant. [i. shall be glad to
be a seruant] to the wise in heart. [i. to him that is truly wise in God.]
Verse. 30. The fruit of the righteous [i. the commodities is as a tree of life,
[i. as a tree that gives life: see before Chapt. 3.18. He means, that the
righteous man is lively in his doctrines and precepts] and he that wins
souls, [i. gains and gets men to God, and brings them to the sound
knowledge and worship of his Majesty: see for this phrase James 5.20.] is
wise. [i. is right wise, or wise in God, using his knowledge and talent, not
only to his own good, but to the good of others.] Verse. 31. Behold, [q.d. I
speak a strange and wonderful thing, therefore mark it well] the righteous
shall be recompensed [vz. with judgments from God, for his transgressions] in
the earth: [i. while he lives here upon the earth] how much more then the
wicked and the sinner. [q.d. how much more shall they feel Gods heavy justice
upon them. By wicked and sinner he understands men notoriously evil, as
Psalm. 1.1, 6. And for the true meaning of this place see. 1. Peter 4.17, 18.
etc.

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches us to avoid falsehood, and to practice truth in all our
dealings. Verse. 2. teaches us to avoid pride, and to embrace true humility
of mind. Verse. 3. Teaches us, to follow upright dealing, and to shun all
perverseness, and frowardnes. Verse. 4. Teaches us, that riches, cannot put back
from us, Gods justice for our sins, and that we should carefully strive to
holy conversation. Verse. 5. Teaches us, that upright dealing shall never want
a blessing, and that the wicked, rather than he should not be punished, shall
be overtaken with his own sin. Verse 6. Delivers the self same doctrines.
Verse. 7. Shows that death sent from God shall prevent the wicked, from
enjoying those things they hoped for. Verse 8. Sets out Gods mercy toward
the good, and his justice upon the wicked. Verse. 9. Teaches us, to fly from
hypocrisy, and to avoid also all words that may hurt any. It teaches also
that the knowledge which God gives his children, is very profitable, both for
themselves and others. Verse. 10, 11. Teaches, that it is a great blessing from
the Lord to have godly and wise Magistrates: and that it is a curse, where the
Magistrates be wicked and foolish: also that the people may rejoice, as in the
prosperous estate of the good, so in the ruin and decay of the wicked. Verse.
12. Teaches us, to avoid all manner of contempt of others, and to learn holy
silence, unless great occasion be offered of speech. Verse. 13. Teaches us,
two things, first to avoid slaundering and the disclosing of secrets: secondly
to be faithful in such matters, as be committed to our credit. Verse. 14.
Teaches us, how necessary it is, for men admitted to government, to be
furnished, with wisdom, experience and many other good graces: as also what
good effects and holy blessings do flow and follow thereupon. Verse. 15.
Teaches us, to take heed and beware of suretiship. Verse. 16. Shows, that
modesty in women, is a notable mean to bring them to credit. Verse 17.
Teaches us, both to take heed of cruelty and hard heartednes, and also to
exercise the deeds of pity and mercy. Verse 18. Teaches us, what great
ods there is, both between the works, and therewardes, of the godly and
ungodly. Verse. 19. Sets out the unlikely reward of good and evil dealing.
Verse. 20. Teaches us, to avoid frowardnes of heart, and to labor to a sincere
life and conversation. Verse. 21. Teaches us, first that no strength and
policy, can prevent or drive away Gods vengeance that shall light upon the
wicked: also that God is gracious, to the faithful and their seed. Verse. 22.
Teaches, that outward proportion and comelines of body without holy qualities
of the mind, is not only nothing worth, but a great disgrace also, to the
party that has it. Verse. 23. Teaches us, to wish and desire good things
only. Verse. 24. Teaches us, to practice liberality, and to abhor
niggardlines. The same does also, verse. 25, 26. teach us, that if God have
blessed us with store we should provide, that other might be plenteously
relieved, and not couetouslie to hoord up against the day of dearth. Verse 27.
Teaches us, to procure good, both to our selves and others, as much as in us
lies. Verse. 28. Teaches us, to cast away from us, vain trust and confidence
in worldly riches. Verse. 29. Teaches us, for fear of after-claps to beware of
prodigality on the one side, and of miserable pinching on the other side.
Verse 30. Teaches us, to have a care, for the conversion and winning of others
to GOD. Verse 31. Teaches us, that abundance of plagues, shall fall even in
this life, upon the impenitent sinners.

CHAP. 12.
Co.
THis Chapter hangs upon the former thus; In the last verse of the other he
shows what great judgments from God are prepared for the wicked even in this
life, and in the first verse of this Chapter, he shows one good mean,
whereby those punishments may be avoided, to wit, in reverent hearing of holy
counsel, and in laboring to profit by the corrections, which God lays upon
men.

Di.
I Suppose this chapter, as the former may be divided into three parts: the
first reaches from verse 1. to the end of the 8. Wherein he entreats of
verse 9. to the end of the 16. wherein he deals against the vaineglorious,
the cruel, the idle, the proud, and the wrathful persons, commending on the
other side, the contented mind, pitifulnes of heart, diligence in labor, true
humility, and the brideling of hate or anger. The third reaches from verse.
17. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaks

Se.
Verse. 1. HE [vz. who soever he bee] that loves [vz. indeed and vnfeinedly]
instruction, [ vz. either from God by his word, or from men as his Ministers]
loves knowledge: [i. sound and fincere judgment: and the reason hereof is,
because that by instruction men come to knowledge: q.d. he that loves and
likes of a good mean whereby a good thing is obtained, does love and like of
the good thing it selfe] but he that hates correction [vz. either from God or
man] is a fool [i. a wicked person. He means, that the righteous, who
yields to the instructions and corrections of the Lord, does not only
thankfully receive the same, but is provoked thereby, more and more to grow up
in heavenly Psalm. 94.12.] Verse. 2. A good man [i. he that has care and
conscience, both to know, and to perform good things] gets favor of the
Lord [i. is accepted and well liked of the Lord: and yet he makes mention of
getting, because we must by prayer and other holy means seek it, though we
know it is by God special gift, that so we may be provoked to pray, and
exercise our faythe] but the man of wicked imaginations [i. he who thinks
nothing else but evil against other, yea and himself also in the will he
condemn. [i. the Lord will pronounce him guilty of wickednes] Verse. 3. A man
cannot be established [vz. long to continue upon the earth] by wickedness [i. by
devising and performing evil things: q.d. let the wicked think by their
wickedness to make their state strong, yet is it a matter impossible, that they
should long continue and endure,] but the root of the righteous [i. the
righteous himself and all things whatsoever appertayning to him] shall not
be moved. [vz. for ever: it seems to be the same in other words which is
expressed before chap. 10.25. And he makes mention of the root, because if
the root be sound and prosper, the body and branches Verse. 4. A virtuous
woman [vz. such a one, as is described afterward in this book. chap. 31.10,
11. etc.] is the crown of her husband [i. is a great glory, honor, and credit
unto him: see Philip. 4.1. 1. Thessal. 2.19. also 1. Corinthians. 11.7.] but she
that makes him ashamed [vz. by her evil manners, folly, or wicked life,
meaning also, by making him ashamed, bringing of him into contempt amongst men]
is as corruptions in his bones [i. as grievous and paynefull unto him, and
almost as incurable, as grievous diseases, that have not only eaten the flesh,
but entered Verse. 5. The thoughts of the just are right [i. they think upon
just, right, and holy things] but the counsels of the wicked [i. their
conspiracies, and practises] are deceitful [i. full of craft and subtlety:
he opposes to the godly, the wicked, and to their thoughts, the subtilties
and crafts Verse. 6. The talking of the wicked [i. all their words and speech is
to lie in wait for blood [i. tends all to this end, to spoil men and to
take their lives from them:] but the mouth of the righteous [i. good men's words
and speeches: see chap. 10.31.] will deliver [vz. from danger and them. [i.
those, for whose life, the wicked lie in wait.] Verse. 7. God overthrows the
wicked [vz. through his just judgment against them for their sins: or it may
be turned thus,] the wicked overthrow themselves [vz. through their own
vngodlines] and they are not: [vz. to be found amongst men alive, but dye and
decay: see Ierem. 31.15. and Matthew. 2.18.] but the house of the righteous [i.
he and all whatsoever apperteyneth unto him] shall stand. [vz. firm and sure
and not be shaken: see chap. 10.25. 11.21.] Verse. 8. A man [vz. of what state
or condition so ever he be] shall be commended [vz. amongst men] for his
wisdom: [i. for his wise, and sincere handling of matters: it may be
understood also, as though he should be commended, according to the measure
and proportion that he has received of it] but the froward of heart [i. he
that does things rashly and frowardly] shall be despised. [vz. both of God and
men.] Verse. 9. He that is [vz. of other men] and is his own servant, [q.d. and
yet notwithstanding, is sufficient of himself, doing his own business,
wheresoever it be] is better [i. is in a better case, and that by many degrees]
than he that boasts himself [vz. of his great honor, riches, etc.] and
lacks bread. [i. suffers want, and has little or nothing to mainteyne
himself with all. For bread here is put for all manner of mayntenance.] Verse.
10. A righteous [i. a good and faithful dealing person] regards the life of
his beast, [i. has a good eye to preserve it, meaning by this speech that he
is merciful, if to beasts, much more to men: q.d. he is so gentle and
courteous, that he neglects not his own cattle, but gives them their meat,
attendance, and all other things necessary in due time, how much more then does
he care for his household and needy persons] but the mercies of the wicked [vz.
if he have any at all, which also may be doubted of] are cruel [i. tend even
to cruelty, and have cruelty mingled with them. Some read it thus,] but the
mercies of the wicked, are the mercies of a cruel man [i. they have no more
mercies, then a cruel and outrageous person has.] Verse. 11. He that [i. is
faithful and paynefull in his calling, for he puts one sort, vz.
husbandry for all] shallbe satisfied with bread [i. shall not only have
sufficient maintenance, but fulness of it, he uses the word bread, for meat,
drink, cloth, and all things necessary, for the maintenance of man's life,]
but he that follows [vz. as an example in his dealings and behauior, and
trade of life] the idle [i. idle headed fellows, and such as giving themselves
to vanity, would not follow any honest trade, or occupation. The same word,
is turned Judges 9.4. vain.One refers it rather to the things than to the
persons, and indeed I suppose the Antithesis or comparison would better stand
so] is destitute of understanding [i. of right understanding, how wise so ever
he seem notwithstanding in his own eyes.] Verse. 12. The wicked desires, [vz.
very greatly and earnestlie] the net of evils [i. all manner of means,
whereby he may cast others into many evils and mischiefs, and so hurt and
grieve them. Some turn it thus] the net of evil [vz. men: q.d. he wishes to
use the same deceites to oppress good and innocent people with all, that the
wicked use. Some turn it thus] the wicked desires the aid of evils [i. aid
and defense against them: q.d. he has an earnest desire to be established and
defended from all evils, but his desire is in vain, as verse. 3. of this chap.
and this I rather like of] but the root of the righteous [see before verse. 3.
of this chap.] gives fruit. [I would rather read gives it, [vz. defense
against evil and mischief.] Verse. 13. The evil man [vz. fast, and caught
very sure] by the wickedness of his lips, [i. by his wicked words uttered
with his lips: q.d. the naughty man, by his own lewd words, brings all
manner of grief and destruction upon himselfe] but the just shall come out of
adversity [vz. by the wisdom of his words and speech, he shall escape great
affliction, and manifold dangers, meaning, that either by the wise weighing of
his words, he takes heed of distress, or if he fall into any trouble, does
thereby deliver himself from the Verse. 14. A man [i. a good and wise man]
shall be satiate with good things [i. shall obtain plenty and abundance of
good things] by the fruit of his mouth, [i. by the good, wise, and holy words
which he utters with his mouth, as thanks giving is called the fruit of the
lips, Heb. 13.15: q.d. every good man shall receive most large and excellent
fruit of his speech, when he shall speak learned, right, and holy things] and
the recompense of a man's hands, shall God give unto him [i. God will recompense
him, meaning every man according to the works done in this flesh: and so in
this part of Verse. 15. The way of a fool [i. the trade of life and
conversation which he affects, yea whatsoever thing he likes, understanding
by fool, a perverse wicked man] is right in his own eyes: [i. seems so to
be in his own judgment, how crooked and froward soever it be before God and
good men] but he that hears counsel [i. good and holy counsel, meaning also
by hearing of it, practicing and obeying of it] is wise. [vz. in deed: q.d.
whatsoever a fool does, he does it without advise or counsel of other men,
why so? Because he is carried away, with an ouerweeuing of his own devises,
whereas the wise man uses other men's counsels, Verse. 16. A fool in a day [i.
very quickly and soon, yea even in that day and at that present, wherein he
shall be provoked to wrath, shall be known to be a fool, because he cannot
suppress his raging wrath] shall be known by his anger: [vz. against others:
q.d. he cannot put off or defer his wrath, but by and by manifests it, and so
withal bewrays his folly] but he that covers shame [vz. offered unto him,
by some injury or outrage: he means not here to allow of hypocrisy and
dissimulation, but that whosoever he is, which can patiently put up wrongs,
offered or done him, and stirs up no brawles or contentions, but rather will
suffer than revenge, or declare his rage and fury unto men, (which thing also
after a sort, might purchase shame to himself) he I say, that is wise [vz.
indeed, or truly wise.] Verse 17. He that speaks [vz. from his heart, and
that plainly and openly] truth, [i. true things] will show righteousness: [i.
will not be either afraid or ashamed to declare too, and before others his
upright dealing] but a false witness uses deceit. [i. all manner of deceit both
in heart and word, that he may the more Verse. 18. There is [vz. a man, meaning
thereby great numbers in the world: see Chapt. 11.24. Also Chapt. 13.7.] that
speaks words like the pricking of a sword: [I would rather turn it,] like
the persings or thrustings in, or through with a sword, [that is, that speaks
such sharp, bitter, and pernicious words, which pearce a man as much as
grievous thrusts with a swords point, whether it be by false witness bearing, or
otherwise by the evil speech and deadly poison of the tongue] but the tongue
[i. the words and speeches, because they are uttered by the tongue] of wise men
[i. of men which are truly wise indeede] is health. [i. healthful and
profitable both to themselves and others.] Verse. 19. The lip of truth [i.
not shall be stable for ever: [i. shall not only last and continue, but be
always like unto themselves, not varying in tales or speaches] but a lying
tongue [i. lies and lyers] varieth incontinently. [i. are not only variable in
the matters they deal withal, but vanish away quickly, because they are of
no longer continuance but a moment.] Verse. 20. Deceit is in the heart of them
that imagine [vz. against others, meaning that they perform their mischiefs
against others by craft and deceit: but I rather allow his reading who turns
it thus] deceit falls into the heart of such as imagine evil: [i. the wicked
are many times destroyed by their own subtlety and craft, the consideration
whereof brings unto them most grievous sadnes] but to the counselors of
peace [i. to such as shall persuade and counsel men to good things] shall be
joy. [vz. both of heart and body, and so the Antithesis agrees very aptly.]
Verse. 21. There shall none iniquity [i. no grievous punishment for come [vz.
from the Lord] to the just: [i. to the good and holy man: q.d. whatsoever
judgments fall upon him for sin, he shall not live long in the same, as
though he were an abject: see verse. 13. of this Chap. but the wicked are full
of evil. [vz. both of transgression, and of punishment for it, committed
against God.] Verse. 22. The lying lips [i. both lies and are abomination to
the Lord: [i. the Lord cannot abide them: see Chapter 6.17. Also Chapter 11.1.]
but they that deal truly [vz. both in word and deede] are his delight. [i.
are such as he takes delight and pleasure in: see Chapt. 11.20.] Verse. 23. A
wise man conceileth knowledge: [i. the but the heart of the fools publishes
foolishnes. [i. as they have conceived foolishnes in their hearts, so they
spare not shamelessly as it were to utter it: see Eccles. 10.3.] Verse. 24. The
[i. such as be laborious and painful in their callings: he puts a part for
the whole] shall bear rule: [vz. over others, Chapter 10. verse 4. He says,
makes rich: and here he uses another word, because that through riches they
obtain power, and so get rule over others] but the idle shall be under
tribute. [vz. of others, meaning hereby that they shall be in slavery and very
poor estate.] Verse. 25. Heaviness [vz. of heart, specially in the heart of man
[vz. of what calling or state soever he bee] does bring it down: [i. does
through sorrow depresse and keep it under, meaning the heart: for we know
that sadness does no whit at all profit men, but rather cast them many times
into deadly and grievous diseases] but a good word [i. even one word of
comfort spoken chearefully] rejoices it. [i. many times makes it glad again:
the Verse. 26. The righteous is more excellent [vz. by many degrees, and in
every respect] than his neighbor: [vz. who cares not for righteousness and
goodness: and this he speaks, because the world and common sort of people
think the just men to be abiects] but the way of the wicked [i. the order of
life and conversation wherein they walke] will deceive them. [vz. at the last,
howsoever they flourish in the pleasures of sin, which last but a while, as
the Apostle says to Verse. 27. The deceitful man [i. he that gives himself
to deceit] rosteth not [i. has neither pleasure nor profit of that] that he
took in hunting: [i. of that which he achieved, either by intolerable pains
taking, as hunters do, or else by stealth and indirect means, such as hunters
use many times: the reason is, because that between his mouth and the morsel
he has many discommodities and lets, so that he cannot inioye that which he
has gotten] but the riches of the diligent man [i. of him that trauaileth
faithfully and painfully] are precious. [i. excellent and very good. One
reads it thus] but the diligent person enjoys the precious substance of a
man. [i. is made owner and possessor of precious and excellent things,
belonging Verse. 28. Life [vz. both true life in this world, and eternal life
in the world to come] is in the way of righteousness, [i. is to be found and
obtained by a righteous and holy conuersation] and in that pathway [vz. of a
good and holy life] there is no death. [vz. which is eternal, though the
bodily death apprehend the good as well as the bad, as appears by many
examples.

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches us, that he that harkeneth to good counsel, and profits
by the Lords corrections, is in a blessed estate: as on the other side, he must
needs be miserable that thriueth not by the one or the other. Verse. 2.
Teaches us, that God loves the good and hates the evil, also that evil
thoughts and imaginations are sin before God. Verse 3. Teaches us, that
wickedness has no certainty or assurance, but that godliness shall continue and
abide for ever and ever. Verse 4. Teaches us, what a blessing it is to have a
good wife, and what a curse it is to have an ill wife. Verse 5. Shows, what
great difference there is between the thoughts of the wicked, and the devises
of the godly. Verse. 6. Shows, that the very words of the wicked savor of
cruelty, and the speeches of the godly tend to mercy. Verse. 7. Sets out
Gods judgments against the wicked, and his mercy toward the good. Verse 8.
Teaches us, that wisdom is praise worthy, and folly and frowardnes shall
be despised. Verse 9. Teaches us, that the poor man in his poverty is
better, than the vainglorious boaster that has nothing. Verse 10. Teaches us,
that we should have care for the preservation of those things which God gives
us, much more for reasonable creatures: it teaches us also that the wicked
have no bowelles of compassion at all. Verse 11. Teaches us, to follow the
calling wherein God has placed us with all diligence, and to avoid idleness.
Verse 12. Teaches us, that no aid that the wicked has or can desire will
help them against Gods judgments. Verse 13. Teaches us, that evil words are
hurtful to the party using them, and good words profitable to the party
using them, and to others also. Verse 14. Teaches us, that God rendereth unto
every one according to his words and deeds. Verse. 15. Teaches us, not to be
wise in our own eyes: also to hearken to the grave counsel of others. Verse.
16. Teaches us, that wrath and rage of men bewraieth their folly, and pacient
bearing of revenge argues great godliness. Verse 17. Teaches us to speak
truth, and to avoid false witness bearing. Verse 18. Teaches us to abstain
from sharp and bitter words, and to give our selves to charitable and
profitable speeches. Verse 19. Teaches us, that as godly men are constant in
their speeches, so the wicked, and such as give themselves to lying, vary
always in their talk. Verse 20. Teaches us, to persuade and counsel men to
good things. Verse 21. Teaches us, that in the midst of all punishments upon
the wicked, God will either fatherly correct, or else altogether deliver his
children. Verse. 22. Teaches us to abhor lying, and to speak the truth from
the bottom of our hearts. Verse. 23. Teaches us, to take heed that we do not
bewray the folly of our hearts by much babbling: also that we direct our
speech in such sort to such persons, and at such time, as may bring most grace
to the hearers. Verse 24. Teaches to use diligence in our callings, and to
avoid idleness. Verse. 25. Teaches us, to speak good and comfortable words to
the heavy hearted and sorrowful. Verse 26. Teaches us, that the godly are
better, than the wicked of the world account of them: also that sin is
deceitful. Verse 27. Teaches us, that the wicked, through Gods just judgment
upon them, have not the use of those things which they enjoy and possess.
Verse 28. Teaches us to follow the way of godliness, because it does not only
deliver us from eternal death, but bring us to everlasting life.

CHAP. 13.
Co.
IN the 28. verse of the last Chapter, he earnestly commended a holy
conversation. And in the first verse of this Chapter, he shows by what means
this may be attained, vz. by diligence both in hearing and obeying of all holy
instructions.

Di.
THe Chapter may be divided into three parts: the first reaches from verse 1.
to the end of the 8. wherein he teaches the right use of the ears and mouth,
commends diligence and dispraiseth idleness, and speaks against lying,
slaundering, hypocrisy, and other manner of wickednesses. In verse 9. to the
end of the 16. In the third part he deals against unfaithful messengers,
contempt of instruction, wicked company, etc. and commends faithfulness,
obedience, choice of company, Gods favor toward his children, and the good
which comes by moderate correction: from verse 17. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. A Wise son [i. child, whether it be son or daughter] will obey
[vz. in deed and truth] the instruction of his father: [i. which his father
shall give him: understanding by the name father, parents, as by the name son
before, child] but a scorner [i. such a one as does despise the doctrines of
wisedome] will hear no rebuke. [vz. from other men for his amendment: meaning
by hearing, regarding: for this word scorner, see Chapt. 9. A man [i. a good
and wise man] shall eat good things [i. shall find and enjoy them] by the
fruit of his mouth: [i. by his good and wise words: see Chapt. 12.14.] but the
soul of the trespassers [i. the trespassers themselves both in body and
soul: and yet he makes mention of the soul, because it is the principal
part] shall suffer violence. [vz. from God, and many Genes. 6.11.] Verse. 3. He
that keeps his mouth, [vz. from idle or evil speech: meaning hereby, such a
one as has a care, not in words to pass the bounds of his calling, or
godlines] keeps his life: [vz. in peace, quietness and prosperitie] but he
that opens his lips, [vz. to lewd and wicked speeches: in the word opening
is a metaphore taken from harlots, as appears Ezech. 16.25.] destruction
shall be to him. [i. he shall be Verse. 4. The sluggard lusts, [i. he has a
desire or wishing only, and nothing els] but his soul [i. he himselfe] has
naught [vz. besides his bare wishes: q.d. the slothful desire many things, and
feed themselves with bare wishes, but in the mean while, because they labor
not, they obtain nothing of the things which they desire] but the soul of the
diligent [i. the diligent and laborious person himself] shall have plenty.
[vz. of all good things, yea more many times than they wish or 11.25. Verse. 5.
A righteous man hates [vz. vnfeignedlie, and even as it were a filthy and
stinking thing] lying words: [i. lies, and all things thereto appertaining] but
the wicked causes slander and shame. [vz. to himself and others by his lying
speeches: meaning also, that he does so much love and embrace falsehood, that he
will be contented to be counted a filthy person, and hated of all good men,
rather than depart from it.] Verse. 6. Righteousness [i. faithful and holy
dealing] preserves [vz. before the upright of life: [i. such as lead an
upright and blessed life] but wickedness [vz. against God and men] overthrows
[vz. through Gods just iudgement] the sinner. [i. the notorious evil men: see
Chapt. 1.10.] Verse. 7. There is [vz. a man, that is sundry men: see Chap.
12.18.] that makes himself rich, [vz. by his boasting words, and so would be
accounted by the pomp he bears amongst men] and has nothing: [q.d. and yet
for all that, he is worth little or nothing] and [vz. there is another man, or
another sort of people] that makes himself poor, [i. would seem so to be
before men] having [vz. notwithstanding that] great riches. [i. great abundance
of riches. Most interpreters agree, that the first part of the sentence is
spoken against vaineglorious boasters, amongst whom little or nothing is to be
had: and the latter to be understood of such as have contented minds: the
former I like well, but the latter I like not, because the comparison is not so
fit, and therefore I would have it to be understood as before, vz. of feigning
poverty, when they have great abundance.] Verse. 8. A [i. every man that has
wit and vnderstanding] will give [vz. frankly and freelie] his riches [i. all
the riches that he hath] for the ransom of his life: [i. for the redemption of
it, or to redeem it, if he be in danger to lose it: see Psalm 48.7, 8.] but
the poor [vz. man] cannot hear [vz. as to redress it] the reproach. [vz.
uttered against him. His meaning, I think, comes to this much in effect,
that riches and poverty have both their commodities and their discommodities:
for as to rich men their riches are profitable for the maintenance and pomp of
this life, and poverty is discommodious to the poor; so riches are sundry
times discommodious to the rich, because they procure many dangers to the
owners thereof, and yet poverty is commodious at the least in this respect,
because men's hearts are free from the fear of envious persons, who would
ensnare them, and they have not so ready an occasion to revenge themselves as
otherwise.] Verse. 9. The light of [i. the great blessings and good things which
in great plenty shall be powered forth upon them. It is usual in the
Scripture, by light to understand all good and prosperous things: and I take it
to be a metaphorical speech borrowed from the light of the Sun, which first
rising, and afterward increasing in brightness, seems it self to rejoice,
whilst lightening all things, and even the whole face of the earth it makes
them glad] rejoices: [i. makes glad both themselves, and other that behold
it: q.d. the righteous shall continually enjoy felicity, glory, life,
gladness, etc. see Psalm 97.11.] but the candle of the wicked shall be put out.
[i. that little estate of felicity and prosperity which they seem to have in
this life, shall suddenly vanish away: q.d. there is as great difference
between the joys of the good and the bad, both in respect of the greatness and
continuance thereof, as is between the Sun and a candle, and their several
lights and continuance: 4.18, 19.] Verse. 10. Only by pride [i. through pride of
heart: meaning under the word only, that pride is not the only cause of
contention, but one of the chiefest: for many times men braule even of
perverseness and of fond emulation and envy against other] does man [i. do men,
for he speaks of them all, as though they were but one] make contention: [i.
stir up strife one of them with another] but with the well advised [i. with
such as both can give good counsel, and will humbly hearken to other men's
good speaches] is wisdom. [vz. to take heed that they kindle not strife, or
foster Verse. 11. The riches of vanity [i. after some, vain riches, which are
so called, because they vanish away; but I suppose that he means such riches
as are gotten by any vain, false, or ungodly way whatsoeuer] shall diminish:
[vz. certainly, meaning that indeed they should be brought to nothing and
consumed] but he that gathers [vz. riches and goods] with the hand, [i. with
the labor of his own hands] shall increase them. [vz. through Gods especial
blessing, for otherwise it cannot be: see Chapt. 10.2, 4. Also Chapt. 12.24.
His purpose is to commend diligence, Verse. 12. The hope that is deferred, [i.
the thing hoped for, if it be put off from time to time, and not quickly
performed] is the fainting of the heart: [i. it makes a man's mind to faint
and quaile] but when the desire [i. the thing desired, wished, and looked for]
comes [vz. unto men, i. is granted them] it is as a tree of life. [i. it is a
most sweet and pleasant thing, and as a man would say, a very proper and
healthful medicine for a mind that languisheth in lusting 3.18.] Verse. 13. He
that despises the word, [vz. of almighty God, or the good word of exhortation
drawn from the same] he shall be destroyed: [vz. certainly, and assuredly,
through the just judgment and vengeance of GOD upon him] but he that fears
the commandment, [vz. of GOD, understanding by fear, an humble reverence and
love, and by one commandment all commandments of God whatsoever, yea even the
whole lawe] he shall be rewarded. [vz. from the Lord: neither can the Papists
gather, neither need any man fear out of this, merits; because there is a
great difference betwixt desert, and Verse. 14. The instruction of a wise man
[i. such holy and wise instructions as he giueth] is as the welspring of life
[i. is not only plentiful of good things but also brings with it, both to
himself, and those whom he instructs life in this life, and afterward
eternal life: see chap. 10. verse. 11.] to turn away [vz. men: q.d. it serves
also to this end, for this is added, for the more plain and full declaration
of the matter] from the snares of death [i. from such snares, as if men be
caught therewith, kill them: he means specially sins, which bring with them
eternal death.] Verse. Good understanding [vz. of such things as God has
manifested unto us in his word, understanding also hereby good wit, holy
wisdom, and the gift wisely and learnedly to utter good things] makes [vz.
men that have it] acceptable [vz. both before God and men: see chap. 3.4.] but
the way of the disobedient [i. their order of life, and course of conuersation]
is hated. [vz. both of God, and also of good men.] Verse. 16. Every wise man
[i. every one that will work [vz. the things that he doth] by knowledge [i.
sound and right knowledge: q.d. whatsoever he does, he will do it with
wisdom and judgment, and not rashly] but a fool will spread abroad [i.
bewray and publish] folly [i. his own folly: see chap. 12.23.] Verse. 17. A
wicked messenger an unfaithful one, and such a one as does not truly execute
his message or charge] falls [vz. many times through Gods just judgments,
and that or ever he thinks of it] into evil: [i. into affliction, sorrow,
grief, and punishment, and so hurting himself also, smarteth justly, for his
vnfaithfulnes] but a faithful Ambassador [i. he that faithfully performs
his charge] is preservation [vz. to himself, to him or them that send him, and
to those also, for whose cause he is sent.] Verse. 18. Poverty and shame [vz.
is to him [vz. whosoever he bee] that refuses instruction: [vz. of goodness:
q.d. he that will not regard good and holy counsel, shall fall into beggary,
and be made a shame amongst men] but he that regards correction [vz. to
follow it, and to become the better by it] shall be honored [i. he shall
flourish with riches and honor, and be accepted both of God and men.] Verse. 19.
A desire [i. the thing desired, as 12. of this chap.] accomplished [vz. by
good and holy means, for here he speaks of the desiring of good things, and
the lawful accomplishment thereof] delights [vz. very greatly] the soul:
[i. the party wishing or desiring the same: one part put for the whole, and
yet he does not without cause make mention of the soul, because in it is the
quality or faculty of desiring] but it is an abomination unto fools [i. a
loathsome and tedious thing, yea such a matter as their affection does utterly
abhorre] to depart from evil, [i. from that evil whereunto they are
naturally given, and which they foster and feed in themselves, through a vain
pleasure and delight in the same.] Verse. 20. He that walks with the wise: [i.
is conversant and shall be wise [i. through Gods blessing shall become wise by
means of wise speeches and talks, that shall pass from them] but a companion
of fools [i. he that joins himself in society and fellowship with the
wicked] shall be afflicted. [vz. even as they themselves, either because he
commits sin with them, or consents to evil: as Romans 1.13.] Verse. 21.
Affliction [i. punishment and vengeance follows [vz. even as the shadow does
the body, meaning also, that it does even pursue them so egerly, that it
leaves them not, till they be utterly destroyed] sinners [i. perverse and
obstinate sinners: see chap. 11.31.] but unto the righteous, God will
recompense [vz. of his large liberality and goodnes] good, [i. all good things
for this life, and the life to come.] Verse. 22. The good man shall give [i.
leave behind him] inheritance [i. goods and lands to be inherited] unto his
Childrens Childerne [i. unto his posterity for many generations: see Psalm.
128.6. he means, that the Lord will in mercy show such favor to good men,
that not only they themselves shall enjoy their lands and living, but even
their issue after them, unto many generations.] and the riches of the sinner
[i. the goods and lands that he possesseth] is laid up [vz. safe and sure] for
the just. [vz. that they may possess and enjoy them. He means that neither
the wicked themselves, nor their ungodly seed and posterity after them shall
enjoy them, but the good shall have them. How true this is, see Job. 27.16, 17.
see also Ester. Much food [i. much grain and corn meet for food: so is the
word taken Genesis 42.2.] is in the field [vz. that is well tilled and manured,
though perhapes the soil it self be somewhat barren] of the poor: [i. of that
man, who though he be poor, yet notwithstanding is diligent in his labour] but
the field is destroyed without descretion. [he means, that the corn in the
field, can come to little or no profit, where there is not good husbandry, and
good government. One reads it thus:] But there is [vz. a man] who consumes
himself [i. both himself and all that he hath] through sluggishnes [or else
unskillfulness, for the word imports both, and is set here against the
knowledge and diligence of the poor laboring man: q.d. by idleness and want of
skill he comes to nothing, and is utterly consumed.] Ver. 24. He that
spares [i. withholdeth from the correction and chastising of his child,] his
rod, [i. the rod of correction, which God has committed into his hands]
hates his son: [i. his child, as ver. 1. of this chap. meaning that he is
even as though he did hate him, because that not correcting him, he is a cause,
that he falls into evil, by means whereof, he does at the length, pull upon
him his own destruction] but he that loves him, [vz. unfeignedly, and with the
love of a godly father] chasteneth him [vz. measurablye: and according to the
offense committed] betime. [i. in good season, and while that he is tender and
young, least growing in years, he grow in strength and courage, and so either
little regard, or utterly refuse, all fatherly correction.] Verse. 25. The
righteous eats, [vz. of the gifts and blessings which God has bestowed upon
him,] to the contentation of his mind: [i. to the satisfying of himself, for
he notes under that word, not only contentednes, but abundance also] but the
belly of the wicked [i. the wicked himself, a part for the whole, putting
also belly, for the stomach, wherein rests appetite] shall want [vz. many
times great store of Gods blessings: he means that good men, have always
sufficient and abundance, but the wicked never: see Psalm. 34.10. also Psalm
37.16.

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches children their duty, vz. to obey the good instructions of
their parents: it teaches us also, to beware of scorning, and of contempt of
admonition. Verse. 2. Teaches us, that the good words of good men are
profitable both to themselves and others: also that the wicked shall not escape
judgment. Verse. 3. Teaches us, to be wary and circumspect in our words, and
to avoid babbling and much speech. Verse. 4. Teaches us, to avoid sluggishnes,
and to be painful and faithful in our callings. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to
abhor lying. Verse. 6. Sets out the unlikely reward of righteousness and
wickedness. Verse. 7. Teaches to beware, as of vain boasting on the one side,
so of counterfeiting poverty on the other side. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that
riches and poverty have either of them, their profit, and their disprofits.
Verse. 9. Teaches us, Gods favor toward the good, and his judgments upon the
wicked. Verse. 10. Teaches us, that pride is the mother of strife: but they
that are humble, will yield to good counsel and peace. Verse. 11. Teaches us,
that evil gotten goods shall come to nothing: also that diligence and labor is
a mean to get and increase riches. Verse. 12. Teaches us, to do good quickly
and in good season, least otherwise the gift either come too late, or be not so
acceptable. Verse. 13. Teaches us, that the contempt of Gods word, shall never
escape unpunished. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that good counsel is a good mean,
to make men to avoid the snares of sin. Verse. 15. Teaches us, that Gods
gifts in any must be reverenced, and sin and iniquity abhorred. Verse. 16.
Teaches us, to do all things according to judgment and discretion: and to
take heed, that either by word or deed we bewray not the folly of our hearts.
Verse. 17. Teaches us, to deal faithfully in the charges wherein we are
placed, both that we may thereby avoid evil and also procure good unto our
selves and others. Verse. 18. Teaches us, that contempt of good counsel is a
mean of beggary and shame: as on the other side obedience to good speeches, is
the high way to honor and estimation before GOD and men. Verse. 19. Teaches us,
that we may rejoice, when lawful and holy things are done for us; also that it
is a very hard matter, to draw the ungodly from sin. Verse. 20. Teaches us,
to make choice of our company, cleaving to such as are good, and flying from
the evil. Verse. 21. Sets out, the unlikely reward of the good and the bad
from God. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that good men through Gods blessing, leave
their goods and lands to their posterity, even many ages together one after
another: also that God in his justice does many times deprive the wicked of
their wealth, and gives it to the good. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that labor is a
mean to make men rich: also that for want of labor and good government, many
things are consumed. Verse. 24. Teaches parents, to correct their children, but
yet so, that they do it in measure, and in such sort, and at such a time, as
it may do the parties corrected most good, not only for the time present, but
also for the time to come. Verse. 25. Sets out Gods favor toward the good,
and his justice toward the wicked and ungodly.

CHAPT. 14.
Co.
IN the latter end of the other chapter, he had spoken of Parents and children,
and now he begins this chapter, with a t^eatie of women, passing on from
thence, to describe general duties, appertayning to all states, ages, and
sexes whatsoever.

Di.
verse. 1. to the end of the 9. In the second he entreats of the heart or
conscience, of the wicked and the Godly, of an upright way, of heaviness of
heart, of a wicked heart, of easines to believe every tale, and of the foolish
and the wise man: from verse. 10. to the end of the 18. In the verse. 19. to the
end of the 27. In the verse. 28. to the end of the chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. A Wise woman [i. every woman that is truly wise, fearing God, and
regarding their household affairs in holiness and modesty,] builds her house
[vz. not so much with outward furniture and show, as while that by her labor,
and the right government of her household, she does by all means keep,
defend, and increase the same] but the foolish [vz. woman, who is set against
the wise woman mentioned before] destroys it [i. her house and familie] with
her own hands [i. whilst that vnheedely, by her naughty deeds, negligence,
and evil government, she suffers Verse. 2. He that walks in his
righteousness, [i. leads an upright life void of hypocrisy: and it is called
his righteousness, not because he has it of himself but because God in great
mercy has communicated the same unto him] fears the Lord [vz. vnfeinedly]
but he that is leaude in his ways, [i. leads a leaud and lose life]
despises him [i. offers as much as in him lies despite and contempt against
the Lord, because he despises his law: q.d. by the order of a man's life,
even as it were by certain fruits, may a man be known, whether he be godly
or wicked.] Verse. 3. In the mouth of the foolish [i. in wicked men's words
uttered with is the rod of pride: [i. is there great and wonderful pride,
wherewith in the height of his mind, he does not only strike sometimes and
hurt other men, but gives other men standing by and hearing, staves, and
clubbs as it were, to strike himself,] but the lips of the wise [i. words
uttered with their lips, as sundry times before] preserve [vz. from hurt and
danger,] them [i. both the wise themselves, and others that depend upon them:
the reason is, because they observe a measure, and wisdom in their speeches,
that they neither hurt themselves nor others: see chap. 12.6.] Verse. 4. Where
none Oxen are, [vz. such as can work and go to plowe, being there the crib is
empty: [i. there is nothing, no not for the beasts to eat, much less is
there any thing in the barnes or storehouses: for under one he understands
all the rest] but much increase comes [vz. to the good husbandman,] by the
strength of the Ox, [vz. that laboreth in tillage, meaning thereby, all
husbandry and tillage, with all things thereto appertaining whatsoever.] Verse.
5. A faithful witness, [i. a faithful man being called forth to witness
any will not lie: [vz. for any cause whether it be for favor, fear, flattery,
or otherwise,] but a false record [vz. against men] will speak lies. [vz. for
every cause and in every place: meaning that he that has falsified his
faith in public justice, will not spare to strain it in private speeches: see
chap. 6.19.] Verse. 6. A scorner [i. he that scoffeth and scorneth at all good
things, 1.22.] seeks [i. makes as though he would seek for, or else indeed
seeks for it, but not to a right end] wisdom, [i. Gods heavenly wisdome]
and finds it not: [q.d. for all that he finds it not: the reason is
because he seeks it not as he should, that is diligently and earnestly, and
to a right end, that is Gods glory, and the comfort of his children,] but
knowledge [vz. of God and his mysteries] is easy to him that will understand
[i. that has a mind, and labors to atteyne it: and he says it is easy,
meaning to be found, because she offers her self unto all: as chap. 1.20.
And Chapter 8.1.] Verse. 7. Depart [vz. quickly and with hast] from the foolish
[i. from the wicked man, that has his heart seized and possessed, with all
manner of folly and euill] When thou perceauest not in him [i. so soon, as
thou find that he has not] the lips of knowledge. [i. words that savor of
sound knowledge, judgment and wisdom.] Verse. 8. The wisdom [i. the
wisdom, that he hath] is [i. consists specially in this] to understand [i.
to have a diligent and watchful eye to] his way: [i. his whole life, and the
course thereof whether he imploye it, in words, deeds, or both: q.d. this is
his duty, and herein his wisdom appears, diligently and with judgment to
weigh whatsoever he attempteth, avoiding always rashness,] but the foolishnes
of the fools is deceit [i. tends wholly and altogether to deceit: q.d. the
fools in their folly, regard this thing specially to Verse. 9. The fool [i.
all foolish and wicked persons, as appears because the word is of the plural
number in the Hebrewe text] makes a mock of sin, [i. makes no more account
of it, than of a matter of sport or play: see Chapter 10.23.] but among the
righteous there is favor. [i. unfeigned good will one of them toward another.
Some reads it far otherwise, and makes another sense of it, which also I
rather allow of, thus] Sin [vz. which the wicked and ungodly men commit, and
they know one by another,] makes fools to agree [vz. one of them with
another: q.d. their partaking in wickedness, joins the wickeds minds one of
them toward another,] but among the righteous: [i. the good and holy people]
that which is acceptable [vz. before God and good men,] makes agreement, [vz.
among themselves: q.d. good things only tie good men's Verse. 10. The heart [vz.
onely] knows [vz. perfectly and thorowly] the bitterness of his soul, [i. the
heaviness and grief that the soul indureth] and the stranger [i. whatsoever is
without] shall not meddle with his joy. [i. with the joy of the heart or
soul. For the inward joy which we have in the heart, none knows so well as
we our selves, neither are we able by any outward signs to express the
greatness of the inward joy. In the mean while we learn, not to give our
selves too much over to sadness or Ver. 11. The house of the wicked [i. he, and
all that he hath] shall be destroyed: [vz. through Gods just iudgement] but the
tabernacle of the righteous [i. he himself, and all that appertains to him]
shall flourish. [vz. through the favor and goodness of God: against a large and
fair house in outward show, he Verse. 12 There is a way [i. there is an order
and course of life] which seems right to a man: [vz. in his own iudgement]
but the issues [vz. or ends] thereof [i. of that way] are the ways of death.
[i. lead the high and ready way to death and destruction: because we are
easily deceived with the show of right, he counsels us not to stand to our
own imaginations, but to try both our manners and opinions by Verse. 13. Even
in laughing [i. while men laugh] the heart is sorrowful, [i. their hearts are
possessed with great sorrow, though many times they would cover the same, and
shake it off with laughter] and the end of that mirth [vz. which is made so
from the teeth outward] is heaviness. [i. great and much sorrow, specially of
heart: q.d. It falls out many times, that while a man laugheth, and labors
either to ease or shake off the grief of his heart, that he returns
notwithstanding to sorrow and heaviness.] Verse. 14. The heart [i. the man
himself, and yet he speaks of the heart, because there is the fountain and
beginning of euill] that declineth [i. turns aside, either to the right hand
or to the left, from the law and word of God] shall be saciate with his own
ways: [i. shall walk so long in the wickedness that his own heart has
devised, that he shall be filled as it were with wickedness, and at the length
be overtaken with Gods judgments for the same: see Chapter 1.31.] but a good
man shall depart [vz. quickly, and with as much speed as he may for fear of
afterclappes] from him. [vz. that starteth a side from the obedience of Gods
commandments.] Verse. 15. The foolish will believe [vz. very easily, and
without any great perswasion] every thing: [vz. which is told them] but the
prudent will consider [vz. deeply and earnestlie] his steps. [i. the ways
wherein he shall walk, and the things which he shall do: q.d. he will do
nothing rashly, but diligently will examine and weigh whether he ought to
believe or do it: see before verse. 8. of this Chapter.] Verse. 16. A wise man
[i. a godly wise man] fears, [vz. and departs from evil: [i. sin and
transgression, which is a mean to draw both temporal and eternal
punishments upon us,] but a fool [i. a wicked man] rages, [vz. very sore,
both against God and men] and is careless. [vz. of that which is to come: q.d.
he boldly runs headlong into rage, and in his fury desperately commits
all manner of evils whatsoever, for he fears not Gods judgment, or any
punishments to come, and therefore casts himself headlong into the same.]
Verse. 17. He that is hasty to anger, [i. he that has no stay of himself, but
suffers commits folly, [i. not only bewraieth the foolishnes of his
heart, but is making post have to great and grievous sinnes] and a busy body
[vz. such a one as is a continual medler in other men's causes and affaires] is
hated. [i. purchases hatred to himself, both from God and man. The word which
is here turned busy body, is in Hebrew, the man of imaginations, which phrase
sundry men take diversely: some in evil part, as though he should mean such
a one, as is not hasty to wrath, but thinks long upon the mischief he will
do, and so he should compare two contrary vices: the one is headlongnesse to
anger: and the other is, malice long meditated and thought upon. Other some
take it in the good part, meaning by a man of thoughts, a man circumspect and
wary in his words and deeds, and then it is read thus: He that is hasty to
anger commits folly, [yea he is hateful to a circumspect or wise man: and
this I take to be the best, the holy Ghost minding to note the discommodities,
that hastines to wrath brings with it.] Verse. 18. The foolish do inherit [he
means not only that folly is borne with them, and is as it were their
inheritance, but also, that in process of time, they do receive the fruit of
their folly also,] but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. [hee means
that knowledge which they have to perform good things by, is as it were a
crown upon their heads, and that they shall in the end receive also, a most
glorious fruit of the same.] Verse. 19. The wicked shall bow, in token of
reverence and submission] before the good, [i. such as God makes good:] and
the wicked [vz. shall stand waiting through need of one thing or other,] at the
gates of the righteous. [i. before their doors. Thus it pleases the Lord, to
make things some times fall out in this life, for the Verse. 20. The poor [i.
he that comes by any means into pouertie] is hated, [i. lothed, and
despised,] even of his own neighbor, [i. even of him that in all reason and
duty, should most tender and pity his case:] but the friends of the rich are
many, [i. such as have riches and store have abundance of friends, for the
Verse. 21. The sinner [i. the notorious wicked man: as sundry times before]
despises his neighbor: [vz. because he is poore] but he that has mercy
upon the poor [i. pittieth them, and provides for them. Psalm. 41.1.] is
blessed [vz. of God, or else by blessed, he means, is praised and commended
amongst men. Some read it thus.] This sinner [vz. which hates the poor man,
and esteems the rich] shall be despised of his neighbor: [vz. for that his
sin: q.d. God will bring this judgment upon him, that he which despises
others, shall of others be despised himselfe] but, O blessed is he [q.d.
certainly of what state or condition so ever he be, he is blessed] that
shows favor [vz. either in countenance, word, or to the poor [i. to them
that are in need.] Verse. 22. Do not they err [vz. from the right way, which
God has prescribed unto them] that imagine evil [vz. against others. This
demanding notes a more certain and assured affirming of the matter: q.d.
without doubt they go astray, and therefore must of necessity miserably
perish,] but to them that think [vz. earnestly and deepely] on good things,
[vz. toward God and man] to do the same,] shall be mercy and truth: [vz.
from the Lord bestowed upon them, yea and men also shall deal mercifully and
truly with them: q.d. God will faithfully perform his promises, in the
accomplishment whereof, is manifested both his mercy and truth, and he will
move men also in truth Verse. 23. In all labor, [vz. which a man takes upon
him, in his ordinary calling, understanding by labor, diligent and faithful
employing of a man's self in his own function] there is abundance, [vz. of
good things and blessings, meaning that he which gives himself painefully to
follow labor in his calling, shall thrive and prosper,] but the talk of the
lips, [i. bare and vain words, as when a man will labor with his tongue, and
let the rest of his members be idle,] brings only want: [i. brings
nothing with it but poverty: that word only I would refer, rather to the first
words, reading it thus, but the talk of the lips only, [q.d. where there is
no more but labor in the mouth, and no performance of Ve. 24. The crown of the
wise is their riches [i. the riches which wise men through Gods goodness
possess, and have them annexed unto their wisdom, they are a singular
ornament unto them: this word crown, is sundry times so used before] and the
folly of fools is foolishnes, [q d. though fools have never so great riches
they avail them nothing, to remove their folly, but their folly is mere folly
notwithstanding all that, yea they are so far of from adorning them, that
they rather serve to stayne them, because they are instruments and arguments,
to cause them more and more to bewray their folly.] Verse. 25. A faithful
witness [i. he that being called to witness a matter, speaks faithfully and
truely] delivers [vz. from danger and distresse] souls: [i. men, or persons:
see Exodus 1.5. meaning such as were ready to be destroyed and were oppressed
through evil reports] but a deceiuer, [i. a deceitful and false witnes]
speaks lies: [vz. against men, by which he indeuoreth to bring men to death
and destruction: he sets deceit against truth, and speaks of lies against
deliverance, because that lies many times bring men to great danger and
destruction.] Verse. 26. In the fear of the Lord is an assured [i. he that
has a right and reverent fear of Gods Majesty planted in his heart, need
not fear any thing, for the Lord will be an assured strength and defense unto
him] and his children, [i. Gods children, whom he has in Christ begotten unto
himself, by the incorruptible seed of his word, that they might walk in his
reverence and fear: for I had rather refer it unto them, than to the
posterity and children of good people, (though I know that sense also may
stand) because good fathers many times, have evil children,] shall have hope.
[i. an assured hope in the Lord, which shall not make them ashamed, as Roman.
5.5.] Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord the right and reverent fear of his
Majesty, planted in men's hearts] is as a wel-spring of life, [i. blessedness in
this life, and eternal life in the world to come, does abundantly proceed
from it: see Proverb. 13.14. also chap. 10.11.] to avoid [i. to teach men to
avoid and shunne] the snares of death: [i. such snares, as in which if men be
caught and escape not from them, there is no way, but death both of body and
soul: see chap. 13, 14.] Verse. 28. In the multitude of the people, is the
honor of a king [i. it is a great honor and credit for a king, to have many
people willingly subject unto him, and ready to perform his will: and
therefore for the increase of the same he ought to use equity and clemency,
and not tyrranie and cruelty to lessen them,] and for the want of people
comes the destruction of the Prince. [vz. because his countries and
territories, are easily subdued to the power of his enemies, because he has
not forces sufficient wherewithal to resist and so are the borders of his
government diminished. Verse. 29. He that is slow to [vz. against other men,
laboring to master the rage of his affections: see James 1.19.] is of great
wisdom: [i. declares thereby, that God has blessed him with abundance of
wisdom, while he can refrain his rage, and do nothing rashly] but he that
is of an hasty mind: [vz. against others, meaning such a one as is furious,
and soon stirred up:] exalts folly, [i. does openly commit it, as though
he would lift it up that all men might see it: see verse. 17. of this chap.]
Verse. 30. A sound heart [i. a heart free from is the life of the flesh: [i.
brings health and soundnes to the whole man that has it: he puts a part
for the whole] but envy [vz. once conceived in the heart against other men] is
the rotting of the bones: [i. will quickly consume a man, and bring him to his
end, as the diseases, which lie in the boanes, and eat them up: see chap.
12.4. q.d. he that is of a courteous, gentle, and free heart, shall have a
sound body, and pass away his days in quietness rejoicing other men also: but
the trouble which envy brings with it, leaves not the strongest parts of
the body sound, but infecteth and corrupts them, and makes the whole man,
in all men's judgment filthy, Verse. 31. He [vz. of what state or calling so
ever he bee] that oppresses [vz. by fraud, force, slander, or other wise,
for the word is general, and reaches to any kind of oppression,] the poor,
[i. the needy, and he that is not able to make his part good against him]
reprooueth, [vz. by his wicked and lewd dealing,] him that made him: [i. God,
who appointed that he should be poor, and this he speaks, because the
wicked man thinks, that God either cannot, or will not deliver him out of his
hands: it may be taken also thus, that whosoever releeueth not the poor,
despises God: [see Matt. 25.35. etc.] but he honoreth him: [i. the Lord, and
why does he honor him? Because he does a work appointed by God in his lawe]
that has mercy on the poor. [i. shows him pity and compassion: 21. of
this Chap.] Verse. 32. The wicked shall be cast away [vz. from the Lord, and
from the enjoying of his gracious presence, which the godly always behold] for
his malice: [1. for the evil and naughtines which he has committed against
God and man,] but the righteous has hope [vz. of Gods favor and goodness
toward him, and of his own deliuerance] in his death, [i. either when he
dies, or else is set in most grievous distresses, the greatest whereof is
death: q d. though he should dye, yet he would not doubt of Gods goodness
toward him. Psalm 23.4. for even death it self Verse. 33. Wisdom [i. holy
and heavenly wisdom from God,] rests [vz. as it were in his own house or
dwelling place] in the heart [i. in the soul and minde] of him that has
understanding: [i. of all that delight in wisdom and understanding,] and is
known [i. wisdom is made manifest] in the midst of fools [i. openly and in
their sight, so that they can pretend no ignorance. A worthy man reads this
latter part by reason of some supply of words, far better in my judgment
thus,] but the foolishnes which is in the foolish: [i. their own folly and
want of wit] offers it self to be known. [i. it cannot long be dissembled,
for they will presently manifest, and bewray the same: see Chap. 12.23. Chap.
13.16. and 29. of this Chap.] Verse. 34. Justice, [i. the execution of justice
uprightly, without any favor, fear, or hatred] exalts a nation: [i. makes
it famous, not only for the time present, but also establishes the same in
lastingnes for the time to come: see Chap. 16.12.] but sin [vz. either
against GOD or man] is a shame to the people: [i. is an effectual instrument,
Verse. 35. The pleasure of a king is [i. every good and wise king, takes great
pleasure and delight] in a wise servant: [i. a heedie, circumspect, and
diligent officer] but his wrath [i. the Kings great displeasure] shall be
toward him [i. shall justly fall upon him] that is lewd. [vz. in his dealing
and behavior, by which he works shame, and discredit to his Prince: and
indeed so much does the Hebrew text yield.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, what great difference there is between a godly wise
woman, and a foolish wicked woman. Verse. 2. Teaches us, to have care and
conscience of a holy life before men: also, that we cannot offer greater
contempt against God, than to follow a lewd and profane life. Verse. 3.
Teaches us, the discommoditie of rash and foolish speeches: also what benefit
comes by wise words. Verse. 4. Contains a singular commendation of
husbandry, and painful labor in several callings. Verse. 5. Sets out the
great difference between a lying and a false witness. Verse. 6. Teaches us,
that Gods holy wisdom cannot dwell in a scorning or scoffing spirit: also
that Gods word and will, through the light that he gives us, is easy, though
the Papists, by accusing it of hardness, would fear men from it. Verse. 7.
Teaches us, to shun the company of the wicked and ungodly, after we have
had trial of them. Verse. 8. Shows, that holy wisdom teaches men which
embrace her, to direct their whole conversation. Verse. 9. Teaches us, in what
little account ungodly men have sin and wickedness. Verse. 10. Teaches us,
not to give ourselves too much to mirth or joy, but to keep a good measure
and proportion therein. Verse. 11. Sets out the unlikely reward of the good
and the bad. Verse. 12. Teaches us, not to follow whatsoever seems good in
our own eyes, but always, and in all things to ask counsel of the Lord in
his word: it is also a strong place to overthrow good intents. Verse. 13.
Teaches us, to avoid hypocrisy, both in our mirth and sadness, and to be
that indeed which we would seem to be. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that the
sin and disobedience of the wicked, shall never escape unpunished. Verse. 15.
Teaches us, first not to be too light to believe every report that is brought
us: secondly, deeply and duly to consider all our thoughts, words and
deeds. Verse. 16. Teaches us, that a reverent fear of Gods Majesty in good
men's hearts, is a notable mean to make them to avoid sin: also it does
lively paint out the nature of the desperate transgressors. Verse. 17. Teaches
us, to withstand the vnbridlednes of our own affections, and to beware of
being over busy in other men's affairs. Verse. 18. Teaches us, that knowledge
is a mean of great credit and estimation, even before men. Verse. 19. Teaches
us, that God many times in this life, for the manifestation of his mercy and
justice, exalts his own children, and casts down the wicked. Verse. 20.
Does lively paint out the nature of the world, which does easily despise poor
men, though never so good, and readily embrace wealthy men, though never so
bad. Verse. 21. Teaches us, not to despise any, but even for our own good to
show pity and compassion to all. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that evil thoughts
are sin before God: also that the Lord will be merciful toward his own.
Verse. 23. Teaches us, faithfully and painfully to labor in our callings: and
to take heed that we labor not with the lips only, and give the other
parts of our bodies to idleness. Verse. 24. Teaches us, that every thing to the
godly is a credit and glory, whereas all things to the wicked tend to their
shame. Verse. 25. Teaches us, in matters of controversy to speak the truth,
and to abhor all lies. Verse. 26. Shows us, what a sure staff to stay upon
they have that do rightly fear the Lord. Verse. 27. Teaches us, what
commodities come by the reverent fear of GOD planted in our hearts. Verse. 28.
Teaches Kings as to use all holy means whereby to increase their people: so
to take heed, that they trust not in them at any hand. Verse. 29. Teaches us,
to be slow to wrath, and to beware of hastines of heart or word. Verse. 30.
Teaches us, lovingly to do whatsoever we do, and to fly from envy and
hatred. Verse. 31. Teaches us, that oppression of the poor is a grievous
offense against God. Verse. 32. Propounds the miserable end of the wicked, and
the joyful end of the godly. Verse. 33. Shows, that the heart is indeed the
seat of wisdom. Verse. 34. Shows, what good comes by justice, and what
hurt by injustice, and that not only to the parties executing the same, but
also to their people and subjects. Verse. 35. Teaches us, that wisdom is a
mean to make men delight in us.

CHAP. 15.
Co.
IN the last verse of the other Chapter he showed, that frowardnes and ill
demeanor was a mean to provoke wrath against us: and now in the first verse
of this Chapter he shows us how we may quench it, if it be once kindled,
and so proceeds in instructing men, to have an eye to their speeches and
words.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 11. In the verse 12. to the end of the 22. In the
third, he speaks of good words, of the way of life, of proud persons, and of
the widow of wicked men's thoughts, of gain and gifts, of babbling, of Gods
favor upon the good, and his punishment upon the wicked, of receiving and
refusing good counsel, and of the fear of the Lord, from verse 23. to the end
of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. A Soft answer [i. gentle, quiet, and meek words] puts away wrath:
[vz. of another man, either conceived or expressed against us: see Chapt.
25.15.] but grievous words [i. words that work grief in the party against
whom we speake] stir up anger. [vz. against us: and here he teaches what
things follow men's speech; to wit, peace follows upon quiet words, and
trouble upon bitter and hasty speeches.] Verse. 2. The tongue of the wise [i.
the wise man himself: a part for the whole, and yet he names the tongue,
because wisdom and knowledge is expressed therewith] uses knowledge aright:
[i. does aptly and profitably, and seasonably utter it, and makes it more
acceptable, using it in time and place] but the mouth of fools [i. fools
themselves: and yet he names the mouth, because they do especially by that
means bewray it] bableth out [vz. rashly, and without any regard] foolishnes.
[i. their own folly: see verse 28. of this Chapter. In this verse he teaches
men to frame their speeches with knowledge, or according to knowledge.] Verse.
3. The eyes of the Lord [i. his certain in every place [vz. wheresoever it be]
behold [vz. plainly and manifestly, for nothing can be hid from his sight:
Hebrew. 4.13.] the evil [vz. men] and the good. [vz. men, meaning also every
word and deed that comes from them: q.d. seeing the Lord looks upon you,
look that your words be uttered in the reverence and fear of his Majesty.]
Verse. 4. A [i. a tongue that speaks wholesome and profitable things, and
utters whatsoever it utters in wisdom and knowledge, with equity and
vprightnes, and that to other men's profite] is as a tree of life: [i. brings
both to himself speaking, and to others that hear him, life: for this phrase
see before Chapt. 3.18. Also Chapt. 13.12.] but the frowardnes thereof [i. of
the tongue: of which see James 3. almost throughout: meaning by frowardnes, the
froward things also uttered thereby] is the breaking of the mind. [i. is great
grief and sorrow unto the heart. One reads it thus, and better in my mind:]
but the frowardnes which comes by it, is as a breach made by the wind.
[meaning of the Eastern wind, which is most vehement and forcible: q.d. He
that is of a perverse and froward speech, shall fall into most grievous hurt
and danger, and shall pull upon himself most sudden and violent calamities.]
Verse. 5. A fool [i. a wicked and ungodly child] despises [i. little or no
whit at all regardeth] his fathers instruction: [i. the instruction and
counsel that his father and parents give him: q.d. he is foolish whatsoever he
be that regards not his parents advise or good counsell] but he that
regards [vz. rightly and reuerently] correction, [vz. in words or deeds,
from whom soever it come] is prudent. [i. is rightly wise, or wise indeed.]
Verse. 6. The house of the righteous has much treasure: [i. the righteous man's
house is well stored and filled with good things, meaning also thereby, that he
has both the use and possession of them] but in the revenues of the wicked [i.
in that which the wicked have, how much or little soever it be] is trouble. [i.
great and exceeding trouble: vz. for the keeping of it, if it be Verse. 7. The
lips of the wise [i. their words uttered with their lips, or you may take
it simply: because the lips are the instruments of speach] do spread abroad
knowledge: [vz. wheresoever they can, or do come, for they have a desire to
make men partakers of their gifts] but the heart of the foolish does not so
[vz. because it is void of knowledge and judgment, and so cannot utter
wisdom, 13.16.] Verse. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked [i. which they themselves
bring, or offer unto the Lord, understanding by sacrifice, all ceremonies and
outward things whatsoever, though they were done never so solemnly and
sumptuously in Gods service: and against these he sets the bare and simple
prayer of the righteous onely] is abomination to the Lord: [i. he lotheth and
abhors it: see Chapt. 11.1. all sacrifices are rejected, where godliness is
not annexed] but the prayer of the righteous [i. such supplications as proceed
from his heart] is acceptable unto him. [i. unto the Lord, but that is in the
only mediation of Christ, for otherwise Verse. 9. The way of the wicked [i. his
order and course of life] is an abomination to the Lord: [see verse 8. of this
Chapter: he means that the Lord abhors whatsoever comes from the wicked,
either in thought, word or deed, because it all tends to the evil and hurt
of others] but he loves [vz. with an unfeigned and perpetual loue] him [vz.
whosoever he be] that follows [vz. earnestly and egerlie, see Psalm 34.14.]
righteousness. [i. holy life and good dealing.] Verse. 10. Instruction [vz.
given by any] is evil [i. it seems so to be in his judgment, upon whom it
is bestowed, or else he means, that it is unprofitable, for evil is not put
here, as directly contrary unto GOD, because instruction is always good] to
him that forsakes the way, [vz. which GOD has prescribed in his word] and he
that hates [i. cannot away withal or abide, but abhors as an evil thing]
correction, [see verse 5. of this Chap. shall dye. [vz. certainly and
suddenly, or else eternally, for it may be taken Verse. 11. Hell and
destruction are before the Lord: [i. there is nothing so deep or secret, but
the Lord does most thoroughly know it: see verse 3. of this Chapter] how much
more [vz. easily and plainly does he knowe] the hearts of the sons of men?
[i. whatsoever men and their whole posterity can imagine, think, or devise:
and in this respect is it that God is so often called in the Scripture the
knower of the heart, and the searcher Ascorner [i. he that not only refuses,
but scoffeth at counsel and admonition: see Chapt. 1.22. Also Chapt. 3.34.]
loves not him [vz. any whit at all, but hates him rather] that rebukes him,
[vz. justly or wisely for his evil and naughtines] neither will he go unto the
wise. [i. he will not keep company with them, because he knows they will
reprove him: q.d. The scorner hates both the doctrine of God, and those that
should teach him also, and that even for the doctrines sake.] Verse. 13. A
joyful heart [i. a glad and merry minde] makes a cheerful [i. makes the
whole man merry; and yet he speaks of the countenance, because that is one
of the means whereby the mirth of the mind and heart is manifested; for there
can hardly be a merry countenance where there is a heavy heart, unless that
should fall out which was said before: Chapter 14.13.] but by the sorrow of
the heart [i. by means of that grief and sorrow, which seaseth and possesses
many times a man's heart] the mind [vz. of a man] is heavy. [i. is made or
become heavy and sad: some read, and the Hebrew text also seems to import
so much] the spirit is broken [i. the man sigheth often, and draws his breath
very hard: q.d. his life is almost at an end.] Verse. 14. The heart of him [i.
he himself, a part for heart, because if the heart or mind be not set upon
it, we shall hardly obtain it] that has understanding, [i. that through Gods
goodness has obtained some measure of it] seeks [vz. carefully and
diligently] knowledge: [i. increase of knowledge: q.d. he has care to be
every day more skillful than other] but the mouth of the fool [i. the fool
himself: and yet because meat is first received into the mouth before it go
into the stomach, and so become nutritive, he makes mention of it] is fed
[vz. continually, meaning that the fool takes as great delight in the same,
as in all manner of dainties] with foolishnes. [i. with his own folly, and
other men's also, who frame themselves to his humor.] Verse. 15. All [vz. of the
life of a man, from the time his affliction and grief begins, till it have
an end] of the afflicted [i. of any which is afflicted and troubled in mind,
because his state and condition in this life is no better: meaning it of a
poor man that is not content with his own portion, as may appear by the
verses following] are evil: [i. grievous, tedious, and bitter, specially to
flesh and bloud] but a good conscience [i. he that has in himself peace
toward God, quietness before men, and contentednes in his own soule] is a
continual feast. [i. breeds as great pleasure and delight to him that has
it, as if he were daily fed with most fine dainties.] Verse. 16. Better is a
[vz. which a man has of his own through Gods blessing] with the fear of the
Lord, [i. having a reverence of Gods Majesty in his heart, both quieting his
mind, and teaching him the right use of it] than great treasure [vz. howsoever
it be obtained] and trouble therewith. [vz. to the owner thereof, and in his
mind which wauereth, and is unquiet, either for the sure keeping of it, or for
the sudden forgoing of it.] Verse. 17. Better is a dinner of [i. a very mean
and slender dinner] where love is, [vz. toward the parties bidden, and among
the parties themselves, because there all things shall be well accepted] than
a stalled ox [vz. prepared for a dinner or banquet: meaning also thereby a
most sumptuous feast] and hatred therewith. [i. an evil affection either
toward the parties bidden, or one of them Verse. 18. An angry man [i. one
given much to anger] stirs up strife: [vz. in every company wheresoever he
comes, yea many times amongst them where there is great peace and quietness:
see Chap. 29.22.] but he that is slow to wrath, [i. will hardly, or not at all
be moved thereto, see Chapt. 14.29.] appeaseth [vz. by all the means he can he
indeuoureth to quiet and pacifie] strife. [vz. kindled, and stirred up before,
so Verse. 19. The way [i. the order and course of his life] of a slothful man
[i. of him that sluggishly and slothfully goes about his duetie] is as an
hedge of thorns: [i. is so slow and hard, as if it were all beset with thorns
and briers, meaning, that so it seems also unto himself; and therefore he
ever finds some let or stay that he dare not go forward: see Chapt. 26.13.]
but the way of the righteous [i. the order and course of life which he taketh]
is plain. [i. most easy and commodious, so that he finds nothing to hinder
him to walk on chearefully therein.] Verse. 20. A wise son rejoices the
father: [i. makes the father to rejoice and be glad: see Chap. 10.1.] but a
foolish man [i. a wicked disobedient and ungodly child] despises [i. sets
little by, or regards not at all] his mother. [i. neither her person, nor any
good thing that comes from her.] Verse. 21. Foolishnes [i. wickedness and
sinne] is joy [i. is a matter of mirth and delight] to him that is destitute
of understanding: [i. to a wicked and ungodly man, which knows nothing of
heavenly wisdom. I take it to be the same almost that is said, Chapt. 14.9,
24.] but a man of understanding [i. a godly and wise man] walks uprightly.
[i. orders all his actions, and frames his manners to that which is good and
right, never straying from Verse. 22. Without counsel [i. without right, holy,
and good counsell] thoughts [i. all things thought upon and deuised] come to
naught: [i. to no effect and purpose: q d. it is not enough to think upon
things, but there must be counsel taken how to perform the same] but in the
multitude of counselors [i. of good and faithful counsellers] there is
stedfastnes. [vz. both of purpose and performance, if the thing be good: see
Proverb. 11.14.] A joy comes to a man [i. there is a man which has great
and singular ioy] by the answer of his mouth: [i. by the words and speeches
which he utters with his mouth, whether he answer things demanded, or speak
otherwise: q.d. when a man speaks wisely to any person in any place, he has
great occasion and matter of joy given him] and how good [q.d. it is a hard
thing to express how sweet and profitable: so have you the word good used,
Psalm 133.1.] is a word [vz. spoken or vttered] in due season? [i. in fit and
convenient time, see Psalm 1.3. Al is as much: q.d. a wise man is much
refreshed, and greatly rejoices when he sees his counselles to fall well
Verse. 24. The way of life [i. the way that leads unto life, yea the very true
life it selfe] is on high to the prudent, [i. is in heaven, and therefore he
thinks of heavenly things, and tends thetherward, Philip. 3.20. Coloss.
3.2.] to avoid [i. that walking in the same he may auoid] from hell beneath.
[i. both from death and destruction, which the desire of earthly things
brings with it, and also from the place of eternal torment.] Verse. 25. The
Lord [vz. himself in his just iudgement] will destroy [vz. utterly, and as it
were pull up by the rootes] the house of the proud men: [i. them themselves,
their seed, raze, substance, and whatsoever belongs unto them; for so large
I take the signification of the word house to be] but he will establish [vz.
firm and sure] the borders of the widdowe. [i. all that does appertain to the
poor and abject persons as it were. He sets against proud persons, poor
widows, then who, none are commonly more injured amongst men.] Verse. 26. The
thoughts of the wicked wicked men's thoughts, and the things they think vpon]
are an abomination to the Lord: [i. are such things as he cannot abide] but the
pure [vz. in heart and conuersation] have pleasant words, [i. speak such
things as are good and acceptable before God, and profitable to the hearers.]
Verse. 27. He [vz. of what calling or condition soever he be, specially if he be
a Magistrate] that is greedy of gain, [i. that gapeth after it, and cares
not by what means he come by it, so he have it: see Chapt. 1.19.] troubles
his own house: [i. whereas he thought to get peace thereby, and to enlarge his
substance, purchases trouble, and many times the decrease of his family: see
Chapt. 11.29.] but he that hates gifts, [vz. offered him to pervert justice,
or to perform ill causes: see precise commandments against gifts taking
Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.] shall live. [vz. well and plentifully in this life,
notwithstanding his refusal of the same, but specially in eternal life.] Ver.
The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: [vz. not only when he is
demanded, but also to speak, for so does the Scripture use that word of
answering: see Math. 11.25. He means, that the good man speaks nothing but
that which he has long meditated of before, least his tongue should run
before his wit: and therefore he commonly speaks right and good things] but
the wicked man's mouth babbleth [i. rashly and hastily powers out] evil
things. [vz. against other, and such as in the end turn to his own hurt and
destruction: see verse 2. of this Chapter.] Verse. 29. The Lord is [i. from
helping them, or hearing their voice: for otherwise God is in every place, and
nigh to all things: he means that God will not hear them, no more than men
hear them that are very far of calling unto them] but he hears [i.
graciously granteth] the prayer of the righteous. [i. the things that the
righteous prayed for: see ver. 8. of this chap. Also Psalm 145.18.] Verse. 30.
The light of the eyes [i. for a man to see rejoices the heart, [vz. of a man;
that is, makes man and his heart glad] and a good name [i. good fame, and
report amongst men] makes the bones fat. [i. even rejoices and strengthens
all the inward parts: so have you the word bones used before, chapt. 12.4. Also
chapt. 14.30. Some read it as though it were a similitude thus] as the light
of the eyes rejoices the heart: so a good name makes the bones fat. [i. as
the eye by the beholding of good things, makes the whole man merry: so does
the ear by hearing good and wholesome things, of which he speaks Verse. 31.
The ear that hearkeneth [vz. diligently and attentiuely] to the correction of
life, [i. to such correction, reproof, and admonition as leads to life]
shall lodge among the wise. [i. shall not only dwell with them, and be
accounted as they are, but shall have the self same blessing from God that
they have, both in this life and in the life to come. And this he speaks, not
of an outward hearing only, but of such Verse. 32. He that refuses [vz. by
withdrawing himself from it] instruction, [vz. of good things, being tendered
and offered unto him] despises his own soul: [i. makes little account of
his life, specially in respect of the life to come] but he that obeys
correction, gets understanding. [vz. how in this life to behave himself
toward God and man, so as he may, after the days of this wearisome pilgrimage
Ver. 33. The fear of the Lord [vz. rightly planted in men's hearts] is the
instruction of wisdom: [i. is such an instruction or doctrine as brings men
to holy wisdom. One in my mind reads it better thus] The instruction of
wisdom goes before the fear of the Lord, [i. before a man can obtain
wisdom, and be led with the reverence of God and his fear, which is the
beginning of wisdom, Chapt. 1.7. Also Chapt. 9.10. He must of necessity be
taught and learn the precepts of wisedome] and before honor [vz. from God]
goes humility. [i. true and unfeigned humbling of his children: q.d. there is
the same order of the fruits which come from the instruction and fear of God,
as is of the things themselves: for to learning, there is joined casting down
of men and humility: and to the reverence and fear of God, there is joined
excellent honor, which God bestows upon them that fear him.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to avoid bitter words, and to use soft and gentle
speeches. Verse. 2. Shows what great difference there is between the words of
the wise, and the words of the foolish. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that GOD knows
and sees all things every where. Verse. 4. Teaches us, what profits and
disprofites arise of a good and of an evil tongue. Verse. 5. Teaches us,
reverently to regard good counsel. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that the good have
plenty of blessings, and enjoy them with quietness, whereas the wicked have
great trouble and vexation with the same. Verse. 7. Teaches us to use knowledge
in our callings, to the benefit and good of others. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that
nothing proceeding from a wicked person can please the Lord: also that God in
Christ regards the prayers of his servants. Verse. 9. Sets out the great
love of God toward his servants, and his disliking of the wicked. Verse. 10.
Teaches us, that malicious wicked persons will seldom or never regard good
counsel: also what danger there is, in contemning the words of godly
admonition. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that GOD knows all things, yea even the
very depths of men's hearts. Verse. 12. Teaches us, that wicked men, shun the
company and speech of good men. Verse. 13. Declares the profits and disprofits
of a glad and sorrowful heart. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that we must carefully
and continually seek for wisdom. Verse. 15. Sets out the commodities of a
good conscience, and contented mind. Verse. 16. Teaches us, that man's blessing
consists not specially in the multitude of his riches. Verse. 17. Commends
unfeigned love, and dispraiseth hatred. Verse. 18. Teaches us, to bridle wrath,
and to beat down contentions amongst men, what we may. Verse. 19. Teaches us,
to avoid slothfulnes, and idleness. Verse. 20. Shows what benefit or blessing
it is, to have good children, and on the other side what a punishment it is, to
have wicked children. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that the wicked rejoice in sin,
and that there is no godly conversation indeed without the light of Gods holy
word. Ver. 22. Teaches us, to pursue good thoughts, by good counsel, and to
labor to bring them to good effect. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that we may rejoice
in Gods gifts, bestowed upon us: also, that in our speeches, we should have
regard of time, place, persons etc. Verse. 24. Teaches us, to study and seek
for heavenly things. Verse. 25. Declares Gods great judgment against proud
persons, and his singular love, toward the poor and afflicted. Verse. 26.
Teaches us, that wicked thoughts are sin before the Lord: also that our
words and speeches should bring grace to the hearers. Verse. 27. Teaches us, to
avoid greedy gaping after gain, and hasty or ready receiving of rewards.
Verse. 28. Teaches us, to beware of rash and hasty speech, and always to
speak with as great aduisement, as possible we can. Verse. 29. Declares Gods
justice upon the wicked, and his singular favor toward the good. Verse. 30.
Teaches us, that it is a good blessing to have the sight of our eyes: also
that we should strive, to be of good name and report. Verse. 31. Shows what
good men shall get, by observing wise and good counsel. Verse 32. Declares,
what evil shall come upon them that regard it not. Verse 33. Teaches us, two
things, first that no man can rightly fear God, but he that has been some
what trained up in wisdoms school: secondly that we cannot come to true
honor before God and men, till the Lord have effectually humbled us under his
almighty hand.

CHAPT. 16.
Co.
IN the latter end of the other Chapter, the holy Ghost had showed, that we
could not tell how use our ears a right, but by grace from God: and now he
shows us, in the beginning of this Chapter, that we know not how to guide
our tongues, except the Lord assiste us: and direct us in the same.

Di.
ver. 1. to the end of the 9. verse. 10. to the end of the 17. In the third he
entreats of pride and humility, of trust in the Lord, of wise men and
wisdom, of gentle words, and of an upright way: from verse. 18. to the end of
the 25. In the last part he speaks of the painful person, also of wicked;
froward, and ungodly men, of good old age, of bridling anger, and of verse. 26.
to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. THe preparations of the heart are in man: [i. a man has power to
prepare his heart, and wit to direct, how and in what order he will speak or
do any thing. And this he speaks not, as though it were so, but by the way
of concession for if he cannot speak, surely he cannot think or devise
without God, but it is: q.d. be it that man have innumerable thoughts in his
heart, and in his head deuiseth this and that,] but the answer of the tongue
[i. yet the words which he shall speak and vtter] is of the Lord [i. comes
from him, because without him Verse 2. All the ways of a man [i. every thing
that a man thinks, speaks or does,] are clean [i. seem so to be unto
him] in his own eyes: [i. in his own judgment: putting eyes for judgment,
because we take those things to be most sure and sufficient which we see] but
the Lord pondereth [i. diligently weighs and deeply considereth] the
spirits, [vz. of men, meaning thereby, all their imaginations, words, and
works, because they have their beginning, in the spirit or understanding of a
man, and proceed from the same: q.d. God, even as it were by number and
weight, that is, most certainly searches whether that be pure and right that
men think so to be, and knows it by many degrees Verse 3. Commit [vz. in a
steadfast fayth] thy works [i. all thy affairs whatsoeuer] unto the Lord [q.d.
in all things depend upon him for a good success and blessing,] and thy
thoughts shall be directed: [vz. through his providence and power, to a good
end, understanding by thoughts, (which are the beginning of all actions,) even
the very deeds themselves also. This sentence entreats of Gods power and
providence, teaching us to refer all things thereto: see the like Psalm. 37.5.
also Psalm. The Lord [vz. of Heaven and earth] has made [vz. by his almighty
power,] all things, [i. all creatures whatsoeuer] for his own sake, [i. to
this end, that his glory might appear in them:] yea even the wicked [vz. man,
meaning thereby all the vngodlie] for the day of evil: [i. not only against
the time of affliction in this life, but for eternal torments in the life to
come: not that God is the author of any wickedness, but because he not only
suffers, but also has aforehand decreed, that the wicked shall oppress the
good, the Lord reserving them for it against the day of judgment, wherein he
will show his power and justice, by which he is glorified: q.d. the chief end
of the creation of all things, is Gods glory, which glory of his most
plainly appears and is declared, both in the eternal salvation of the
vessels of mercy, and also in the destruction of the vessels of wrath,
appointed beforehand to that destruction: see Roman. 9.22.23. Jude. verse. 4.]
Verse. 5. All that are proud in heart [i. all proud persons of what estate
heart, because there is the first beginning of pride, and from thence it
flows. Mark 7.22.] are an abomination to the Lord: [i. the Lord does loath
them and cannot abide them: we have had this phrase oftentimes, as Chap. 11.1.
also Chap. 12.22. chap. 15.26. etc.] though hand join in hand, [i. though they
join power and forces together to avoid Gods judgments,] he [i. the proud
man, or the proud persons, by one understanding al] shall not be unpunished.
[i. escape unpunished from the Lord, howsoever he does for a while defer his
judgments: see Chap. 11.21.] Verse. 6. By mercy [vz. from and truth, [i. Gods
faithful accomplishment of his promises, he making his children by the zeal
of his spirit to feel the same: see Psalm 85.10. I know, some understand by
mercy and truth, the duties of charity and upright dealing one man with an
other, and I deny not though they see it not, that mercy is so used. Matthew.
12.7. but I approve rather the other sense] iniquity [i. sin it self, and
the punishment deserved for it] shall be forgiven, [vz. before the Lord,
meaning that the Lord freely, even for his own mercy and truth sake, will
forgive the sins of his people,] and by the fear of the Lord [vz. rightly
and sincerely planted in the hearts of his children, understanding by fear, a
reverence of his Majesty joined with loue] they depart [vz. speedilie] from
evil [i. from naughty conversation, and all things, that may pull on to the
same: see 1. Thessalo. 5.22.] Verse. 7. When the ways of a man [i. his
purposes, deeds, and the whole course of pleases the Lord, [i. be such, as he
accepts and allows of, which is, when they are framed according to the rule
of his word,] he [i. God the Lord] will make [vz. by his mighty power and
working] his enemies at peace with him: [i. so far off shall it be, that they
that never hated him shall attempt any evil against him, that even his very
foes and adversaries, shall procure all manner of good for him, for so much I
suppose he understands by the name of peace.] Verse. 8. Better is a little
[vz. gotten and atchieued] with righteousness, [i. with upright and just
dealing,] than great revenues [vz. though they come yearly, monthly, or
daily in] without equity, [i. gotten with the injury and opression of other
men: see Chap. 15.16.] Verse. The heart of man purposes his way: [i. he waieth
and thinks upon the things which he has to do, tossing them too and fro in
his thought and imagination,] but the Lord [vz. alone] does direct [vz always
by his power, and providence,] his steps. [i. every thing that he takes in
hand, for the sense of this place, see verse. 1. of this Chap. also Ierem.
10.23. and Prou. A divine sentence [i. a true and certain judgment, even as
it were from God himself. I know that the word signifies, divination, or
foretelling, such as Soothsayers, Astrologers, etc. use. But he means it not
thereof, for it is forbidden, Deuteron. 18.10, 11. etc. but rather notes, that
the word of the king, is and ought to be a most sure word, as those things
which they foretell, seem at the least, to the parties themselves, and those
that credit them to be] shall be [vz. or ought to be, prescribing as it were
his duties, which word I suppose might be better added here] in the lips of
the king [i. in his words and speeches uttered with his lips: putting the
word king, for all Magistrates whatsoeuer] his mouth shall not transgress in
judgment, [i. while he sits in judgment, he should not pronounce or
award unjust sentences, but deal vprightlie in all causes, as may Verse. 11. A
true weight and balance [i. upright and faithful dealing in every respect: and
this seems to be a reason of the former rule: q.d. the judgment and
uprightness which Magistrates and other men faithfully execute, is not from
men themselves, but of God: see Deuteron. 1.17. 2. Chronic. 19.6. and he
means most exact observation of judgment and justice, by weight and
balance,] are of the Lord [i. are ordained of him, and commanded by him: see
Deuteron. 25.13, 14, 15. also Chap. 11.1.] all the weights [vz. how great or
how little so ever they be,] of the bag [i. which men put into the bag,
for the better and more safe keeping of them: he alludeth to Deuteron. 25.13.
meaning it also of just and equal weights] are his word, [i. the Lord has
made and ordained the same to be used, as appears by the place before
alleged.] Verse. 12. It is [vz. or else it ought to be,] an abomination [i. a
horrible and loathsome thing] to kings [i. to great and mighty men, or to
Magistrates of what degree or calling soever they be,] to commit [vz. in
thought, word, or deed,] wickedness, [i. any manner of wickedness, either
against God or man: and this he speaks specially because of their great
callinges, and high places wherein they are set] for the throne [vz. of the
king or kingdom, meaning thereby the kingdom it self, a part for the whole,
as sundry times in the psalms, and namely Psalm 93.2. also Psalm 132.12.]
is established. [i. is made firm and sure, with great likelyhoode of
continuance] by justice, [vz. by faithful and diligent executing of justice
and equity.] Verse. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of kings [i. kings and
Magistrates, should take specially delight and pleasure in such persons, as
speaks righteous and good things: a part put for the whole person, and one
instrument wherewith the voice is framed, put for the words themselues] and the
King [i. all rulers and magistrates] loves [i. ought tenderly to affect] him
[i. those whosoever they be] that speaks right things. [vz. unto them. This
he speaks, because Princes do many times more delight and savor flatterers,
than plain dealers.] Verse. 14. The wrath of a King [i. that indignation is as
messengers of death: [i. is at it were deadly to him with whom he is angry,
and brings as it were present death, every thing then threatening death as it
were, which we see by daily experience. And he says messengers in the
plural number, that it might have the greater force] but a wise man will
pacify it. [vz. in time, and by all the lawful means he can he will
endeavor the quenching of it, for fear of inconveniences and mischiefs that
may ensue thereon.] Verse. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance [i. in his
favorable q.d. when it pleases the King with a pleasant and merry
countenance to show that he favors men] is life: [i. there is hope of all
manner of prosperity and florishing] and his favor [vz. so expressed and
declared toward other men] is as a cloud [vz. which is full, and therefore
powers down rain: see Eccle. 11.13.] of the latter rain. [vz. which falls
somewhat before harvest, before the corn ripe, and makes the yield of fruit
to be great: see Deutero. 11.14. James 5.7.] Verse. 16. How much [q.d. It can
hardly be told, or a man is not able to express what great odds and
difference there is] to get [vz. by industry and pains taking] wisdom [i.
heavenly wisdom, and knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word] than gold?
[yea, than fine and precious gold; for so much the word importeth] and to get
understanding [vz. of Gods word and truth. The Rabbis refer wisdom to
spiritual and divine things, and understanding to worldly and humane; but me
thinks the other sense is plaine] is more to be desired [vz. by many degrees,
and to be sought for] than silver. [i. than chosen or fined silver: see Chapt.
3.14. Also Chapt. 8.10. Meaning that holy wisdom is to be preferred before
all things.] Verse. 17. The [vz. wherein he walketh] is to decline from evil,
[i. the righteous man has a great care and conscience, in all his conversation
and actions to abstain from sin and iniquity, and all that may allure
thereto: see verse 6. of this Chapt.] and he keeps his soul, [vz. from
destruction: meaning also by soul, himself, a part for the whole] that
keeps his way. [vz. upright in the obedience of Gods commandments:
understanding by way, the whole orders and affairs of his life.] Verse. 18.
Pride [vz. both goes before destruction, [vz. of the party that is possessed
with it: he means, that ruin and shame is the inseparable companion of
pride] and an high mind before the fall. [vz. of the party that has it: q.d.
Such as exalt themselves, are very nigh to ruin and destruction: see chapt.
11.2.] Verse. 19. Better [vz. by many degrees] it is [vz. in the eyes and
judgment of all that be soundly taught of God] to be of an humble mind [i. to
have true humility indeed, both inward and outward] with the lowly, [i. as
they are, and to enjoy their companie] than to divide the spoils [i. than to
get great riches, and so by that means to come to honor] with the proud. [vz.
as they do, and to be in their company.] Verse. 20. He that is wise in his
business, [i. he that wisely and faithfully can dispatch the things he has to
doo] shall find good: [i. shall, through Gods blessing, increase in riches and
substance by that meanes] and he that trusts in the Lord, [vz. unfeignedly
and with all his heart, waiting for blessings from him] he is blessed. [vz.
indeed: q.d. he may be as sure of blessing, as though he had it: see Psalm.
125. This verse is read otherwise of some, but me thinks this sense is plain
Verse. 21. The wise in heart [i. he that is truly wise indeed, and he makes
mention of the heart, because it is the seat of all affections] shall be
called prudent: [vz. of other men, and so esteemed and taken of them, not only
because they say so, but also because he is so] and the sweetness of the lips
[i. the sweet words of doctrine and comfort that he shall speak to others]
shall increase doctrine. [vz. both in himself, because speech is a mean to
increase judgment, and in those that hear Verse. 22. Understanding [vz. of
Gods will revealed in his word] is a wel-spring of life [i. yields life
plentifully: see Prouer. 10.11. Also chap. 13.14.] unto them that have it: [i.
unto them, upon whom it pleases God to bestow it, and unto others also by
their meanes] and the instruction of fools [vz. which they give and bestow
upon others] is folly. [i. not only without sense and wit, but also very
wickedness and sin it self, the reward Roman. 6.23.] Verse. 23. The heart of
the wise [vz. man: he speaks of the heart, because it is the fountain and
wel-spring of all deeds and words] guides his mouth [vz. to speake] wisely,
[i. aptly, well, and with advise or judgment: q.d. The wise man's heart so
directs his mouth, and teaches his tongue, that he speaks nothing rashly,
or vnaduisedly] and adds doctrine [i. continually ministers new occasion of
good speech and good counsell] to his lips. [i. to himself, a part for the
whole; and yet he speaks of the lips, because they are instruments of
speech unto others.] Ver. Fair words [i. gentle, soft, and sweet speeches, he
calls them Chap. 15.26. pleasant words] are as an honey comb, [i. sweet and
profitable, vz. to the party, to whom they are spoken] sweetness to the soul,
[i. they bring sweetness to the inward part] and health to the bones. [by health
he means all outward blessings, and by bones, the whole body: a part for the
whole, see chap. 12.4. Also 14.30. He means that God and godly speeches are
pleasant, profitable, and necessary, both to soul and body, that is, to the
whole man, as honey is sweet to the taste, and profitable to mitigate the
griefs of sundry Verse. 25. This whole verse is the same in words and sense,
with verse 12. of the 14. Chapter. He means, that no man must either in
manners or opinions follow that which seems good to himself; but Gods word
must in all things be the only rule unto us.] Verse. 26. The person [vz. in his
ordinary and lawful vocation] trauaileth for him self: [vnder this word
himself, he comprehends both his own person, and those that depend upon
him: see 1. Tim. 5.8.] for his mouth craves it of him. [i. after a sort does
demand it: for if meat be not by the mouth conveyed into the stomach, the
body will perish. And that word craving, does not only import the earnestnes
of it, but the manner also, even as though it were with bowing and humbling it
self, it did beseech him. Some read it otherwise, and give another sense, but
I freely confess, that for mine own part, I see no reason of it.] Verse. 27. A
wicked man [i. a unjust, violent, and diggeth up [i. not only deuiseth, but
also seeks by all means to performe] evil, [both against others, and
himself also in the end] and in his lips [i. in the words which he utters
with his lippes] is like burning fire. [i. there is somewhat in them that will
consume both himself and others, as fire does wood and stubble. He means,
that though the thoughts of the wicked be hurtful, yet they hurt not so much,
as when they burst forth into words and deeds, for then they hurt as much as
burning and flaming fire does, whereas, while it is kept under the ashes, it
lies as it were hidden.] Verse. 28. A froward person [or as it is in the Hebrew
text, a i. such a one as given altogether to frowardnes] sows strife: [vz.
between man and man, meaning that he is a batemaker] and a tale teller [i. he
that hears, and whistereth to the hurt of another man] makes division [i.
does what he can to set strife] among Princes. [i. amongst great and excellent
personages. I would rather turn this latter part thus] divides [vz. from his
friend] the prince [vz. of friendship, meaning thereby a chief friend: and so
have you the word used Chapt. 17.9. Also Psalm. 15.13. though there it be turned
guide, and Micah. 7.5. where the same word is turned a friend.] Verse. 29. A
wicked man [i. a violent and injurious person, a man of violence, that is, one
that is altogether given to do injury to another] deceives [vz. one while by
fraud, another while by force] his neighbor, [i. him, whom he should do all
manner of good too] and leads him [i. some other of his neighbors, and that
by his flattering and intising words; for so much I think the Hebrew word
imports: see Chapt. 1.10.] into the way that is not good. [i. into a
disorderous course and evil trade of his life: so have we had the word way
sundry times used.] Verse. 30. He [i. the wicked man] shuts his eyes [vz.
that he may the better to devise [i. that he may the more earnestly think
vpon] wickedness: [vz. against others, meaning by wickedness, mischief: see
Chapter 10.10.] he moves his lips, [i. he does but as it were begin to
speake] and brings evil to pass. [i. he presently performs mischief
against other men.] Verse. 31. Age [i. old age: he uses a self] is a crown of
glory, [i. is a glorious crown, meaning, that it brings even as great
glory to a godly old man, as a crown to a King: concerning this word crown,
see before Chapt. 4.9. Also Chapt. 14.24. and in other places] when it is found
[vz. to be passed over and spent] in the way of righteousness. [i. in a holy
and righteous life, meaning it of such old age, as spends the time of life,
godly and justly, and not of al old age without exception.] Verse. 32. He that
is slow unto anger, [i. seldom or not at all bursteth into it, howsoever he
be provoked thereto: see chap. 14.29. chap. 15.28.] is better [vz. by many
degrees] than the mighty man: [vz. in bodily strength and power: by how much
the power of the soul is better than the strength of the body, the soul it
self being better than the bodie] and he that rules his own mind, [i. that
subdueth and keeps under the raging affections thereof] is better [vz. by
much] than he that wins [i. conquereth or getteth] a city. [vz. either by
power or policy. The reason of this speech is, because that the war that a
man has with himself, and with his own mind, and which is made against wrath
and other affections of it, is more grievous and hard, than that which is
attempted against others: and therefore he is better that conquereth himself,
than he that conquereth others. Besides, he that overcomes himself, does it
to this end, to profit himself and to hurt none, yea to do good unto others
thereby, whereas a mighty man that overcomes others, and subdueth cities,
can hardly perform it, without Verse. 33. The lot [vz. for the trial of any
thing in controversy. This was much in use amongst the people of God in
dividing lands: Numb. 26.55. and in other causes, as Leuit. 16.8. Acts 1.26.
and in other places] is cast into the lap: [i. into some secret and close
place, putting one for many others, as into hattes, pots, caps, boxes, etc.]
but the whole disposition thereof [i. the ordering, guiding, and government of
it] is of the Lord* [vz. only: q.d. nothing seems more subject to fortune in
men's judgment than lots, and yet that falls not out by fortune or chance,
for there is no such thing, but God by his infinite providence and wisdom,
does both generally and particularly guide and govern the same, according to
his good pleasure.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches, that both the thoughts of man's heart, and the words of man's
mouth are governed of the Lord. Verse. 2. Teaches us, that neither we our
selves, nor the things that we do, are such, as we esteem of them, but are
so to be taken as God allows of them. Verse. 3. Teaches us, in all our
thoughts, words, and works, to depend upon the Lord for his special blessing.
Ver. 4. Teaches us, that Gods glory appears in all things, yea even in the
destruction of the wicked and ungodly. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to avoid pride
of heart: secondly, that there is no wisdom nor power against the Lord. Verse.
6. Shows us, that there is no other cause of the forgiveness of sin, than
Gods own mercy and truth: also, that there is no better bridle to stay men
from wickedness, than to have a reverent fear of Gods majesty settled in our
hearts. Ver. 7. Teaches us, that a holy conversation commends us, both to God
and men, also that God has men's hearts in his hands to turn them as pleases
him. Verse. 8. Teaches men, to get that which they have, how little or much
soever it be, by good and just dealing. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that in all,
both our imaginations, and actions, we are governed by God, because, that in
him, we live, move, and have our being. Verse. 10. Teaches Magistrates and
rulers, to pronounce just and true sentences. Verse. 11. Teaches us, to use
vprightnes in all our dealings: and that they which use false weightes,
measures, etc. sin not only against men, but against the Lord also. Verse.
12. Teaches kings, even for example sake, to abstain from all manner of
evil, specially from injustice and wrong doing. Verse. 13. Teaches kings, to
abhor flatterers and flattery, and to delight in such, as will speak the
truth fully and boldly. Verse. 14. Teaches wise men, in time to labor to
quiet the just rage of a Prince, least otherwise, there fall out great
mischiefs. Verse. 15. Teaches us, to purchase and delight in the favor of
Princes and Potentates: always provided, that we do it, by lawful and holy
means. Verse. 16. Teaches us to prefer heavenly wisdom, before all
earthly things whatsoever. Verse. 17. Teaches us, first that none can be
counted good, but such as have an unfeigned care to shun things that be
naught, secondly that a holy life is very profitable both for soul and
body. Verse. 18. Teaches us, to avoid pride, least continuing in it, we be
overthrown. Verse. 19. Teaches us to embrace true humility and lowlines of
mind. Verse. 20. Teaches us, to be careful in the doing of our affairs:
also continually to trust in the Lord, and the truth of his promises. Verse.
21. Teaches us, to give a just commendation, to the gifts and graces of God
in any: also to use profitable, comfortable, and good speeches to others. Verse.
22. Teaches us, to have a care, to obtain spiritual understanding and
knowledge. Verse. 23. To beware of rash speech, and to think well of our words,
before we utter them. Verse. 24. Teaches us, to use gentle, soft and good
speeches. Verse. 25. Teaches us, not to hang upon our own judgments, but upon
the rule of Gods word only. Verse. 26. Commends unto us, painful travail,
in our several callings. Verse. 27. Teaches us, to avoid, both imagining and
doing evil against any. Verse. 28. Teaches us, to take heed, that we be not
authors of strife or tale carriers Verse. 29. Teaches us, to beware of offering
any man any injury, or intising any man, to those things that are evil. Verse.
30. Teaches, that we must neither by word nor countenance, practice or
perform evil against others. Verse. 31. Teaches us, that godly old age, is
greatly to be reverenced and esteemed. Verse. 32. Teaches us to employ all our
forces, to the subduing of the rage of our own affections. Verse. 33. Teaches
us, that nothing falls out by fortune or chance, but is wholly and
altogether directed, by the infinite and eternal providence of almighty God.

CHAP. 17.
Co.
THis Chapter depends upon the former thus: he had showed before, that all
things were guided according to the determinate counsel and purpose of God,
which ought to teach us contentednes with whatsoever it shall please God
either of our own, or of other men's to bestow upon us, which J take to be
the meaning of the first verse.

Di.
verse. 1. to the end of the 9. In verse. 10. 18. In the third he deals with
proud and contentious persons, with froward and evil tongued people, foolish
parents, and ill children, also he speaks of the sorrow and ioyfulnes of
the heart, of bribes and gifts, of the wise man and fool, of evil children,
of upright judgment, of few words: from verse. 19. to the end of the chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. BEtter [vz. by much] is a dry morsel [vz. of bread, meaning a
morsel of dry bread without drink, or any other thing with it] if peace be
with it: [i. if men have it in peace and quietness, and with unfeigned good will
one of them toward another] than an house full [i. very great store and
plentie] of sacrifices [i. meat left of freewill offerings, which are called
sacrifices because they are part of that which was sacrificed: see Chap.
7.14.] with strife [vz. one of them against 15.17.] Verse. 2. A discreet
servant, [i. a faithful, painful, and wise servant, he calls such a one
Chap. 10.5. the son of wisdom: and Chap. 14.35. a wise servant,] shall have
rule over a leude son [i. shall be preferred before him, yea so, that many
times he shall rule and govern him: this fellow is called the son of
confusion, Chap. 10.5.] and he shall divide the heritage [vz. through Gods
ordinance and the fathers appointment, as it were by will,] among the brethren.
[It was a common matter, to have goods, possessions, and lands, divided to the
sons or daughters, amongst the people of the Jews, see Nombers 36.2. also,
Luke. 12.13. his meaning is, that wisdom exalts the basest, and folly
casts down them that are very high.] Verse. 3. As is the fining pot for
silver, and the furnace for gold, [i. as the fining pot and the furnace, serve
to try good silver and gold from dross and corruption:] so the Lord tries
[vz. by many means and waies] the hearts [vz. of men: meaning thereby also,
all the thoughts, affections, and imaginations thereof, yea the whole man
himself, both inward and outward: q.d. as men by their art try all things,
which is well done; so God is he alone, that searches the hearts and raines:
see Ierem. 17.9, 10.] Verse. 4. The wicked he that sells himself over to
work wickedness,] gives heed [vz. very attentively and diligentlie] to
false lips, [i. to false words uttered with the lips against other men, or
to false accusing persons, a part for the whole,] and a liar [i. he that is a
liar himselfe] hearkeneth [vz. heedilie] to the naughty tongue. [vz. of an
other man, who is like to himself: meaning that one wicked man, will regard
and esteem another, even in those things which be evil and wicked, and
whereof in deed they ought to be ashamed.] Verse. 5. He that mocketh [vz. either
by word or deed] the poor [i. he that reprocheth him that made him [i. God:
q.d. he does after a sort, scorn and scoff at God: see a like sentence,
Chap. 14.31.] and he that rejoices at destruction, [i. at the hurt or
hinderance of another man, or at any evil whatsoever that falls upon him]
shall not be unpunished: [i. shall be certainly punished, and by no means
escape it: see Chap. 11.21. and Chap. 16.5.] Verse. 6. Childrens [i. properly
Neuewes, but the holy Ghost means hereby a long race and posterity, as
Psalm 128.6.] are the crown, [i. are the glory renown and decking: see
Chap. 12.4. also Chap. 16.31.] of the elders [i. of their graundfathers, great
graundfathers, etc. This he speaks of good, holy, and obedient children] all
the glory of the children, [i. a singular mean whereby the children, come to
glory and renowme] are their fathers. [i. their wise and godly Parents.] Ver.
7. High talk, [i. talk of high and great becomes not a fool, [i. is not
seemly in his mouth, because howsoever he can babble of the things, yet he
has them not in effect:] much less lying talk a Prince, [q.d. much less
does it beseem a great personage, to be overtaken with lying, or any other
evil, either in word or deed. One reads it otherwise, and gives another
sense of it; but I like this as well, if not better.] Verse. 8. A reward [vz.
given is as a stone pleasant, [i. is like a precious and pleasant stone,
meaning that it is of great regard and estimation] in the eyes [i. in the
judgment and opinion] of them that have it [vz. given them by others] it
prospers [i. takes good success,] whether soever it turns [i. to what end
soever it be applied: his purposes is, to describe the great corruption of
bribes and gifts: q.d. a corrupt reward is with covetous Judges very forcible
to pervert just judgment, and therefore whosoever gives it, the Magistrate
receiving it, great likelyhoode there is, that his Verse. 9. He that covers
[vz. by all lawful means, and what he may, or as much as in him lyeth] a
transgression [vz. committed against another man] seeks love: [i. indeuoreth
thereby to mainteyne and uphold love between them. He means, that he that
keeps close, offenses committed by one against another, and blaseth them not
abroad to any, is a very good preserver and increaser of true friendship: see
Proverb. 10.12. also Chap. 16.28.] but he that repeateth a matter, [vz. done
long before against another, meaning by repeating of it, reporting of it in
speech,] seperateth the Prince. [see this expounded Chap. 16.28. meaning hereby
the chief friends, and the alienating, and turning Verse. 10. A reproof [vz.
alone uttered in bare words, but yet wisely and charitably expressed] enters
more into him [i. takes deep root, and brings forth more profit in him]
that has understanding, [i. that is truly wise indeed] than an hundred
stripes into a fool [i. than great correction bestowed upon a fool and wicked
person: q.d. a wise man will be more built up in goodness Verse. 11. A seditious
person [i. a man given to disquietnes and trouble] seeks only evil [i.
studieth nothing else, but how he may perform mischief, but he shall gain
nothing thereby, as appears by that which followeth] and a cruel messenger,
[i. either a tormentor, or some other who shall execute the judgment of God,
and the Magistrates against him, not repenting] shall be sent [vz. from God,
or man, or both] against him, [vz. to punish him according Verse. 12. It is
better, [i. there is less danger in it] for a man [vz. that is himself alone
unprepared, or unarmed,] to meet [vz. in the wilderness, or else where] a bear
[the word is of the Masculine gender, and signifies notwithstanding the
Femall also or she beare] robbed of her whelps, [i. whose young ones have been
taken from her, by some one means, or other. The bears when they have lost
their whelps, are very fearce and cruel, specially the she bears, as whose
affection seems to be greater toward them: concerning the greatness of the
danger, which may befall men by bears. see 2. Samuel. 17.8. 2. king. 2.24.
Hoseah. 13.8.] than a fool in his folly. [i. then a wicked man in the
extremity of his wickedness and rage: q.d. it were less evil to fall into the
power of the one, Verse. 13. He [vz. whosoever he be,] that rewards, [i.
renders and yields unto another man,] evil [i. mischief and hurt] for good,
[i. for the good and profit, that he has received by him,] evil [i. plagues
and punishments from God, and many times displeasure from men also.] shall not
depart from his house [i. from him, or from his wicked posterity. It is a
sin against all law, yea even against nature, to requite good with evil:
see it forbidden. Roman. 12.17. where we are forbidden to recompense evil for
evil, much less to recompense good with evil.] Verse. 14. The beginning of
strife, [i. the beginner of strife, he puts the thing for the persons: q.d.
he that is the worker of the beginning of strife] is as one that opens the
waters: [vz. which were shut up in standing pooles or ponds, which being once
let out, they ouerflowe, and carry away every thing that stands before them,
and cannot again be shut up and enclosed: q.d. the hole or since, by which
they are let forth, at the first seems narrow, but afterward by the rage
of the waters, it is made greater; and so is it with strife and contention]
therefore or the contention be meddled with, [i. before it be any whit at al
begun] leave of. [vz. from it. He would have us to withstand and quench the
beginning of strife.] Ver. 15. He that justifies [i. declares either Exodus
23.7. Isaiah 5.23. Math. 11.19. 1. Tim. 3.17.] the wicked [vz. man] and he that
condemns [i. either by word or deed pronounces sentence of condemnation
against] the just, [i. the upright and innocent person] even they both [vz. of
what state, condition or calling soever they be] are an abomination to the
Lord. [i. lothed, and disliked of him: see chapt. 11.1. for this phrase, and
for the matter and words almost, see the like sentence Chapt. 24.24.] Ve. 16.
Wherefore [i. to what end and purpose] is there a price [i. means in the hand
[i. in the power, as sundry times in the scripture] of the fool [i. of the
wicked and ungodly man] to get wisdom, [vz. by it] and he has none heart?
[vz. to obtain it: meaning, that he has no affection or pleasure thereto:
q.d. It avails the fool nothing, yea rather it is a miserable thing unto him
to have full hands, or great power, and no heart or will at all to obtain good
things. For he is unworthy of good things that disdaineth wisdom, yea those
very good things shall tend to his greater judgment.] Ver. 17. A friend [i. he
that is a faithful and trusty friend] loves [vz. unfeignedly and with a good
heart, his familiar at all times: [vz. both of adversity and prosperity, for
nothing can turn away his minde] and a brother [i. a natural and dear
friend, for I suppose he speaks not of natural brethren onely] is borne [i.
is brought forth as it were into the world, and so made manifest] for
adversity. [i. even against the days of troubles and trialls come: q.d. then
does the force of natural friendship appear, which before in prosperity lay
as it were hidden.] Verse. 18. A man destitute of understanding [i. an unwise
touches the hand, [vz. of another, giving him his hand and word, as it were,
for the payment and performance of some thing: see Chapt. 6.1.] and becomes
surety [vz. by that meanes] for his neighbor. [i. his familiar friend and
acquaintance: see chap. 1.1, 2, etc. Also chap. 11.15.] Verse. 19. He loves
transgression, that loves strife: [vz. either between and he that exalts
[i. sets on high] his gate [i. the gate or door of his house, meaning in an
allegory hereby, he that despising others, lifts up himself, which is fitly
shadowed out by this speech, because it sometime falls out, that they that
set their doors high, fall backward from thence, and so bruise, hurt, and wound
themselues] seeks [i. his own hurt and danger.] Verse. 20. The froward heart
[i. the man given to frowardnes: a part for the whole, and yet he names the
heart, because it is the seat of affections, from whence also they flowe]
finds no good: [i. obtains no good thing, either before God or man, but
much evil and hurt rather] and he that has a naughty tongue, [i. he that
uses his tongue to speak either lewdlie and filthilie, or else untruly or
falsely against any] shall fall into evil. [i. shall be overtaken with Gods
judgments for the same, and have those things light upon him, that his tongue
has pronounced Verse. 21. He that begets a fool, [i. the parents of a
foolish child. He puts the first part of procreation for the whole, and the
education thereof also; because in the first generation no man knows what his
son or child shall be: and of the habit, which the child afterward gets,
either by the parents negligence, or evil bringing up: or though he have been
well instructed, yet notwithstanding he has an evil heart or mind] gets
himself sorrow, [vz. through the folly of his child] and the father of a
fool [i. his parents] can have no joy. [vz. in their foolish children, and so
long as they continue such: see Proverb. 10.1. Also 15.20. And also verse 25.
of this Chapter.] Verse. 22. A joyful heart [i. a heart that is truly touched
with joy: for he does not speak of a dissembled or counterfeited ioye]
causes good health: [vz. to the whole man: understanding also by the word
health, all good things] but a sorrowful mind [i. the mind which is wounded and
oppressed with sorowe] dries the bones. [i. corrupts and consumes 14.13.]
Verse. 23. A wicked man [i. a man given to wickedness: and this may be
understood either of the man giving the bride, or of the Judge receiving it]
takes a gift [vz. either which he had prepared to give the Judge, or the Judge
knew he had brought] out of the bosom, [i. closely and privily, as men are
wont to do things which they take out of their bosomes] to wrest [i. to
pervert and turn vpside down: q.d. the one gives it, and the other receives
it, to that end] the ways of judgment. [i. just and upright matters, in
which, as in broad Verse. 24. Wisdom is in the face of him that has
understanding: [i. the very stayed and pleasant countenance of a wise man, is
sufficient to set out the wisdom that is in him] but the eyes of a fool are
in the corners of the world. [i. wander h^ther and thither, which is sufficient
enough to bewray the vnstaiednes of his mind, and the folly of his heart. He
means, that even by the countenance, Verse. 25. A foolish son [i. a wicked,
lewd, and disobedient child, whether he be son or daughter] is a grief [vz.
of heart, that is a great griefe] unto his father, [vz. that begot him, if he
live to see, behold, or hear of his wickednes] and a heaviness [vz. of heart
also] to her that bare him. [i. to his or her mother: see Chapter 10.1. For no
greater grief can come to parents in this life, than to know or hear of the
ill demeanor of their children.] Verse. 26. Surely it is not good [i. it is a
very hurtful and evil thing] to condemn the just, [vz. any manner of way: see
verse 15. of this Chapter: and this appertains to Magistrates, putting them
in mind of their duties, to execute justice, and to minister right] nor [vz.
is it good, but evil and hurtfull] that the princes [i. the Magistrates and
rulers] should smite [i. any manner of way punish] such [i. just persons] for
equity. [i. for their upright and good dealing: withal, he puts Princes in
mind to beware of tyranny.] Verse. 27. He that has knowledge [i. he spares
his words, [i. oftentimes refraineth his speeches, he does not rashly power out
by his words the thoughts of his heart, no though they be good things, but
observes time, place, etc. see Chapt. 15.23, 28. Also Chapt. 29.11.] and a man
of understanding [i. one endued with right understanding and knowledge] is of
an excellent spirit. [Some read,] is precious in spirit [i. is of a rare
spirit, for the excellency of it, as the word of God is said to be precious,
1. Sam. 3.1. Others read, cold in spirit: meaning, that he is moderate and
well stayed, and easily bursteth not forth into anger, but does diligently
take heed of the heat of his heart: the senses do not much differ.] Verse. 28.
Even a [q.d. so great is the commendation of silence, that if unwise people
hold their tongues, they may be deemed and taken for wise many times] when he
holds his peace [i. speaks not to the bewraying of his follie] is counted
wise, [vz. many times, because wise men judge not but by words and deedes] and
he that stops his lips, [vz. from speaking] prudent. [i. is counted, or
may be counted prudent and wise.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, how good a thing peace is, and how hurtful strife and
contention is. Verse. 2. Teaches servants to strive to diligence, faithfulness,
and wisdom in all their masters affairs. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that God
knows all things, either within man, or without him, and many times tries
him by many means to make him pure unto himself. Verse. 4. Teaches us, not to
lend our ears to false accusations, or lying tales. Verse. 5. Teaches, that we
ought not to rejoice at any man's poverty, affliction, or hurt whatsoever.
Verse. 6. Teaches us, that to have posterity, is a good blessing from the
Lord, and that it is a great grace to have good fathers. Verse. 7. Teaches us,
that wicked men should not talk of good things, nor great personages give
themselves to lying and injury. Verse. 8. Sets out, what great hurt comes
by giving and taking of rewards or bribes. Verse. 9. Teaches us, to cover such
matters as may break and hinder growth in love. Verse. 10. Teaches us, that
reproves are profitable to Gods children, and that nothing will amend the
wicked and ungodly. Verse. 11. Sets out the nature of sedicious people, and
the judgment that they shall receive from God and men. Verse. 12. Sets out
the great rage and madness of the wicked and ungodly. Verse. 13. Teaches us,
not to recompense evil with evil, as worldly men do, much less to requite
good with evil, but to do good for good, and to overcome evil with well
doing. Verse. 14. Teaches us, to withstand the beginnings, as of all evil
generally, so particularly of strife and contention. Verse. 15. Teaches us, to
beware what we utter, either with or against men. Verse. 16. Teaches us, that
neither wealth, nor any outward things can attain heavenly wisdom. Verse. 17.
Teaches us, that amongst Gods children there should be at all times a steadfast
bond of love, specially in the days of adversity. Verse. 18. Teaches men to
beware of suretiship. Verse. 19. Teaches us, to beware of contention with
others, and also of pride or lifting up our selves above others. Verse. 20.
Teaches us, to fly from frowardnes of heart, and naughtines of speech. Verse.
21. Teaches us, that lewd and ill children are great grief unto their
parents. Verse. 22. Sets out what commodities joy of heart brings with it,
and also the discommodities of a sorrowful heart. Verse. 23. Declares what
great mischief bribes and rewards given and taken do work. Verse. 24.
Teaches us, that men's countenances many times bewray, either their wisdom or
their folly. Verse. 25. Teaches us, that evil children are matters of great
grief to their parents. Verse. 26. Teaches Magistrates justly to execute
justice, and to punish no man for well doing. Verse. 27. Teaches us to avoid
multitude of words and babbling, for where there are many words, there is much
sin. Verse. 28. Teaches us, that there seldom or never comes any hurt by
silence, but rather credit sundry times.

CHAP. 18.
Co.
IN the latter end of the other Chapter, he spoke of a prudent or wise man: now
in the beginning of this he shows, that such a man will spare no cost nor
labor, to the end he may have his desire satisfied in obtaining holy and
heavenly wisdom.

Di.
verse. 1. to the end of the 8. wherein he speaks of the desire of wisdom, of
the foolish and wicked man, of wise words, of respect of persons, of the words
of fools and tale bearers, and the hurt which comes by them verse 9. to the
end of the 16. wherein he speaks of the slothful person, of Gods power, of
riches of pride, and humility, of hasty answers, of the grief of body and
soul, of pains to get verse 17. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he
speaks of the first complainer, of the use of the lot, of the wrath of
brethren, of good words and speeches, of a good wife, of the poor and rich,
and of a true friend or brother.

Se.
Verse. 1. FOr the desire thereof, [i. for the earnest affection that he has
to obtain holy and heavenly wisdome] he, [i. a good man] will separate
himself [vz. from all that he has, that may let him] to seek it, [i. to the
end he may seek and find it: see Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46.] and occupy
himself: [i. he will carefully employ himself, and diligently also,] in all
wisdom, [i. in wisdom it self, and in all the means whereby he may grow
and increase in the same: others I know read it otherwise, and give anosense,
but me thinks this is plain enough.] Verse. 2.] A fool has no [vz. at all]
in understanding, [i. either in the thing it self, or in the means, whereby
it may be obteyned] but [vz. his delight is] that his heart, [i. the things that
be in his heart] may be discovered. [vz. to other men, and that by his vain
babbling and speaking of every thing that comes into his mind: q.d. he is
only delighted with his own folly, which he laboreth to publish and make
known to all men.] Verse 3. When the wicked [i. wheresoever there is a wicked
man,] then comes [vz. with him, i. there is] contempt [vz. of other men, he
means that this is proper to the wicked, and is as it were his inseparable
companion, to despise others,] and with the vile man, [vz. there is alwaies]
reproach, [i. disdainefull uttering of reproaches against others. I deny not,
but that this verse may be taken, as though God should punish the wicked and
vile men, with contempt and reproach, but the other sense in my judgment, is
more simple and plain.] Verse. 4. The words of a man's mouth, [i. such words and
speeches, are like deep waters, [vz. which cannot be drawn empty, neither
can a man come to the bottom of them: so the wisdom and learning of a wise
man, never cease, but the more he utters, the more he may,] and the
welspring of wisdom [i. the great plenty and abundance he has of it, meaning
hereby also, the wise man's mouth pouring it out, and largely communicating it
to others] is like a flowing river. [i. is like to a river that flows
continually: he means by these Metaphors and similitudes, that there is
never scarsitie of wisdom in him.] Verse. 5. It is not good: [i. it is very
evil and hurtful, as chap. 17.26.] to accept [i. to regard or look vpon] the
person of the wicked: [i. any thing in him at all, as his authority, wit,
words, gifts, etc: see this forbidden, Deutero. 1.17.] to cause [vz. thereby]
the righteous to fall [i. to be ouerthrowne] in judgment. [i. where judgment
is to be pronounced. This belongs to Judges, and Magistrates, who are many
times so moved, with the power, etc. of the wicked, that the just and porer
sort come to ruin thereby, which fault should Verse. 6. A fools lips [i.
the words which a fool utters with his lippes] comes with strife, [i.
have always strife annexed unto them, as an inseparable companion, and are
mingled altogether with contentions,] and his mouth [i. the words which he
speaks with his mouth] calls for stripes. [vz. to be laid upon him for
his folly, meaning that his own words are means to hurt himself.] Verse A
fools mouth, [i. words spoken with his mouth] is his own destruction, [i.
bring hurt and destruction unto himselfe] and his lips, [i. speeches uttered
with his lippes] are a snare for his soul: [i. are instruments and means, to
bring him within the danger of the loss of his life: see chap. 10.14. 13.3.]
Verse. 8. The words of a talebearer [vz. which he utters to some against other
some] are as flatterings, [i. they seem pleasant and sweet, yea to be more
gentle than oil or butter: see Psalm. 55.21.] and [i. but for all that, or else
thus: and vz. yet notwithstanding] they go down into the bowels of the
belly, [i. into the bowels which are within the belly, meaning that they
wound even the very entrails, which being once perished, there is no hope of
life, and therefore it is as much: q.d. they wound Verse. 9. He also [vz. as
well as the talebearer, is to be misliked] that is slothful, [i. given to
idleness and loytering] in his work: [i. in doing the thing he is set about,
and should indeed performe] is even the brother of him that is a great waster
[vz. of the things which he has: he means that he is cousin german as it
were, with the prodigal person, because look what the one loses by
superfluity and riot, the other Verse. 10. The name of the Lord [i. his
Majesty, goodness and power, as sundry times in the Psalms, and namely Psalm
20.1.] is a strong tower [vz. to all such as steadfastly trust therein, meaning
by strong tower, a mighty defense to shield him, and to keep him safe, from
all the dangers, of such as would anoye him: see Psalm. 61.3.] the righteous
[vz. at all times, but specially in the days of his distresse] runs [vz.
with all possible have and speed] unto it [i. to this assured tower of Gods
strength, might, power, goodness, etc.] and is exalted, [i. lifted up, vz. into
a high place, where he shall be safe and sound, from the Verse. 11. The rich
man's riches [i. the riches which he presently possesses,] are his strong
city [i. he makes them unto himself a defense against all attemptes and
assaults made against him: see before Chap. 10.15.] and as an hie wall in his
imagination. [i. he fondly imagines, that they are sufficiently able, not
only to keep him from the violence of men, but also to shield him and cover
him so, that neither Verse. 12. Before destruction [i. before the calamity,
fall, or hurt of any man come] the heart of a man is hautie [i. a man himself
is proud and lofty: a part for the whole, and yet he mentions the heart,
because from thence pride grows, and flows: see Chap. 11.2. also 16.18.]
and before glory, [i. before a man come to glory and estimation amongst men]
goes lowlines [vz. of heart and body: q.d. humility is a mean to come to
glory: see chap. 15.33. as pride is a mean to come to contempt.] Verse. 13.
He [vz. whosoever he be] that answers [i. that takes upon him to shape an
answer to a thing] before he hears it [vz. thoroughly out, or else thus] before
he hear it, [i. before he understand it,] it [i. that manner of dealing, and
his answer also] is folly and shame unto him, [i. bewrays his own folly,
and purchases him great discredit, because he will be so rash and hasty.]
Verse. 14. The spirit [i. a man, that has a bold spirit and good courage,
specially given him from God,] will sustain. [i. endure and bear, and that
with great patience and constancie] his infirmity: [i. all outward griefs and
discommodities whatsoever,] but a wounded spirit, [i. a man stricken with the
wrath of God, and wounded in conscience, for his sins, or other great causes:
see Psalm. 51.17.] who can bear it? [i. who is able to endure it long, without
great and gracious assistance from God: q.d. there is no man, nor any thing
else: for as for the body, it cannot do it, because it is not his office to
rule the spirit and mind, but rather the mind and soul it self, although
it be carried about in the body, to rule, guide and govern it: see Proverb.
15.13. and the note of the Geneua bible, is very good also.] Verse. 15. A wise
heart [i. he gets [vz. daily more and more,] knowledge, [vz. of Gods will
revealed in his worde] and the ear of the wise, [i. the wise man himself by
attentive harkening] seeks learning, [i. seeks daily increase of the same,
he joins the heart, and the ear together, though under either of them he
understand ye whole man, because that from a heart desirous of knowledge,
proceeds the attentive ear, which is apt to learn, and earnestly seeks
after it.] Verse. 16. A man's [vz. which he gives, or bestows upon another,]
enlarges him, [i. delivers him from distresse] and leads him before great
men: [i. brings him into their presence, so that he may tell his own tale,
and speak for himself. And here he teaches what men are wont to do, and not
what may be done, though sometimes a man may give gifts to be delivered from
danger, when otherwise he cannot: but he must beware with all, that he be not
thereby injurious to any other] Verse. 17. He that is first [vz. before the
judge in his own cause, [i. in laying out his own cause, and the things
apperteyning thereto] is just, [i. so seems to be, meaning that he seems
to have a just and good cause,] then [i. afterwards] comes [vz. before the
iudge] his neighbor [i. he between him and whomthere is some controversy,]
and [vz. the judge, upon his appearance and speach] makes inquiry of him, [i.
inquireth of either of them, how the case stands, laboring by demands and
questions to get the certeintie thereof: q.d. he that first brings his cause
to the Judges, seems to plead a right cause, til his adversary be heard,
and the Judge understand the truth of the matter.] Verse. 18. The lot [vz.
whose direction is from the Lord, as Chap. 16.33.] causes [i. ought to cause]
contentions to cease, [vz. amongst men, unless they will after the manner of
giants, fight against God and his decree,] and makes a partition, [vz. justly
and uprightly,] among the mighty. [i. yea even among them, that are at great
dissension, and by reason of their strength and power might hurt one another
very much. Join this, with the other verse thus. If the matters between men,
be so hard and doubtful, that the truth of them cannot be known then let
the lot, decide the controversy.] Verse. 19. A brother offended [i. grieved and
that with his brother, for some one cause or other] is harder to win, [i. it
is a harder matter to win him to reconciliation] than a strong city, [i.
than a city well defenred: so hard a matter is it, to master men's affections:
see Chap. 16.32.] and their contentions [i. the strifes between them] are like
the bar of a palace, [which must of necessity be strong and sure, to keep
the gates of such a great and sumptuous building, wherein also many times,
things of great price, are laid up: he means, that the angers of brethren
one of them toward another, are so sharp and vehement, that they can no more
easilier be subdued, than strong defenced towns conquered, or easilier broken,
then Verse. 20. With the fruit of a man's mouth [i. with his words, which are
called the fruit of his mouth, because they come from it, as fruit from a
tree,] shall his belly be satisfied, [i. he shall have enough of it,] and
with the increase of his lips, [i. with the abundance of words that his
lips shall utter, and the increase that shall come thereof,] shall he be
filled. [i. he shall have plenty and abundance, he means that every man
shall receive the fruit of his own speech, either good or evil, even as he
has spoken either well or evil, and these Metaphors, of the belly, satisfying,
and so forth, serve but to note the abundance that he shall have either the one
way, or the other: see before Chap. 12, 13, 14. also Chap. 13.2, 3.] Ver. Death
and life, [i. all manner of evil and good, all prosperity and aduersitie] are
in the power of the tongue: [i. in the tongue itself, rightly used or abused]
and they that love it [i. to use it, either the one way, or the other] shall
eat the fruit thereof. [vz. accordingly; meaning that they shall receive
according to the goodness, or illnes of their speech, see Matthew. 12.37. It is of
the same sense and meaning, that the other verse before going is. Thus we see,
that such as speak well, do themselves and others good, and they Verse. 22. He
that finds [vz. by the special appointment of God] a wife, [i. a good,
diligent and wise wife] finds a good thing: [i. a profitable and pleasant
thing,] and receaueth [vz. even in that] favor of the Lord. [i. a sure
testimony and token of Gods favor toward him: see Chap. 19.14. he means
that a good and Verse. 23. The poor [vz. man or men, putting one for many]
speaks [vz. unto others] with prayers: [i. humbly and beseechingly as a man
may say,] but the rich [vz. man, or persons] answers [vz. when he is demanded
any thing, or else answering here is put for speaking, as before chap. 15.1, 28.
Also chap. 16.1.] roughly. [i. bitterly and sharply: we see the truth both of
the one and the other by experience.] Verse. 24. A man that has friends, [i. he
that through Gods ought to show himself friendly: [vz. toward them and others
also] for a friend [i. a faithful and unfeigned friend] is nearer [vz. unto
us, in fast and sound love many times] than a brother. [i. than a natural
brother or kinsman: q.d. there are many friends found that will show in words
and countenances, and perform in deeds and truth more steadfast friendship and
love, than brethren: see to this purpose before Chap. 17.17.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, that nothing should be so dear unto us, as Gods
heavenly wisdom. Verse. 2. Shows, that fools delight in the disclosing of
their own folly. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that we can look for nothing from
wicked men, but contempt and reproach of others. Verse. 4. Sets out the
excellency of a wise man and of his words. Verse. 5. Teaches Magistrates, to
banish far from them all respect of persons. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that
wicked men, out of the abundance of their wicked heart, speak wicked things.
Verse. 7. Teaches us, that the wicked many times speak such things as do
greatly endanger themselves. Verse. 8. Teaches us, to avoid tale carrying and
flattery: also, that though it be pleasant at the first to hear tale tellers,
yet the end is dangerous and deadly. Verse. 9. Teaches men to beware of
idleness on the one side, and prodigality on the other. Verse. 10. Teaches us,
continually to trust in the goodness and power of God. Verse. 11. Teaches us, to
avoid trust and confidence in riches, for they are not such sure things as the
world makes account of. Verse. 12. Teaches us to avoid pride, and to embrace
humility. Verse. 13. Teaches us, that rash and hasty speeches bewraieth the
folly of him that uses them, and procures his shame. Verse. 14. Shows, what
an vnbeareable burden the affliction of the soul and spirit is. Verse. 15.
Teaches us, to apply our hearts and ears, and all the parts and members of
our bodies and minds to attain heavenly wisdom. Verse. 16. Sets out what
great power gifts and rewards have. Verse. 17. Teaches Magistrates not to
believe any one party, but to examine both. Verse. 18. Sets out the right
use of the lot. Verse. 19. Teaches us, that there is no strife matchable to the
strife amongst brethren. Verse 20. Teaches us, that we shall receive the
profit of our words, either good or evil as they were. Verse. 21. Delivers
the same doctrine. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that if any man has received a good
wife from the Lord, he has received also therewith a good testimony of his
favor. Verse. 23. Declares what great difference there is between the rich
and the poor, and the words of either. Verse. 24. Teaches men to show
themselves friendly toward such, as from whom they have received friendship,
and to prefer a faithful friend before a natural brother.

CHAP. 19.
Co.
Having in the latter end of the other Chapter spoken of a faithful and sure
friend, he does in the beginning of this Chapter show, that sound friendship
consists not in the lips only, nor in abundance of riches, but in
vprightnes and sincerity of heart, though the party be poor that professes
it.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 10. In the second, he teaches men to bridle wrath,
and speaks of the favor and displeasure of Princes, of evil children, and
brauling wives, of a good wife, of idleness and deceit, of obedience, and
contempt of the word, of pity upon the poor, of due correction, of wrath,
and of good counsel: from verse. 11. to the end of the 20. In verse. 21. till
you come to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. BEtter [vz. by much or many degrees, as sundry times before] is the
poor [vz. man, or friend] that walks in his vprightnes, [i. that walks
uprightly both in word and deed toward them, with whom he is joined in
friendship,] than he that abuses his lips, [vz. by pretending great good
will in words, and yet has nothing in effect] and is a fool. [i. and so
bewraieth his folly: other read it otherwise, and give another sense of it,
but me thinks 28.6.] Verse. 2. For without knowledge [i. sound and sincere
iudgement] the mind [i. the affection and good will] is not good, [i. is not
right and sound, but hurtful, both to the one party and the other: for this
phrase, it is not good, see Chapter 17.26. Also Chap. 18.5.] and he that
hastes with his feet, [i. he that runs hastily to euill] sins. [vz.
against God and his own soul: q.d. as he has little regard of himself that
looks not to his feet, that he may discern good ways from bad, yea is in
great danger of continual falling; so he that hastily and without great
deliberation runs to this and to that, it is very Verse. 3. The foolishnes of
a man peruerteth his way. [q.d. men must ascribe it to their own folly that
things go not well with them, for here he touches them that would accuse GOD
of the evil success of their things] and [vz. yet for all that] his heart
fretteth against the Lord. [i. he is impatient, and after a sort ascribes his
evil hap, as we say, to God, and not to himself.] Verse. 4. Riches [i. rich
men: he puts the thing for the person, and yet we may notwithstanding
understand it simply of riches] gathers many friends: [vz. to him that has
them] but the poor [vz. man or person] is separated [vz. in friendship and
familiaritie] from his neighbor. [vz. for the want of his riches: for the word
seperating: see Chap. 17.9. And for the whole verse, see Chap. 14.20. q.d. all
men will be friends with rich persons, but even such as were before friendly to
the poor person, depart from him for his poverty sake.] Verse. 5. A false
witness [i. he that bears false witnes] shall not be unpunished: [vz. either
before God or man: see Deuteronomy. 19.19. and in many other places of this book: as
Chap. 6.19. Also verse 9. of this Chap.] and he that speaks lies, shall not
escape. [vz. the judgment and punishment of almighty God.] Verse. 6. Many [vz.
men] reverence the face of the Prince, [i. does face, see Deuteronomy. 1.17.] and
every man is friend to him that gives gifts. [vz. unto other men: meaning
that the liberal person has many friends.] Verse. 7. All the brethren all the
kinsfolks, how nigh or far off so ever they be, if they be alive, and be
richer than he] of the poor [vz. man, that is fallen into decay] do hate him:
[i. do despise him, or little regard and set by him] how much more [vz. soon
or easilie] will his friends [i. his counterfeit and feigned friends: for of
his faithful ones he had said the contrary before] Chap. 17.17.] depart far
from him? [vz. in the time of his affliction and distresse] though he [vz. so
afflicted and brought into pouertie] be instant with words, [i. do earnestly
and heartily entreat them for some comfort, relief or fauour] yet they will
not. [vz. stand fast by him, or minister unto his need.] Verse. 8. He that [i.
keeps sure and fast] understanding, [i. heavenly wisedome] loves his own
soul, [i. himself: a part for the whole, or else provides well for himself.
The word in Hebrew is heart, which he uses, because understanding and wisdom
has his proper seat in the hart] and keeps wisdom [which he has obtained
and gotten] to find goodness. [i. that thereby he may come to that goodness
which never shall decay.] Verse. 9. is the same both in 5. of this Chapter,
saving that there it was said, he shall not escape, and here it is said, he
shall perish: q.d. he shall certainly come to naught.] Verse. 10. Pleasure [vz.
in the use of all Gods blessings] is not [vz. because he knows not how to use
it] much less [vz. comely is it] for a servant [vz. that is bound to another
man] to have rule over Princes. [i. to rule such as should rule others: he
means, that fools should rather have stripes, as Chapter 10.13. and
servants, service or bondage, and not abundance of pleasures and delights, or
rule over others, because they know not how to use them well.] Verse. 11. The
discretion of a man [i. the wisdom and understanding that a man has, through
Gods especial gift] deferreth [i. is a very good mean to make him to put off,
yea to remove and put away] his anger: [vz. conceived, or ready to be
expressed toward others] and his glory is [i. it makes much for his glory
and credit] to pass by [vz. without any great regard: meaning by this manner of
speech, easily to forget and to forgiue] an offense. [vz. committed against
him.] Verse. 12. The Kings wrath [vz. against any of his subiects] is like the
roaring of a lion: [i. fearful and terrible, and threatening as it were present
death. The Hebrew word signifies a young lion, which has more courage, and
roreth much more strongly, which serves also to aggrauate the danger: see
Hosea 3.4, 8. q.d. as the lion fears men and beasts by roaring: so does the
Princes wrath terrify men, but specially his subjects: see Chap. 16.14.] but
his favor [vz. toward any] is like the deaw upon the grass. [i. both
comfortable to cool it after some great heat, and profitable to make it grow:
meaning that the favor of great men is profitable for their people, and
gladdeth their 16.15.] Verse. 13. A foolish son [i. a wicked child, whether it
be son or daughter; but yet it more grieueth a man, when he in whom the hope
of his name is left, shall be dissolute] is the calamity of his father, [i.
brings grievous and intolerable misery upon his parents: see Prou. 10.1.
Also Chap. 15.20. Chap. 17.25.] and the contentions of a wife [i. such as
proceed from a wife, or else a contentious woman or wife her selfe] are like a
continual dropping. [vz. or rain or water upon stone or timber, which eats
into it or rotteth it: meaning, that they do even consume a man and his
household, 21.9. Also Chap. 27.15.] Verse. 14. House [i. lands] and riches [i.
goods and wealth whatsoeuer] are the inheritance of the fathers: [i. are such
inheritances as fathers leave to their children] but a prudent wife [i. a
godly, virtuous, and wise wife] comes of the Lord. [vz. only as a special
gift and blessing from him, see Chap. 18.22. He means not that inheritances
come not from the Lord, but because they come by the mean of the parents, they
seem in our judgment further off from God, than a good wife; and yet neither
of them fall out but according to his will, though it appear more immediately
in match of marriage, than in inheritances or possessions.] Verse. 15.
Slothfulnes causes [vz. men in whom it raigneth] to fall a sleep, [i. to be
careless and negligent of their affaires] and a deceitful person [i. he that
gives himself over to deceive others] shall be affamished. [vz. for lack of
food: meaning, he should fall into great poverty and extremity: he joins
deceit and slothfulnes together, because they are companions that can hardly
be sundred, showing that both the sluggards, which cease from doing of their
duty, and the deceitful, that live against all charity, shall be Verse. 16.
He that keeps [vz. unfeignedly, and with all his heart] the commandment, [vz.
of the Lord, meaning thereby his holy law, which consists in commandments,
one being put for all, because the law giver is but one, and obedience to the
whole tends but chiefly to one end, that is Gods glory, though indeed
eternal salvation be annexed thereto] keeps his own soul [i. he himself: a
part for the whole, meaning that through obedience he does deliver himself from
danger of eternal death and destruction] but he that despises his ways [i.
makes no account, how or after what sort he does live, nor has care to frame
his life according to the prescript rule of Gods worde] shall dye. [i. shall
certeinely perish specially in the World to come. Verse. 17. He that has
mercy [i. shows pity and compassion, either upon the poor, [i. upon such
as be distressed, and are not able to help themselues] lends unto the Lord
[vz. all that whatsoever he does which he bestows upon the poor: the reason
is because the Lord makes account of the godly poor, and things done to them,
as of himself, and performed to him: see Matthew. 25.40.] and the Lord will
recompense him [vz. to the full, yea in the largenes of his mercy, give him a
thousand times more] that which he has given. [vz. willingly, and cherefullie
to the poor. 2. Corinthians. 9.7. and that in his name, Mark 9.41. He shoots at
this mark in this one verse: that is to teach them tender hartednes toward
the afflicted, which that he may the better persuade them too, he sets
before them both a plentiful, and also an assured reward from God.] Verse. 18.
Chasten [vz. moderately, and with good discretion] thy [i. thy child, as
sundry times before] while there is hope, [vz. that thy correction will amend
him, and do him good: meaning while he is young, for if he grow to a head of
stubbornes, it will be a hard matter to reform him] and let not thy soul [i.
thy fatherly affection and pity, which are called the soul, because they
have their seat in the soule] spare [vz. him, or correcting of him, so it be
done as before is prescribed] for his murmering. [vz. against thee: q.d. though
he murmur and grudge, yet forbear not to correct him, when he deserves the
same.] Verse. 19. A man of much anger, [i. he that shall suffer punishment [vz.
either publicly or privately, for the transgressions, which his wrath causes
him to commit,] and though thou [i. any man] deliver him [vz. by good
persuasion from committing evil, or by entreaty and suit set him free from
the hand of the Magistrate] yet will his anger come again, [q.d. he will be
little or no whit at all the better, but fall to his rage and wrath again.
Other men read it otherwise, and give other senses, but me thinks this is
plain.] Verse. 20. Hear [vz. counsel, [i. good counsel given thee] and
receive whilst thou may have it,] instruction^ [vz. in the ways and truth
of the Lord,] that thou may be wise. [i. atteyne wisdome] in thy latter end.
[vz. when thou art ready to depart from the world, and go to GOD, not but
that he would have him to be wise before also, but to note that then heavenly
wisdom shall stand him in best steed, when he is to wrestle with death.] Verse.
21. Many devises are in a man's heart: [i. many men toss many but the counsel
of the Lord [i. whatsoever he has determined in his counsell] shall stand
[vz. steadfast and sure, both in the purpose, and in the performance thereof,
he minds to note the difference between Gods Verse. 22. That that is to be
desired [i. the thing that a man ought specially to desire and wish in this
life] is his goodness [i. that he deal religiously toward God, and uprightly
toward men,] and [it may be turned for, or but, without any injury to the
text,] a poor man, [vz. though he be never so poor, if he be godly] is better
[vz. by many degrees, both before God, and also in the judgment of all
goodmen, not meaning hereby that a liar being poor is good] than a liar. [i.
than one that gives Verse. 23. The fear of the Lord, [i. a reverence of his
Majesty, joined with an unfeigned love thereof settled in men's hearts] leads
to life, [i. to a blessed life in this world, and to eternal life in the world
to come,] and he that is filled therewith, [i. he that has received it
freely and plentifully from the Lord, every one according to his measure]
shall continue [vz. safe, sound, and steadfast,] and shall not be visited with
evil [vz. to his hurt and destruction; for his purpose is not here to exempt
Gods children from chastisements and corrections.] Verse. The slothful [vz. man
or person,] hides his hand in his bosom [vz. in the time of some great cold]
and will not put it to his mouth again, [vz. that thereby he might feed
himself: q.d. he is so given to idleness and sloth, that even when great need
and occasion requires his labor for himself and his own good, he will not
do it, much less would he perform it for others, see 26.15.] Verse. 25. Smite
[i. correct and chastise, either by words or stripes: see Chap. 17.26.] a
scorner, [i. one of whom there is no hope of amendment, for a scorner is in
the highest degree of transgression. Psalm. 1.1.] and the foolish [i. such as
through simplicity and ignorance, are carried forward to euill] will beware:
[vz. of the like fault, for which thou smitest the scorner,] and reprove the
prudent [vz. for some thing, wherein he has said or done amisse] and he [i.
the simple ignorant person] will [vz. in process of time,] understand: [i.
atteyne to understand by that meanes] knowledge. [vz. of a better trade and
course of life. He shows that there are two ways to instruct simple ones:
the one is sharp correction of the obstinate, Verse. 26. He that destroys his
father [vz. by bringing him to great losses and hindrances on the one side, or
by greeuing him through leudnes on the other side,] or chaseth away his
mother,] either out of the house wherein she dwells, or from his presence
with his froward speach] is a lewd and shameful child, [i. is a very wicked
fellow, and must look for shame to fall upon him, and all manner of
confusion. Others read it otherwise, but the sense is all one, vz. that wicked
children waste many times through their leudnes their fathers goods, and so
turn away their minds from them, that they are glad when they are Verse. 27. My
son [see Chap. 1.10. and other places] hear no more [i. be so far of from
obeying, that see thou hear not any longer] the instruction that causes to
err from the words of knowledge, [i. such instruction as carries thee away
from the right way of holy wisdom: q.d. apply thy self altogether to holy
doctrine, and therefore withdraw thy mind and thy thought from the use or
custom both of evil words and evil deeds.] Verse. 28. A wicked witness, [i. a
corrupt and false witnes] mocketh [i. makes no more account, either of right
causes themselves, or of Magistrates that are placed to execute justice, or of
God himself that will punish false witnesses, for so largely I suppose, the
word judgment may be taken, than of a jest, or thing to be laughed at,] and
the mouth of the wicked: [i. the wicked and ungodly person himself, and yet he
mentions the mouth, because of the Metaphor swalloweth up following]
swalloweth up [vz. with great delight and pleasure, as dronkards do strong
wine, and gluttons delicate meats: meaning also thereby the abundance of
iniquity, which the ungodly commit] iniquity [vz. against God and men. One
reads it thus:] so iniquity swalloweth up the mouth of the wicked. [q.d. in
that wicked witnesses, do scorn judgment, they do it even of obstinacy and
malice, which does wholly possess them, and even swallowe up as it were all
their words, so that they can speak or utter nothing but iniquity. An other
sense also may be given, as when our text says, swallowe up iniquity: it
means thereby, hiding and covering of the same, as meats and drinks
devoured and swallowed up, are not seen: q.d. with the color of their words,
and show of their reasons, they endeavor to cover their iniquity.] Verse. 29.
But [q.d. but for all their scorning and cunning speeches,] judgments, [i.
punishments: and the plural number notes the variety and multitude of them]
are prepared [i. not only appointed, but even in a readynes to be executed,
either by the Magistrate, or else by the Lord himself, either in this life, or
in the life to come, or both] for the scorners, [i. for such as scorn at God,
and all goodness,] and stripes for the back of fools. [hee means that which
he spoke before, expressing it under other terms, understanding hereby not
only bodily punishments in this life,] but also eternal in the life to come.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, that the godly poor estate, is not the worst: also, Do.
that we should not give our lips leave to run at random. Verse. 2.
Teaches us, that sound knowledge is the informer of the mind, also that we
should bridle the parts and members of our bodies from wickedness. Verse. 3.
Teaches us, that lack of sound judgment, is the very mother of all the
corruptions, which we commit against God or man. Verse. 4. Teaches us, that
we should not regard a man for his riches only, nor despise him for his
poverty, but respect rather his good, or his evil dealing toward God and
men. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to abhor false witness bearing, and and lying.
Verse. 6. Teaches us, rightly to esteem great personages, and to practice
liberality, as a virtue which does much commend us to GOD and men. Verse. 7.
Teaches us, that poverty, does many times estrange the hearts of friends and
kinsfolks, from such as fall into it. Verse. 8. Teaches us, that heavenly
wisdom, is the mean to preserve us, both in this life, and in the life to
come. Verse. 9. Teaches us, to flee from false witness bearing and lying. Ver.
10. Teaches us, that things uncomely are not to be allowed of. Ver. 11.
Teaches us, to bridle the rage of our angry affections, and to be ready to
forgive offenses committed against us. Verse. 12. Shows what great difference
there is between the grace and displeasure of Princes and mighty men. Verse.
13. Sets out the miseries that come by evil children, and wicked wives.
Verse. 14. Shows what a great blessing, and that from the Lord, a good wife
is. Verse. 15. Teaches us, to avoid idleness on the one side, and deceit on the
other side. Verse. 16. Sets out the good that comes by obedience of Gods
law, and the misery that insueth upon carelessness of holy conversation.
Verse. 17. Teaches us, pity and liberality toward the poor. Verse. 18.
Teaches parents, to give moderate and due correction to their offending
children or servants. Verse. 19. Sets out the great misery, that comes, by
giving our anger the reins, Verse. 20. Teaches us, always to receive good
counsel. Verse. 21. Shows, as the variety of man's mind, and the
inconstancy of all his devices, so the assurednes of the Lords purposes.
Verse 22. Teaches us, that this is the especial mark, we should shoot at
in this life, even goodness and well doing, and never to refuse a man, for his
poverty, but for his lying. Verse. 23. Sets out the effects and fruits of
the fear of God. Verse. 24. Teaches us, to shun idleness. Verse. 25. Teaches
us, that reproves can never be uttered in vain, but that it shall do good,
though perhaps not to the party reproved, yet to others which are by. Verse.
26. Teaches men to avoid all unnaturalness toward their parents. Verse. 27.
Teaches us, not to give ear toward that will provoke to sin. Verse. 28.
Does lively painte out the nature of the wicked and ungodly. Verse. 29.
Teaches us, that they shall not escape unpunished for the same.

CHAP. 20.
Co.
IN the other Chapter, and last end thereof, he taught men, for fear of
punishment to take heed how they gave themselves over to any wickedness, and
namely to false witness bearing. And now in the beginning of this Chapter, he
wills them, for the inconvenience that may ensue thereof, to beware of
dronkennes and the means of that vice, and so proceeds to deliver other
doctrines and exhortations.

Di.
verse. 1. to the end of the 10. Wherein he entreats of dronkennes, of a kings
wrath, of contention, of idleness, of the depth of man's heart, of boasting, of
fond dealing, of a good King and his duty, of natural corruption, and of
false weights and measures. The second reaches from verse 11. to 20. wherein
he speaks of good or evil works, of the right use of the eye and ear, of
sleeping or idleness, of craft and deceit, of the excellency of knowledge, of
sureties and their estate, of advice or counsel, of slandering and flattery,
of unnaturalness toward parents. The third reaches verse 1. to the end of the
Chapter, wherein he speaks of ill gotten goods, of patience, of false
weights, of Gods providence, of the right use of holy things, of a good King
or Prince, of the power and force of Gods word, of mercy and justice the two
props of all kingdoms, of young men and old persons, and of corrections.

Se.
Verse. 1. WIne [vz. taken and received immoderatly] is a mocker, [i. a deceiuer
of him that so uses it; for where as he vainly supposed, that it was sweet
and pleasant unto him, it is become hurtfull] and strong drink [the Hebrew
word imports every drink that may make men dronken] is raging: [i. it
carries those men that excessiuely use it, into outrage and violence against
others] and whosoever [vz. of what state or condition soever he be] is deceived
thereby, [i. is overtaken therewith] is not wise. [i. shows thereby, that he
has not as yet tasted of the heavenly wisdom. I allow not the note in the
Geneua bible, which refers it to the persons.] Verse. 2. The fear of the
King [vz. being once angry against fear, that terror with his wrath or anger
strikes into men with whom he is offended] is like the roaring of a lion: [i.
is very fearful and terrible: see Chap. 19.12. Also Chap. 16.14.] he [vz. how
great soever he be] that provoke [vz. by his ill demeanour] him [i. the King]
to anger, [vz. against himselfe] sins against his own soul. [i. puts
his life in very great danger, for the Kings wrath shall be toward him that
is lewd, Chap. 14.35.] Verse. 3. It is a man's honor [i. it is a glorious and
very honorable 19.11.] to cease [vz. what in him lies, and as much as is
possible] from strife: [vz. with all other men: see Romans 12.18.] but every fool
[i. every one that is foolish, and not rightly taught of God] will be meddling.
[vz. busily with other men and their matters, which is indeed the mother and
nurse of all contention.] Verse. 4. The slothful [vz. will not plow, [i.
diligently and faithfully follow his calling: for by one, which is as it were
the principal, Chap. 14.4. he understands all the rest] because of winter:
[i. because of the cold of winter: meaning, that every little blast is as a
mean strong enough to make him idle] therefore [i. for his idleness sake] shall
he beg [vz. of others] in summer, [i. in harvest time] but have nothing. [vz.
given him: he means, that the slothful person shall fall to extreme
poverty, and though he beg to get his living, yet Verse. 5. The counsel in
the heart of man [i. the devices and purposes that a man thinks upon, and
tosseth too and fro in his vnderstanding] is like deep waters: [i. can either
very hardly, or not at all be attained unto: q.d. man's thoughts are so deep,
that no man knows them, but the spirit of man which is in him, 1. Cor. 2.11.]
but a man that has understanding [i. he that is lightened from God by his word
and spirit] will draw it out. [vz. by one mean or other, as by demanding
questions, by observing diligently his gestures and behauiours, Verse. 6. Many
men [vz. that are in the world] will boast, [vz. vaine-gloriouslie, meaning
that he will to his own glory, tell and set abroad] every one [vz. of them]
of his own goodness: [i. either of the good things that be in him himself, or
of the kindness and benefits that he has performed toward others. I incline
to this latter] but who [vz. for all this boasting of theirs] can find [vz.
amongst them all] a faithful man? [i. such a one, as either will perform the
things he braggeth of, or else do it without boasting. And his propounding of it
in the way of a question does note, how rare such Verse. 7. He that walks [i.
leads a good and a holy life] in his integrity, [i. in the soundnes and
vprightnes that the Lord has given him, which is called his; not because he
has it of himself, but it is by God bestowed upon him] is just: [vz. before
God and men: before God, because he is so accepted: and before men, because his
conversation is such, as they cannot justly reprove it] and blessed [vz. from
the Lord] shall his children [i. his posteritie] be after him.] He means,
that it shall not only go well with him himself whilst he lives, but with
his posterity also, which is a common thing in Scripture to promise blessings
to the just and to their Exodus 20.6.] Verse. 8. A King [vnder the chief he
means not him only, but all inferior Magistrates] that sits [vz.
carefully and continuallie] in the throne of judgment, [i. in that place from
whence justice and judgment is pronounced: meaning also hereby, the execution
of justice and right] chaseth away [vz. quickly and easilie] all evil [i. all
manner of vice and corruption whatsoeuer] with his eyes. [i. while he himself
looks into causes, Verse. 9. Who [vz. amongst all men] can say, [vz. justly
and truely] I have made mine heart clean, [vz. from unholy and dishonest
affections: he begins with the heart, because it is the fountain from
whence corruption flows: meaning by this interrogation, that no man neither
has in himself power so to do, neither can rightly so say] J am clean from
sin? [vz. committed either 1. King. 8.46.] Ver. 10. Diverse weights [vz. to
buy and sell by, as to buy by the more heavy, and to sell by the more light]
and diverse measures, [vz. as one great and another little] both these [yea and
all such kind of crafty and covetous dealing, for under these two he
comprehends all of the same sort: see before Chap. 11. 1. Also Chap. 16.11.
where you shall find a reason why the Lord hates them, because he has made
them to be just and upright.] Verse. 11. A child [It would be better turned
thus, even a child, for otherwise that word also, makes it dark, as though it
were referred to somewhat before going] is known [vz. of men] by his doings,
[i. by the things he does commit] whether his work [i. the things that he
does: one part for many] be pure and right. [vz. before God and man: q.d. young
children do by the manners and feats of their childhood, many times bewray
what course they will take afterward in the rest of their life to come.] Ver.
12. The Lord [vz. himselfe] has made [vz. by his secret and almighty power]
both these, [vz. excellent parts and members of our bodies] even the ear to
hear, [vz. his holy word and lawe] and the eye to see. [vz. his great and
wonderful works: q.d. it behooves us therefore rightly and well to use them.]
Ver. 13. Love not sleep over much: q.d. give not thy self to over much
sleep. His meaning is to turn men from slothfulnes, which commonly causes
men to fall a sleep Chap. 19. verse. 15. Also Chap. 6.9.10.] least thou come
unto poverty: [vz. thereby. A reason why he would not have men to be idle,
because idleness begets and brings forth beggerie] open thine eyes, [vz.
to labor: q.d. be watchful, and diligently and carefully apply thy busines]
and thou shall be satisfied with bread. [vnder this phrase he means, that it
shall go well with him, and he shall have plenty and abundance of all things
necessary for the maintenance of his life: see Chap. 12.11.] Ver. 14. It is
naught, it is naught, it is stark naught, or worth very little or nothing: for
so much does the doubling of the word import, as I take it] says the buyer:
[vz. of any ware or marchandise] but when he is gone a part, [vz. from him of
whom he bought it] he boasts. [vz. of his good peniworths, and what a good
thing he has bought: q.d. the buyer, that he may get his ware good cheap,
defiles his tongue with lying, saying this and that in the dispraise thereof,
but when he has bought it, he commends it greatly, committing as it were an
offense on both sides.] Verse. 15. There is gold, [i. great store of gold, and
it is much and [vz. besides that there is] a multitude [i. an infinite number]
of precious stones: [vz. in the world] but the lips of knowledge [i. a godly
wise man, who has sound and holy knowledge in his heart, and can utter it
with his mouth, yea that very knowledge it selfe] are [vz. indeede] a precious
jewel. [i. more precious than the things before named, and therefore more to
be accounted of.] Verse. 16. Take his garment, [vz. as a pleadge or that is
surety [vz. rashly, and without good aduice] for a stranger, [vz. either to
thee, or to himself: see Chap. 11. 15.] and a pledge of him [vz. that is
become surety unto thee] for a stranger. [Expound this as before: q.d. fear
not to demand a pawn or pledge of him that will easily thrust himself into
other men's businesses, and rashly for another give his word; for if he be rash
and unadvised in his own matters, he will not be wise in thine. Neither is
this against Gods commandment, Exodus 22.26. for there he speaks of the poor
brother, who for the need of their household were constrained to lay pawnes or
gages; but here 22.20. Also Chap. 27.13.] Ver. 17. The bread of deceit [i. all
manner of maintenance craftily compassed and gotten] is sweet [i. so seems to
be at the first] to a man: [i. to a worldly minded man] but afterward his
mouth shall be filled with gravel. [i. money and goods so gotten shall be
full of hurt and destruction to him, see Chap. 9.17.18.] Establish the thoughts
[vz. of thy heart and head] by counsel, [i. by holy counsel and good advice:
q.d. that thing is sure and steadfast, which is not attempted rashly, but with
good aduice] and by counsel [i. by good and deliberate counsell] make war.
[vz. against thine enemies: understanding by this one particular, the
attempting of all the like: q.d. do nothing at all Verse. 19. He that goes
about [vz. from place to place, and from house to house] as a slanderer, [vz.
of other men] discovers [vz. at some one time or other, either for favor,
fear, or flatterie] secrets: [vz. committed unto him to keep: see before
Chap. 11.13.] therefore meddle not [vz. at any hand, that is to say, have
nothing to do, much less communicate any close matter to such a one as
followeth] with him that flattereth [i. a flatterer and a fawner upon other
men.] Ver. 20. He [vz. whosoever he be] that curses [i. notoriously
disobeyeth, and with reuiling and cursing speeches speaks vnto] his father
and his mother, [i. his parents] his light shall be put out in obscure darkness.
[i. his name and memory shall be utterly taken away, yea he shall be deprived
of all prosperity and blessing, and shall be accursed both in this life and in
the life to come: see Exodus An heritage [i. any thing whatsoever, as goods,
lands, and such like] is [vz. many times] hastily gotten [yea, and that by
indirect and unlawful meanes] at the beginning, [i. at the first atchieuing
and getting therof] but the end thereof [i. of that heritage or possession so
hastily and unlawfully gotten] shall not be blessed. [vz. from the Lord: the
reason is, because goods hastily gotten, are commonly gotten Verse. 22. Say not
thou, [vz. either in thy heart, or with thy words] I will recompense evil:
[vz. done against me: q.d. abstain from all revenge and requiting of injury,
either in word or deed, yea abstain from the very affection of reuenging] but
wait [vz. with patience] upon the Lord, [vz. to whom vengeance does belong,
Deuteronomy. 32.35. Psalm. 94.1. and for the execution of his iudgements] and he [vz.
alone] shall save thee. [i. keep thee safe and sound from the rage of all thine
enemies, and al hurts whatsoever.] Verse. 23. Diverse weights [see verse 10. of
this chap.] are an abomination unto the Lord, [see chap. 11.1.] and deceitful
balances [i. weights and balances, by which and with which deceit is practiced,
for otherwise balances are hardly deceitful of themselues] are not good. [i.
are much hurtful and evil: see Chap. 17.26. Also Chap. 18.5.] Verse. 24. The
steps of man [i. all the actions and affairs of man, specially concerning
good things] are ruled [vz. even every one of them wholly and altogether] by
the Lord [i. by God himself, and by his almighty power and providence,] how
can a man then [vz. as he is a man] understand [vz. rightly to dispose, and
know the effect and issue of] his own way, [i. his thoughts, words, and
purposes: see Psalm. 37.23. Proverb. 16.9. Ierem. 10.23.] Verse. 25. It is a
destruction, [i. it brings for a man [vz. of what state or calling so ever he
be] to devour that, which is sanctified: [vz. to the Lord, and to holy uses,
as it were in sacrifices: to eat the Lords part: q.d. he purchases death
unto himself whosoever he be, who either takes away from God any thing, that
is offered unto him, or holds back, that which is due unto him] and after the
vows, [i. the things vowed to the Lord, and offered to him, to take them away
from him, and the uses he has appointed them too,] to inquire. [vz. whether
they may do so, yea or no: q.d. when sin is committed it is to late to
inquire of it. Verse. 26. A wise King [i. a good and a godly Magistrate]
scatters [vz. by his the wicked, [vz. people of his land and country: we had
a like sentence before in this Chapter. verse. 8. saving that that is spoken of
evil things especially, and this of wicked persons,] and causes the wheel to
turn over them. [i. sharply, and severely punishes them: putting one kind
thereof for all. He means, that good princes, cannot away with wicked persons
Psalm. 101.7, 8. but rooteth them out as a good husband man does the chafe
from the Wheat, under the word wheel, he alludeth to the manner of threshing,
used among the Jews, whereof see Isaiah. 28.27.28.] Verse. 27. I would restore
this whole verse out of a worthy Man's soul [vz. wherein is placed the gift of
reason and vnderstanding] is as it were the Lords light [i. is such an
excellent part, as into which God has powered great light, and wherein also
his glory does wonderfully appeare] which [vz. soul and understanding of
man,] searches [vz. out and thorowly] all the bowels of the belly. [i. all
the most secret and inward things q.d. GOD has put into man's soul a light, by
which he searches out the most deep and secret things, I take it to be the
same in meaning, though not in words, with verse. 6. of this Chapter.] Verse. 28.
Mercy, [i. pity and compassion toward such as are oppressed] and [i.
ministering of justice, truly and vprightly] preserve [vz. from all violence
and danger,] the King, [i. both his person and state: understanding also there
by the name of King, all Magistrates, both superior and inferior: see Psalm.
101.1.] for his throne [i. he and his kingdom, a part of princelike pomp,
put for the whole] shall be established [vz. assuredly to continue and abide
for euer] with mercy. [i. with practicing pity and compassion as before in
this verse.] Verse. 29. The beauty of young men [i. that which is their
strength, [i. the strength, agilitie, and good gifts of the body that God
has endued them withal, specially if they use them to the good of the
country and common wealth wherein they live,] and the glory of the aged, [i.
that which brings glory and credit to the old folkes] is the gray head, [i.
experience, wisdom, counsel, and other gifts, which in length and process
of time, they have atteyned too: see Chap. 16.31.] Verse. 30. The blewnesse of
the wound [vz. which arises by sharp and severe punishments: putting the
thing following punishment, for hard and sharp punishment it selfe] serves to
purge the evil: [vz. that rests and remains in wicked persons] and the
stripes, within the bowels of the belly [vz. serve to the same end, meaning
by stripes within the bowels of the belly, sharp and cutting corrections,
which pearse as it were even to the entrails, he means that wicked people
cannot be reformed, but by sharp and vehement corrections, no more than
dangerous diseases can be cured, without biting and pearsing medicines.

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches us to beware of dronkennes, and whatsoever may draw us on
thereto. Verse. 2. Teaches us to take heed, how we provoke any Magistrate
against us, specially the chiefest. Verse. 3. Teaches us, to beware of
contention, and to take heed, that we be not busy bodies in other men's
matters. Verse. 4. Teaches us, to avoid idleness for fear of poverty, that
will ensue thereof. Verse. 5. Teaches us, that man's heart, is a froward, and
unsearchable evil: also that the wise notwithstanding the depth thereof, can
perceive many things therein. Verse. 6. Teaches us, to shun vaineglorious
boasting, also that the number of trusty men is small. Verse. 7. Commends
unto us upright walking and conversation. Verse. 8. Sets out the great
profit, that comes by good Magistrates. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that none is
free from sin. Verse. 10. Teaches faithful dealing in all trades. Verse. 11.
Teaches us, that words and deeds do many times bewray great corruption of
the heart. Verse. 12. Teaches us, rightly to use the ear, the eye, and all the
parts and members of our bodies. Verse. 13. Teaches us, to avoid idleness, and
whatsoever may provoke thereto, and diligently to employ our selves in our
callings. Verse. 14. Teaches us, both in buying and selling, to avoid all
craft and subtlety. Verse. 15. Teaches us, that the knowledge of God and his
truth, is better worth than all precious things whatsoever. Ver. 16. Teaches
men to deal sharply with such, as rashelie take upon them suertiship. Verse.
17. Teaches us, that deceit and craft, cannot long prosper. Verse. 18.
Teaches us, to do or think nothing rashly, but with very good advise.
Verse. 19. Teaches us to shun, first slandering of others, secondly,
disclosing of other men's sins, and thirdly, flattery. Verse. 20. Teaches
us, that disobedient children shall not prosper. Verse. 21. Teaches us, that
goods quickly gotten, are not only suspicious amongst men, but also accursed
before GOD. Verse 22. Teaches us, not to render evil for evil unto any, it
teaches us also, in patience to wait for the Lords work, either toward our
selves, or others. Verse. 23. Teaches us, to deal vprightlie and faithfully,
in our weightes and measures. Verse. 24. Teaches us, that men can neither
think nor do any thing without the Lord. Verse. 25. Teaches us, at no hand to
meddle with any thing that appertains to the Lord. Verse. 26. Teaches princes
and Magistrates their duty, to wit, that they sharply punish wicked men.
Verse. 27. Describes, the excellency of that immortal part of man his soul.
Verse. 28. Sets out the duties of Magistrates and judges. Verse. 29. Teaches
us, to refer all that we have, to the glory of God, and the good of the
Common wealth wherein we live. Verse. 30. Teaches, that the Magistrate should
use sharp and severe punishment against such, as will not otherwise be
reformed.

CHAP. 21.
Co.
IN the other Chapter and the last verse thereof, he spoke of correction that
magistrates should execute against the obstinate wicked, and now in the first
verse of this Chapter, he shows, that they cannot do, neither that, nor any
thing else, but by special motion and grace from God, who both in them and
others works all in all.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into four parts. The first reaches from verse.
1. to the end of the eight, wherein he entreats, of the providence and
knowledge of God, of vprightnes toward men, of pride, of diligence, and
speaks against rashness, deceit, theeuerie, etc. The second reaches from
verse. 9. to the 16. Wherein he speaks of a contentious woman, of the cruelty
of the wicked, of chastisement, of Gods judgment against the wicked, of hard
hartednes against the poor, of gifts, and of the punishment of the wicked,
and the blessing of the good. The third reaches from verse. 17. to the end of
24. Wherein he deals against excess in pleasure, wine, etc. and the
contentious woman, and commends the wise, and the righteous person, speaking
also of the bridling of the tongue, and against pride and wrath. The fourth
reaches from ver. 25. to the end of the chapter wherein he speaks against
the slothful and covetous person, and the offering of wicked men, also against
false witness bearing, hard hartednes in sin, and trust in any thing, save in
the Lord only.

Se.
Verse. 1. THe Kings heart [vz. and the disposition thereof] is in the hand of
the Lord [i. in his power, to be ruled, as he will,] as the rivers of waters
[vz. are in men's powers, to be drawn hither and thither through their labor,
as they shall think meet,] he [i. God] turns it [i. the Kings heart and
affection] whether soever it pleases him, [q.d. as gardners and others, for
the watring of their gardens and grounds, or for trade of merchandise bring
rivers of water, sometimes to one place, sometimes to another: so does the
Lord guide Kings hearts: not but that he governs other men also, but because
this seems a more Verse. 2. Every way of a man [i. every matter that a man
attempteth, either in thought word, or deed] is right, [i. seems so to be]
in his own eyes: [i. in his own judgment: he puts one, yea the surest of
his senses, such as the eye or sight is, for judgment and vnderstanding] but
the Lord pondereth [vz. vprightlie and iustly] the hearts [vz. of men, that is
not only their outward actions, 16.2.] Verse. 3. To do justice and judgment
[i. for one man to deal uprightly and justly with another: see Micah. 6.8.]
is more acceptable [i. is better liked of, and that by many degrees] to the
Lord, [vz. who alone knows what is right and good] than sacrifice, [i. than
any or many sacrifices, yea though GOD himself have prescribed them, without
justice and judgment: he means that God prefers obedience, yea and that
to the morrall law, before sacrifice: see 1. Samuel. 15.22. A hautie look [i.
even the very show of pride manifested in the countenance or eyes, see Chap.
6.17.] and a proud heart, [i. a heart given to pride] which is the light of
the wicked: [i. which the wicked takes to be his glory, estimation and
credit] is sin [vz. against God, and is so reputed and esteemed also Verse. 5.
The thoughts of the diligent [vz. person meaning such a one as does diligently
and faithfully follow his calling, doing all things wisely in time, place,
etc. do surely bring abundance: [vz. of profit and good things with them: see
Chap. 10.4. also Chap. 13.4.] but who soever is hasty, [i. rash in his
purposes and deedes] comes surely to poverty. [i. cannot choose but be a
poor man at the last, for that is one of the punishments, Verse. 6. The
gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue, [i. goods and treasures gotten
through lying and deceite] is vanity [i. like to a vain thing, or a thing of
no weight or importance, as chafe, dust, etc.] tossed too and fro [vz. by the
wind] of them that seek death: [he means that it is the vain delight of
fond and foolish men, to seek to get riches unlawfully, which is a matter of
no more importance than dust: or else he sets out a double discommoditie of
riches wickedlie, gotten; to wit, that they perish quickly, and bring with
them destruction, see Chap. 10.2. also Chap. 13.11. One reads it thus.
Treasures gathered together with the tongue of falsehood, [i. riches and goods
gotten by any false means whatsoeuer] are tossed too and fro like vanity: [i.
they are not durable, or last not long with the parties or their posterity so
gathering them] they that seek them [i. those riches, or to be rich by such
meanes] seek death. [i. destruction unto themselves: q.d. evil gotten goods
are many times ill consumed, and destroy them that have them, as appears in
the Verse. 7. The robbery of the wicked [i. that the every which the wicked
commit against other, and the goods gotten thereby] shall [vz. certainly, and
assuredly] destroy them, [i. the wicked themselues] for they have refused [i.
they have stubbornly and wilfully denied] to execute judgment. [i. to deal
justly and uprightly, if we refer it to the common sort; but if we refer it
to judges and rulers, then it imports in judgment to yield to every man his
right.] Verse. 8. The way of some [i. the life and conversation is perverted
[vz. from all equity and right] and strange: [vz. from the order that God
himself has prescribed in his word, and his children allow and like of] but
of the pure man, [i. of him that deals uprightly, and with a single heart]
his work [i. the things that he doth] is right. [i. just, plain, and good.]
Verse. 9. It is better [i. it shall be more ease to dwell [vz. even alone, and
without companie] in a corner of the house top, [i. in a most inconvenient
place, yea though it do not only want necessary room, but also be subject
to the heat of summer, the coldness of winter, the force of the wind, the
beating of the rain, etc.] than with a contentious woman [i. with a woman
given to brauling and chiding] in a wide house. [i. in a very large, pleasant,
and profitable room to dwell in: see Chap. 25.24. And concerning a contentious
woman, see Chap. 19.13. Also Chap. 27.15.] Verse. 10. The soul [i. the very
heart and affection] of [vz. man] wishes [vz. continually] evil: [i. hurt and
mischief to all but himself, he is so kindled with enuie] and his neighbor
[i. he that dwells by him: meaning also thereby any other; for he that does
not good to those that be about him, is hardly drawn to profit others] has
no favor in his eyes. [i. finds no friendship at his hands, yea he is so
far of from doing him good, that he will not yield him a good countenance.
He declares the great readiness that is in the wicked to hurt others, who is so
far off from benefiting others, that he will not pleasure his friends and
companions.] Verse. 11. When the scorner is punished, [vz. by the Magistrate and
the foolish is wise: [i. becomes wise, or learneth wisdom thereby to avoid
wickedness. By scorner, he understands him that is as it were desperately set
upon all wickedness; and by foolish, such a simple one as is of ignorance
deceived: see Chap. 19.25.] and when one instructs [vz. rightly and soundly]
the wise, [i. he whose heart is inclined to wisdom] he will receive knowledge.
[vz. by that instruction and exhortation.] Ver. 12. The righteous teaches [vz.
both by word and example, and all to draw on to goodnes] the house of the
wicked: [i. the ungodly man, and all that belong unto him] but [vz. for all
that] God [vz. himself in his justice and iudgement] overthrows the wicked
[vz. because they will by no means be bettered, but despise admonition,
reproof, etc.] for their evil. [i. for their sin committed against him and
men. I know there are other reading and senses of this verse, but me thinks
this is plain.] Verse. 13. He [vz. whosoever that stops his ear [vz. that
he may not hear: meaning hereby also, he that uses any mean to turn away
himself, and his compassion from the poore] at the crying of the poor, [i.
when the poor and needy cries unto him for relief and succour] he shall
also cry [i. earnestly call upon or entreat, either God or man, or both] and
not be heard. [i. be never a whit the better for it, for it is a just thing
with God, yea and with good men also Verse. 14. A gift [vz. both given and
received also to any, either high or low offended with thee] in secret [i.
closely and secretly giuen] pacifieth anger, [vz. conceived against a man] and
a gift in the bosom [i. carried in the bosom, and so given to another man]
great wrath. [i. pacifieth and stilleth mighty and raging wrath: see Prouer.
17.8. 18.16.] Verse. 15. It is joy to the just [i. the just man takes great
delight and pleasure] to do judgment: [i. to deal uprightly and justly with
every man, see verse 3. of this Chap.] but destruction shall be to the workers
of iniquity. [i. all unjust and ungodly persons shall be destroyed: for
workers of iniquity see Psalm. 5.5. Also Psalm 6.8.] Verse. 16. A man [vz.
whosoever he be] that wandereth [vz. either of ignorance, or malice, or both,
if he continue in the same] out of the way of wisdom, [i. out of the course
that Gods wisdom revealed in his word prescribeth] shall remain [vz. for
euer] in the congregation of the dead. [i. amongst that great number of people,
that either are dead already both in body and soul, or else through their
Verse. 17. He that loves pastime, [i. to satisfy his delight and pleasure in
all thinges] shall be a poor man [vz. though he were never so rich before]
and he that loves wine and oil [i. he that gives himself to riot, excess,
and all kind of pleasures] shall not be rich. [vz. very long, for the
following of these things will consume his Verse. 18. The wicked shall be [vz.
as it were] a ransom for the just, [i. when the righteous shall be delivered
from distress, the other shall fall into it] and the transgressor for the
righteous. [it is the same which he 11.8.] Verse. 19. It is better to dwell
[see verse 9. of this Chap.] in the wilderness, [i. in a most rude, and wanting
place] than with a contentious and angry woman. [vz. though the place wherein
they should dwell together, were never so large and fair: see chap. 19.13.
Also chap. 25.24. Also 27.15.] Verse. 20. In the house of the wise [i. in his
storehouse or treasurie] is a pleasant treasure and oil: [i. there is to be
found plenty of things that are to be desired: and he names specially oil,
because it is a notable thing: see Judges 9.9.] but a foolish man deuoureth it.
[vz. even that which he himself, or others for him, as his parents or friends
have laid up in store: q.d. A wise man does abundantly get unto himself goods
and ornaments, and keeps them that are provided for him, Verse. 21. He that
follows after [i. does earnestly pursue, and carefully practice or perform:
see Hebrew. 12.14. Also Psalm. 34.14.] righteousness [i. good and faithful
dealing, yielding to every man his right] and mercy, [vz. toward such as be
afflicted and in distresse] shall [vz. certainly and assuredly] find [vz. both
before God and man, for the Lord will bring to pass that no man shall be
injurious unto him, but every where yield him his right] life, [i. all manner
of blessings in this life] righteousness, [i. upright and faithful dealing
toward him] and glory. [vz. both here, and in the life to come.] Verse. 22. A
wise [i. he that is truly wise indeed] goes up [vz. through his wisdom, and
that as a conqueror, in peace without any resistance] into the city of the
mighty, [i. into a city that mighty men possess and keepe] and casts
down [vz. through his excellent wisedome] the strength of the confidence
thereof. [i. the walls and bulwarks of it wherein they much trusted, thinking
themselves thereby to be safe: he means, that wisdom is more excellent than
strength: see Eccle. 9.16.] Verse. 23. He that keeps [vz. his mouth and his
tongue, [vz. from uttering evil things] keeps his soul [i. his life, and he
himselfe] from afflictions. [i. from manifold both outward and inward troubles.
The reason is, because that death and life are in the power of the tongue,
Chap. 18.21.] Verse. 24. Proud, hautie, and scornful [vz. both before God is
his name [i. is he himself, and the glorious report that goes of him] that
works [vz. against other men] in his arrogancy [i. in the pride of his
heart] wrath. [vz. how much, or how little soever it be: q.d. the proud and
angry person shall be contemned both of God and man.] Verse. 25. The desire of
the slothful [i. the thing that the slothful desires, being delaied, and not
performed toward him] slaieth him: [i. kills him, or grieueth him at his
heart] for his hands refuse to work. [vz. thereby to get his living, and to
maintain himself: q.d. he does nothing but wish, and uses not the means to
obtain, and therefore he must needs perish: see Chap. 13.4.] Verse. 26. He [i.
the slothful person or the wicked] coueteth greedily, [vz. another man's goods
to satisfy his need withal, and yet has never a whit the more] but the
righteous gives [vz. unto such as are in distress, God has blessed him with
such abundance] and spares not. [vz. to give frankly and freely, according
to the portion which he has received: see Psalm 37.25.26.] Verse. 27. The
sacrifice of the wicked [i. that service whatsoever it be, is an abomination:
[i. an abominable thing to the Lord, and such as he cannot like of: see Chap.
15.8.] how much more [vz. is it abominable] when he brings it [vz. into the
Lords presence or into his temple to be offered there] with a wicked mind? [i.
when his heart is seized with wickedness, rendering it, thinking thereby the
better to perform some wickedness, as Balaam and Balaak did: Number. 23. or else by
wicked and unlawful means, as Malach. 1. q.d. It is always evil, but then
most wicked indeed, see Isaiah 1.13.] Verse. 28. A false witness [i. he that
shall perish: [i. shall certainly come to naught and be punished: see Chap.
19.5.] but he that hears, [vz. the truth of matters, knowing also the same,
and is as it were an eye witness: he puts one sense for sundrie] speaks
[vz. the truth, and nothing but it] continually. [i. always and in all places
when he is called thereto: q.d. he may boldly speak, because he utters
nothing Verse. 29. A wicked man hardens his face: [i. boldly and impudently,
without fear of God or shame of men, goes on to perform the wickedness he
purposed] but the just, [vz. man] he [q.d. he indeed] will direct [vz.
according to the truth of Gods word, and all equitie] his way. [i. all his
ways, words, thoughts and deeds, and the whole course of his life: q.d. the
ungodly does obstinately respect his lust, and not his duty, and casts
from him all shamefastnes; whereas on the other side, the godly diligently and
wisely pursues the things he has to do.] Verse. 30. There is no wisdom,
[vz. in man] neither understanding, nor counsel [by these particulars he
means, that there is nothing in man, either wit, will, or power, that can
infringe or let the Lord in his purposes and works, which thing he declares
also by a particular example in the next verse following] against the Lord. [i.
that is able to withstand him and his Verse. 31. The horse is prepared [i. not
only made ready, but also furnished] against the day of battle: [i. against
the time that men go to fight with their enemies: q.d. men make ready all
things necessary and meet for their own defense. For I suppose that we may
understand by this one particular of the horse, all outward aids whatsoever:
see Psalm 33.16, 17.] but salvation [i. deliverance from danger and distresse]
is of the Lord. [vz. only: see Psalm 3.8. where the word salvation is
likewise used also.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, that God by his power and providence governs all
things whatsoever, both general and particular. Verse. 2. Teaches us, not to
stand upon our own imaginations, but upon the approbation of the Lord. Verse.
3. Teaches us to deal uprightly and faithfully with all. Verse. 4. Teaches us
to avoid pride both in heart and countenance. Verse. 5. Teaches us, advisedly
and diligently to perform the things we are to do, and to beware of hastines
and rashness. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that evil gotten goods shall not long
prosper. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that the wicked shall not carry their robbery
away unpunished. Verse. 8. Teaches us to fly from evil, and to do good, and
that the one is a note of goodness, and the other of evil. Verse. 9. Teaches
us, what a hurtful thing a disquiet life is between a man and his wife. Verse.
10. Shows the nature of the wicked, who are given to wish and do evil
against other men. Verse 11. Teaches us, that punishments laid upon some,
profit other some to goodness. Ver. 12. Teaches us, to have a care to instruct
one another, yea even the very ungodly: it sets out also the judgment of
God against the wicked and their ungodly raze. Verse. 13. Gives us to
understand, what a great sin hard hartednes, and the want of compassion is.
Verse. 14. Declares what power and force gifts secretly given have. Verse. 15.
Teaches us, what joy and consolation the godly should take in well doing:
also what judgment the wicked must look for. Verse. 16. Teaches us, what
danger it is to straye from the word of God. Verse. 17. Teaches us, to beware
that we have not our hearts carried away, even in the use of lawful things.
Verse. 18. Sets out Gods favor toward the good, and his punishment of the
wicked. Ver. 19. Teaches the discommoditie of a brawling and chiding wife.
Ver. 20. Teaches us, that godliness is crowned with abundance: and wickedness
with want. Verse. 21. Teaches that good doing shall never be left unrewarded.
Verse. 22. Teaches us, that godly wisdom is better than strength. Verse. 23.
Teaches us, to bridle our tongue and speech. Verse. 24. Teaches us to beware
both of pride and anger. Verse. 25. Teaches us, to beware of idleness. Verse. 26.
Teaches us to shun covetousness, and to embrace true liberality. Verse. 27.
Teaches us, that nothing that the wicked do, is acceptable before God. Verse.
28. Teaches us, to avoid false witness bearing, and to speak nothing, but
that whereof we have the certain knowledge. Verse. 29. Teaches us, to beware
of hard hartednes and impudency in sin: and to order all our actions,
according to truth. Verse. 30. Teaches us, that nothing within man, or
without man, can hinder Gods purposes. Verse. 31. Teaches us, that howsoever
means be used, yet there can be no deliverance, but by the Lords grace and
working.

CHAP. 22.
Co.
IN the end of the other Chapter, he entreats of matters concerning God, to
wit of his power and goodness, saving men from danger and distresses: and now he
passes from them in the beginning of this Chapter, and deals with some
things which directly concern men, as a good name, favor, wise dealing, etc.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into three parts. In the first he speaks of
verse. 1. to the end of the 10. In the second he entreats of pureness of heart,
of Gods savor verse. 11. to the end of the 21. In the third, he speaks against
verse. 22. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. A Good name [vz. amongst men: meaning hereby a good reporte] is to
be chosen [vz. by such as love and fear the Lord, and the fellowship of his
saints] above great riches, [i. more than any riches a man can attain too in
this life: see Ecclesiast. 7.3.] and a loving favor [vz. from good men,
obtained also, by good dealing: and he speaks here of the favor and good
will of men, because it is a common companion of good report, and is no more
sundred from it, then the shaddowe from the bodie] is [vz. more worth, or more
to be desired, or as he said before, to be chosen] above silver and above
gold. [i. above all the rich and precious treasures of this world whatsoever:
see for this phrase Psalm. 19.10.] The rich [vz. men of the world,] and the
poor [vz. people also] meet together, [vz. many and sundry times, even as
it were waifaring men, the Lord thereby sensibly preaching as it were unto
them, that riches and poverty are not natural, but laid upon them according
to his good pleasure] the Lord [vz. alone,] is the maker of them all, [i. he
makes one rich and another poor: see Chapter. 14.31. also Chap. 17.5. for
making of the poor. And in this, God has showed his singular providence and
wisdom, for if all were rich, no man would labor, and if all were poor, they
could not 29.13.] Verse. 3. A prudent man, [i. he that has learned holy and
heavenly wisdome] sees [vz. by the eye of faith] the plague [vz. coming:
understanding by plague, any evil or danger whatsoever,] and hides himself,
[i. laboreth by all lawful means to escape the same: or else commits
himself to the providence of God until those dangers be ouerpast, as David
says in one of his Psalmes] but the foolish, [i. the wicked and vngodlie] go
on still [vz. in their iniquity and transgression, and are even rashly, and
impudentlie carried, whether so ever their mind leads them,] and are punished
[vz. from God, and that justly, by reason of their sins committed against God
and their brethren.] Verse. The reward [vz. both from God and men] of humility,
[i. that true humblenes of mind hath] and the fear of God [i. the reward,
which the fear of God brings with it,] is [vz. certainly and assuredly]
riches and glory and [i. all good things both in this life, and in the life to
come.] Verse. 5. Thorns and snares, [i. most grievous calamities and
punishments] are [vz. to be found] in the way of the froward, [i. in those
ways and courses which he takes: q.d. for his wicked and froward behavior,
such and such calamities hang over his head: and so it is set, as it were
against the other verse] but he that regards his soul [i. has care and
consideration of his own salvation: a part put for the whole,] will depart
[vz. with all possible and convenient speede] far from them, [i. either from
the men themselves, or from such miseries as hang over their heads, or from
such misdemeanors, as have Verse. 6. Teach a child, [i. every child, for the
commandment is generall] in the trade of his way, [i. in the order and course
of his life, meaning thereby, virtuous and good education: in holy and good
things,] and when he is old, [i. grown to more age] he shall not depart from
it, [i. he shall very hardly, or not at all depart from that good course:
q.d. Instruct him, to pass his life godly, justly, honestly and lawfully,
in all the things, which concern Gods worship, or holy fellowship amongst
men.] Verse. 7. The rich [vz. man] rules the poor, [i. is preferred and the
borower is servant to the man that lends: [vz. unto him, in the time of his
need: q.d. it commonly so falls out amongst men, that the rich rule the
poor, and that the detters are servants to their creditors, whether this be
don rightly or wrongfullie he expresses not, but only teaches, what is
usually don.] Verse. 8. He that sows iniquity, [i. he that gives shall
reap affliction, [i. punishment and calamity, specially from God: see Job.
4.8. also Galath. 6.7, 8.] and the rod [i. the power, and force, the sign of
a thing, put for the power thereof,] of his anger [vz. toward others,] shall
fail. [vz. in such sort, that he shall not be able to accomplish any
mischief.] Verse. 9. He [i. he that is merciful and liberal toward others,
as an evil eye, is put for an envious or evil affection, see Matthew. 20.15.]
He shall be blessed: [vz. mightily, and that from the Lord] for he gives
[vz. freely and liberallie] of his bread: [i. part of his food and
sustenance] unto the poor. [vz. that wants the same, and is in need
thereof.] Verse. 10. Cast out [vz. of thy company, country, commonwealth,
City, or house, wherein thou dwellest] the scorner, [i. him that gives
himself to scoffing and deriding, specially at good men and matters,] and
strife [vz. between him and others well affected] shall go out [vz. from
amongst you, and that immediately: q.d. there is no way to avoid contention
with scorners, but by thrusting them out of company, for while they give
themselves to scoffing, and take a certain pride and pleasure therein, they
do nothing but provoke brawling and quarrels,] so [i. by that means, of
throwing them out] contention [vz. amongst men, whilst many times there is
partaking,] and reproach, [i. shame, following such contention] shall cease
[vz. both quickly and assuredly; he means, that the scorner being present,
strifes are stirred up, and from strife, shame, and reproach, but if he be once
absent, all those things cease.] Verse. 11. He that loves [i. makes much of,
and pureness of heart, [i. soundnes, sincerity, and vprightnes in the inward
man] for the grace of his lips [i. because he utters also gracious and
grateful things, and not such as tickle the ears, but proceed from the
soundnes of the inward man: q.d. he that is endued with these two holy gifts,
vprightnes of heart, and wisdom of speech,] the king shall be his friend. [i.
he shall be well and friendly used of great personages, for the king either
will, or should delight in such persons.] Verse. 12. The eyes of the Lord [i.
his gracious mercy and great providence: for he speaks of God according to
the manner and capacity of men,] preserve [vz. safe and sound, from all hurt
and danger,] knowledge [i. men endued with true knowledge and wisdom, the
gifts and qualities of the mind being put for the persons endued therewith,]
but he overthrows [vz. utterly, and that in his great iudgement] the words
[i. the thoughts, words, and deeds, for under this speech, he comprehends
them all] of the transgressor. [i. of all such, as transgress his Verse. 13.
The slothful man, [i. he that is given to sloth and idleness,] says [vz.
openly even in the hearing of many, specially of those that are to employ
him:] a Lion is without [vz. in the way, that he should go,] J shall be
slain in the streate: [i. he brings in the idle person, who shunning labor,
imagines many dangers and difficulties, where either there are none at all, or
else very 15.19.] Verse. 14. The mouth, [i. the fair speeches, and flattering
words, uttered with the mouth] of strange women: [i. of harlots, or whores,] is
as a deep pit, [i. full of great danger, into which if a man fall, he can
hardly get out again: see Chap. 2.16. also Chap. 7.25, 26, etc.] he with
whom the Lord is angry [vz. for his grievous sins and transgressions
committed against him,] shall fall therein. [vz. as a punishment Verse. 15.
Foolishnes [i. wantonness and wickednes] is bound [vz. very fast, because he
has it by nature] in the heart [hee touches this part because it is the
seat of affections] of a child, [i. of every child, as verse. 6. of this
Chap.] but the rod of correction [i. a rod used to correct, or else
correction with a rodde] shall drive it away from him, [i. shall be a very
good mean to remove it: q.d. folly, though it be fast fixed in youth, may
yet notwithstanding by correction be removed, and therefore, the father must
not spare to correct the child while he 19.18.] Verse. 16. He, that oppresses
[vz. by any means, either by fraud, force: or otherwise, for so much I suppose
the word importeth] the poor [i. the needy and such as be in want] to
increase himself: [i. to make himself more rich and mighty thereby] and
gives [vz. gifts and bribes] unto the rich, [vz. that thereby he may purchase
and procure his favor, specially in wrong causes] shall surely come to
poverty, [vz. for the indirect and unlawful means, which he uses to uphold
himself by: q.d. they sin alike, and therefore shall have alike punishment,
that gather their gain, by the hurt of the poor, and bestow upon the rich,
that which Verse. 17. Incline thine care [vz. unto the good things that I shall
propound] and hear [vz. with thy heart and vnderstanding] the words of the
wise: [i. such excellent matters, as the godly wise shall vtter] and apply
thine hand, [i. bend all the parts and powers of thine outward and inward man]
unto my knowledge. [i. unto the knowledge that I shall teach thee, it is a
grave exhortation, to receive the Doctrines, Verse. 18. For it [i. the doctrine
that I shall truly and soundly propound] shall be pleasant, [vz. unto thee:
meaning by pleasant, sweet and comfortable: and this is one argument that he
uses to persuade men to the embracing of his doctrine] if thou keep them [vz.
safe and sure] in thy belly, [i. in thy mind or heart: and here is a
Metonomie, the thing containing for the thing contained, which also is usual
amongst the Hebrues] and if they be directed together in thy lips. [i. if
together with thy knowledge inwardly, thou join the expressing of them by
words outwardly.] Verse. 19. That thy confidence [i. thy hope and trust] may
be [vz. firmly and steadfastly fixed] in the Lord, [i. upon him, and the
truth of his word and promises] I have showed thee [vz. openly and plainly,
even the will and word of God] this day: [i. all this while, as Psalm 95.7.
And so he shows what is the end of Gods word, vz. to strengthen our faith in
God] thou therefore take heed. [vz. to the things that I speak: q.d. It
stands thee in hand so to do; for what art thou without hope and trust in
God, which thou can never attain without his word.] Verse. 20. Have I not
written unto thee [vz. excellent and notable things: understanding also by
writing, all the means of publishing the same] three times [i. sundry and
many times, as 2. Corinthians. 12.18.] in counsels and knowledge, [i. such things
as consist in knowledge and counsels: q d. I have, for to that end serves the
demand.] Verse. 21. That I might show thee [vz. plainly the assurance of the
words of the truth, [i. the great certainty that these words containe] to
answer [i. that thou also may thereby be instructed to answer] the words of
truth [i. true and sound words] to them that send to thee? [vz. to the end
they may know the same, and be instructed by thee therein. And this is another
commendation of his doctrine taken from the excellency and profit thereof.]
Verse. 22. Rob not [vz. by the poor, [vz. man or person] because he is poor,
[and therefore not able to put back injury offered] neither oppress [vz. any
manner of way] the afflicted [i. he that is already in miserie] in judgment.
[i. under the pretense and show of justice and judgment. In Hebrew it is in
the gate, putting the place where judgment was executed, for judgment and
justice it self. He touches two faults: the one oppression of the poor,
because great men may the more easily do it: and the other is spoiling of
them, under pretense of justice and equity. And mark here, that the sentences
following from this place, even to the five and twenty Chapter, be for the
most part comprised in two or three verses together, one hanging upon another,
and are as it were the causes, effects, or events of the same.] Verse. 23. For
the Lord [vz. himself, if men should neglect it] will defend [i. the right of
the poor: see Chapter 23.11.] and spoil the soul [i. take away from them,
sometimes by one means, sometimes by another] of those that spoil them. [i.
of all such as take any thing by any wicked way from them. And this is a reason
why they should surcease from wickedness.] Verse. 24. Make no friendship [i.
seek not to be acquainted or familiar] with an angry man, [i. with one that
cannot rule and subdue his outrageous and angry affections] neither go [vz.
in the way, as though thou were familiarlie acquainted] with the furious man,
[i. with him that is Proverb. 15.18.] Verse. 25. Least thou learn [vz. by
keeping company with him] his ways, [i. to be like unto him in his fury,
rage, and unbridled affections] and receive [vz. either from God or men, yet so
that thou have by thy misdemenour, pulled it upon thy head] destruction to thy
soul. [i. to thy self, a part put for the whole, and here is contained a
double reason why men should avoid furious persons Verse. 26. Be not thou of
them [i. be not thou like them, or take heed that thou be not reckoned in the
number of them] that touch the hand, [vz. of another man: meaning thereby,
striking of hands, or making of a bargaine] nor among them [i. of that sort and
number] that are surety [vz. to other men] for debts. [vz. of other men: q.d.
shun suretiship, least thou hazard thine own goods, and at lengeth be
brought to necessity, for that I take to be the meaning of the next verse:
see Chapter 6.1, etc. Also Chapter 11.15.] Verse. 27. If thou have nothing to
pay, [i. if thou be not able to perform that which thou have promised] why
causest thou [vz. through thy negligence and rashnes] that he [vz. to whom thou
have given thy hand and word] should take thy bed [vz. whereupon thou lyest]
from under thee? [vz. as thou lie upon it: a reason against rash suretiship:
q d. Why do thou through thine own folly commit, that if thou be not able
to pay that which thou art become surety for, thy bed, if thou have nothing
else to give, should with thy great loss and shame be taken from thee, and so
thou have nothing 20.16.] Verse. 28. Thou shall not remove [vz. either by force
or fraud, openly or secretly, in the day or in the night] the ancient bounds
[vz. of lands or grounds, laboring thereby to enlarge thine own, and to pull
from other] which thy fathers [i. thy ancestors many years before thee] have
made. [i. have set: q.d. If they had no right, how Deuteronomie 19.14] Verse.
29. Thou see [q.d. thine own experience and knowledge teaches thee] that a
diligent man in his business [i. he that faithfully and painfully occupies
himself in his vocation, and in the things he has to doo] stands before
Kings, [i. is much in great personages presence, and they use them much in the
accomplishment of their affaires] and stands not before the base sort. [i.
is not much conversant with the common people, nor much regarded of them: the
reason is, because he is more highly called and preferred, for otherwise all
would be glad of him: all is as much, q.d. seeing diligence aduanceth men,
embrace and practice the same.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to esteem and make much of good report amongst good men
and their favor. Verse 2. Teaches us, that riches, and poverty, and all come
from the Lord. Verse 3. Teaches us, in a holy wisdom, not only to foresee,
but also to prevent what we may, dangers hanging over our head. Verse 4.
Teaches us, to strive to attain true humblenes of mind, and a right and
reverent fear of Gods Majesty in our hearts. Verse 5. Teaches us to avoid,
both the ways and companies of froward and perverse men. Verse 6. Teaches
parents, in time to train up their children in the nurture and information of
the Lord. Verse 7. Shows, how that man in the corruption of his heart,
abuses many times those things, to the maintenance of his pride and tyranny,
that God has given him for the good of others. Verse 8. Teaches us, that the
ungodly shall reap a just reward of that wickedness which they sow. Verse. 9.
Teaches us, unfeignedly to embrace liberality. Verse 10. Teaches us, to
avoid the scorners company, showing us what good shall ensue thereof. Verse.
11. Teaches us, to embrace vprightnes and soundnes of heart. Verse. 12.
Teaches us, that God is gracious to his children, but a sharp punisher of the
words and works of the wicked. Verse. 13. Teaches us, to avoid sloth and
idleness. Verse 14. Teaches us, to avoid whores and whoredom. Verse 15.
Teaches us, that moderate and ordinary correction, is a good mean to reform
things amiss in children. Verse 16. Teaches us to fly from oppression and
briberie. Verse 17. Teaches us, to hearken to good counsel. Verse 18. Sets
out the sweetness and pleasure of the word of God. Verse 19. Teaches us, that
the word is published to begin and to confirm faith in us. Verse 20. Teaches
us, that a good lesson may be often times delivered unto us. Verse 21. Sets
out both the certainty of Gods word, and also what effect it works in them
that embrace it, to wit, it makes them able to answer al things demanded of
them. Verse 22. Teaches us, to beware of oppression, whether it be committed
by force, the party being not able to resist, or by fraud, and namely under
the pretense of justice. Verse 23. Sets out Gods favor toward the
afflicted, and his judgments against them that afflict. Verse. 24. Teaches us,
to avoid anger, and wrath, and all the means whereby we may be provoked
thereto. Verse. 25. Teaches us, how hurtful and dangerous a thing it is to
keep company with the ungodly. Verse. 26. Teaches us to beware of rash and
hasty suretiship. Verse. 27. Teaches us to take heed, that by our own
unadvisedness, we be not the authors of our common woe and misery. Verse 28.
Teaches us, not to incroch upon any, but to be content with the portion which
the Lord has given us from our ancestors. Verse 29. Teaches us, to be
diligent, painful, and faithful in all our actions and affairs.

CHAP. 23.
Co.
THe holy Ghost declared in the last verse of the 22. Chapter, that diligence
aduanceth men to the presence and speech of great personages, and now in the
beginning of this Chapter he shows how they should behave themselves when
they come before them, specially when they sit to eat with them.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 11. wherein he teaches men to bridle their
appetite, he shows the uncertainty of riches, he speaks against the
nigardlie and covetous person, also against contemners of exhortation, and
extortioners, verse 12. to the end of the 25. wherein is contained an
exhortation to embrace wisdom, to correct children, he speaks of the joy
that parents have by good children, he teaches men to fear the Lord
continually, to avoid evil company, to obey parents, to get the knowledge
of truth, verse 26. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he speaks against
whores and whoredom, and against dronkards and dronkennes, setting out most
largely and plentifully the sower fruits that come thereof.

Se.
Verse. 1. WHen thou sit [vz. at the table] to eat [vz. meate] with a
ruler, [i. with a great personage or governor of the people] consider
diligently [i. carefully think upon and weigh] what is before thee, [i. what
things are set before thee, least, through variety of dishes, thou knowing not
where to begin, thou bewraie Verse. 2. And put the knife [vz. that thou have in
thy hand, or is upon the table for thee to vse] to thy throat, [He means by
this manner of speech, that men should use all means they could to bridle
their greedy desire and eating of dainties] if thou be a man given to the
appetite. [vz. of such dainty and sweet things.] Verse. 3. Be not desirous of
his dainty meats: [i. of the fine, sweet, and pleasant cates of a King, or
great person. The Hebrew word imports such things as savor well to the taste,
and are sweet and pleasant] for it is a deceitful meat. [i. it will easily draw
men on by dainties to gluttony: or it may be called deceitful, because it will
not last long: or else because the mighty suppose thereby to work some craft
and deceit against the other. In these three verses I think he specially
shoots at these two points: the one is to teach us to use judgment and
wisdom, and to bridle our affections when we are to deal with great
personages in any thing, which he expresses by one particular, that is,
sitting at the table with them. The other is, to take heed that we be not not
overtaken with dainty and sweet delicates, thereby bewraying, that there is
not that wisdom in us, that has been supposed or reported.] Verse. 4. Travail
[q.d. think not, by great and tedious travail, thou shall be rich whether God
will yea or no, for riches are Gods gift: Psalm. 127.2. neither is this
contrary to many sentences already rehearsed, wherein men are exhorted, to be
laborious and diligent: but he forbids, first immoderate toyling and care,
whereunto our savior seems to allude, Matt. 6.25. and secondly a desire, to
wax suddenly rich, which is also condemned by Gods word,] but cease [vz.
utterly and as much as in thee lyeth] from thy wisdom, [i. from that same
worldly wisdom of thine own, which indeed may rather be called distrust in
God, or covetousness, as when a man is violently carried away, with a desire to
be rich, than wisdom.] Verse. 5. Wilt [i. will thou set thine heart and
affections] upon it, [i. upon riches] which is nothing [i. which is as it were
nothing, or a matter of no great importance, and this is one reason why men
should not so greedily gape after riches, because when they have atteyned
them, they have gotten, as much as a thing of nothing. And another reason he
adds in the second part of this verse taken from the uncertainty,] for
riches takes her to her wings [i. flies swiftly and fastly away,] as an
Eagle [vz. does,] and flies into the heaven, [i. goes so far as it is an
impossible and hard matter to attain the same: q.d. set not thy affections
upon riches, for they suddenly vanish away, and when thou have gotten them,
there is an hundred ways to forgo them, as fire, water, evil detters, etc.
and that in a moment.] Verse. 6. Eat thou not the bread [i. any manner of
sustenance, as bread, meat, bread is the principal he names it] of him that
has an evil eye: [i. of the covetous, hard hearted, and nigardly minded man:
see the contrary of this, Chap. 22.9.] neither desire his dainty meats: [q.d.
be so far off, from eating them, that thou have no affection or appetite that
way, see verse. 3. of this Chap.] Verse. 7. For as though he thought it in his
[vz. when indeed he does it not,] so will he say unto thee, [vz. when thou
eatest of such things, as he has prepared,] eat and drink: [vz. of such as
we have: or as we say, you are welcome, I am sorry I have no better cheer,
etc.] but his heart is not with thee. [i. stands not uprightly affected
toward thee: he gives a reason, why men should not eat such men's meats,
because they are hollow hearted and full of hypocrisy, pretending in words
liberality, whereas they foster niggardlines in their soul.] Verse. 8. Thou
shall vomit [vz. even for very grief and sorrow,] thy morsels [i. all that
thou have eaten of his: q.d. because thou have eaten of his meat, and
perceived his niggardly mind, thou shall wish all vomited up whatsoeue it be,
it shall grieve the so much,] and thou shall loose thy sweet words. [i. the
good communication and speech, which in the time of eating thou have used shall
be as it were labor lost. One reads this and the former verse also
otherwise, and gives another sense, but me thinks Verse. 9. Speak not [vz.
grave wise, and good things] in the ears of fools, [i. in the hearing of a
very wicked and ungodly man,] for he will despise the wisdom of thy words, [i.
he will little or nothing esteem such things, as thou shall wisely and
learnedly utter. I take it to be the same in sense, which our Savior speaks
in other words, Matthew. 7.6.] Verse. Remove not the ancient bounds [see for
this, Chap. 22.28.] and enter not [vz. either by fraud, or force, or
otherwise, to take any thing away from thence, that is not thine] into the
feilds, [i. into the grounds, houses, lands, or possessions] of the fatherles,
[i. of any that are weaker than thy self, and not able to resist: for the word
used here, signifies such ones, as thorrowe want of age, are not able to
defend themselves, nor to put back injury: Psalm. 68.5.] Verse. 11. For [this
verse conteyneth a reason, why men should not oppress the poor,] he that
redeemeth them [vz. from danger and distress, meaning also, thereby that he
will redeem them, and yet to the end the godly might be rightly persuaded, of
the continual care of the almighty toward them, he speaks in the present
tense,] is mighty, [vz. so mighty, as no one man, no not all the creatures in
the world, are able to withstand the least part of his power: q.d. though thou
now oppress them, because they cannot resist thee, know yet, that the Lord,
who is mightier and greater than all, will redeem and defend them,] he will
defend their causes aganst thee. [see this expounded before, 22.23.] Verse. 12.
Apply thine heart to instruction, [i. bend all the powers and senses of thy
mind, to receive it,] and thine ears to the words of knowledge. [i. apply
all the parts and powers of thy body also, to embrace such things, as are not
only skilfully propounded unto thee, but also may build thee up in knowledge
and judgment: he uses a part of the inward, and a part of the outward, for
the whole man, both inward and outward, 22. verse. 17.] Verse. 13. Withhold not
[vz. at any hand] correction, [i. moderate and due punishment, such as the
party punished is able to bear, and his fault requireth] from the child:
[vz. that by any means deserves the same,] if thou smite him [i. chastise and
correct him] with the roode [vz. of correction,] he shall not dye. [i. either
thou shall not kill him, or hurt him, or else by that means, thou shall
withdraw him from many evils, that would lead to the death both of body and
soul: see for correction 13.24. also 19.18. also 22.15.] Ver. 14. Thou shall
smite him with the rod, [this is expounded ver. 13.] and shall deliver [vz.
by that meanes] his soul [i. him himself: a part for the whole] from hell.
[i. from danger Verse. 15. My son, [see before chap. 1.8, 10.] if thine heart
be wise, [i. if it be inclined to embrace wisdom, and thrive and grow
therein,] my heart shall rejoice [vz. very much or greatly:] and I also, [vz. my
self, in my whole man, shall take wonderful delight and Verse. 16. And my
reins shall rejoice [i. even from the inward affection of my mind, I will be
glad, for the scripture attributes, the seat of will and affections to be in
the reins, as where it says, God is the searcher of the heart and reins,]
when thy lips speak righteous things. [i. when thou shall utter good, holy
and wise things, he puts lips for speech, because they be helping
instruments to utter the voice by.] Verse 17. Let not thine heart be envious
against sinners, [vz. because thou see David Psalm 37.1. Jeremiah, and
others, and therefore it is not without cause, that this commandment is so
often put down,] but let it be [vz. fast fixed, set, and grounded] in the
fear of the Lord [i. in a sincere reverence of his Maiestie] continually [i.
at all times, both in prosperity and adversity, etc.] Verse. 18. For [this
verse conteyneth surely [i. without al doubt: and this affirmation serves for
the certainty and truth of the thing] there is an end, [vz. not only of the
wickeds prosperity and flourishing, how great or much so ever it be, but also
of thine own patience and hope] and thy hope shall not be cut off. [i. made
frustrate, or deceived, but thou shall in good time have the thing that thou
did hope for.] Verse. 19. O thou my son 15. of this Chap.] hear [vz.
diligently and attentively, both with the ears of the body, and the minde] and
be wise [i. learn wisdom by hearing good and holy things] and guide thine
heart [i. frame and fashion, the affections of thy soul, yea labor to rule
them in such sort, that thou may walke] in the way [vz. which I shall show
thee, that is in the right way of Gods commandments: see Psalm. 32.8.] Verse.
20. Keep [vz. at any hand: this he adds, both because youth are greatly
delighted in eatings and drinkings, and also because that thereby, they are
many times drawn from the way of virtue and well doing, with dronkards [in
Hebrew, it is bibbers of wine, meaning thereby such as would quaffe of cup
after cup, and never be satisfied, such a one the Jews did falsely accuse
our Savior Christ to be. Matthew. 11.19.] nor with gluttons [i. such as over
charge their stomachs with meat: q.d. haunt not such men's company, nor have
any familiarity with them.] Verse. 21. For [this verse contains the dronkards
and gluttons shall be poor: [i. fall into poverty though they be very rich,
for what vanity more consusumeth men's substance? We see that apparel, and
building remains: but if a man have gulled in, of all dainties, even as much
as his panche will hold, yet with in six, eight, ten or twelve hours, he
has appetite againe] and the sleeper [i. the idle and slothful person, who is
called a sleeper, because idleness provoke to sleep, Chapter 19.15.] shall be
clothed with rags [i. with ragged and torn apparel meaning also, that he
should fall into beggerie and poverty, even as the other.] Verse. 22. Obey thy
father [vz. in the Lord, as Ephesians. 6.1.] that has begotten thee [i. that has
been a mean of thy being, and it may be used, as it were a reason to induce
obedience] and despise not [vz. at any hand, but reverence very much] thy
mother when she is old, [vz. and not able as it were to help her self, see
chap. 1.8.] Verse. Buy [vz. even by departing, from all the pleasures and
profits that thou hast] the truth [i. the knowledge of Gods truth, meaning,
that they should by all means seek to obtain it, when they want it] but sell
it not: [vz. at any hand: q.d. when thou have gotten wisdom bargain it not
away, that is depart not from it for any price, or for any cause,] likewise,
[vz. buy and sell not] wisdom, and instruction, and understanding, [these
words have been expounded before, Chap. 1.2, 3.] I take this to be the same
with that Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46.] Verse. 24. The father of the righteous [i. he
that begets a good and a godly childe] shall greatly rejoice [vz. in that
his childe] and he that begets a wise child, [i. one that is given to holy
wisdome] shall have joy of him, [i. shall receive great joy and pleasure in
him and by him: the contrary of this sentence, see before 17.21.] Verse. 25.
Thy father and thy mother, [i. thy parents, kinsfolks, and friends,] shall be
glad [vz. in and of thee, if thou be given to godliness, and well disposed] and
she that bare thee [i. thy mother] shall rejoice [vz. greatly in thy well
doing: I take it to be used as an argument, to Verse. 26. My son [see verse.
15. of this chap, also verse. 19,] give me thine heart, [i. apply thy self
wholly to my precepts: and this he speaks in the person of the heavenly
wisdome] and let thine eyes delight [i. take thou thy self singular pleasure]
in my ways: [i. in those ways, which I show and teach thee: the word which
we turn here delight, being a compound word of another word, that signifies
to be willing, and to keep, does not only note the great delight we should
have in good ways, but also expresses the care and diligence that should be
in them Verse. 27. For a whore [the holy ghost shows a reason here, why men
should cleave to holy wisdom, and avoid all evil, under one comprehending
all sorts of naughtines,] is as a deep ditch, [vz. out of which a man can
hardly get: see Chapter 22.14.] and a strange woman [i. an harlot: this word
has been expounded sundry times before,] is as a narrow pit. [vz. wherein
a man cannot stir himself, to deliver himself out of danger he is so shut
in on every side: q.d. a man may easily fall into whoredom, but when they
are once gotten into that same bottomless pit, and narrow hole, they can
hardly or not at all come out again, see Chap. 2.19.] Verse. 28. Also she
lies in wait [vz. secretly and closelie] as for a pray [i. as it were to
catch a pray: see Chap. 7.10.] and she increases [vz. by her intising and
wickednes] the transgressors [i. the number of transgressors] among men. [vz.
upon earth: q.d. although without whoredom there were infinite wicked persons
upon the earth, yet whores, by intisements, make thousands wicked also, and
unfaithful to GOD and man.] Verse. 29. To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? [the
words here turned woe sorrow, are in the Hebrew tongue particles, or
interiections of mourning and exclamation: q.d. who have cause to mourn,
complain and cry out? even dronkards] to whom is strife? to whom is
murmuring? [i. who is a contentious, brabbling, and repining or murmuring
person? even a dronkard. For dronken men raise up strifes and braulings: see
Chapter 20.1.] to whom are wounds without cause? [who abound in stripes, and
are much beaten and hurt? even dronkards: and that speech without cause, may
be interpreted thus, either that they have them not in warfare, and fighting
with others, but because they many times fall and so hurt themselves: or else,
whilst that without any cause, rashly pouring out contentious words against
other persons, they do slander and reproach them, and so receive stripes and
wounds for the same] and to whom is the rednes of the eyes? [i. abundance of
hot humors in the eyes: q.d. who by their very countenances bewray themselves
to be great drinkers of wine and strong drink, but dronkards? And in this
verse is comprehended the question: the answer follows in the next.] Verse.
30. Even to them that tarry long at the wine, [i. to to them [vz. also [that
go [vz. from their own houses to other places, and trot as it were up and
down from house to house] and seek [vz. carefully, and curiously enough I
warrant you] mixed wine. [He speaks this according to the custom of the
countries of the East, which are hot, where they did not drink wine, but well
mingled and alaied: meaning thereby, that they satisfied their pleasure greatly
in the same.] Verse. 31. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, take heed
thou be not deceived with the pleasant color of the wine: and withstand evil
in the beginning] and when it shows his color [vz. gloriously and fair to
the eye] in the cup, [i. when it is put into the goblet, glass, etc.] or
goes down [vz. through thy throat into thy stomacke] pleasantly. [i. sweetly,
and with delight to thee that art the drinker: q.d. withstand even the very
beginnings and prouocations to dronkennes, and all the means whereby thou
may be provoked thereto.] Verse. 32. Jn the end thereof [I q.d. thy wine may
be pleasant for a while, but at the length it will sting thee and bite thee in
the head, stomach, and whole bodie] it will bite [vz. thee] like a serpent,
[he means by this speech, very sore, yea so grieuouslie, that it will infect
thee] and hurt [vz. thee thy selfe] as a cockatrise. [I had rather read with
some, a viper, which yields forth her young ones with the destruction of her
self: meaning by these two similitudes the great grief and hurt that
dronkards through their own folly draw unto themselves.] Verse. 33. Thine [i.
thou shall become shameless and unchaste, if thou give thy self to dronkennes:
understanding by strange women, harlots, as sundry times heretofore: and this
is another reason why dronkennes is to be avoided, because unchasteness is joined
with it, as an inseparable companion] and thine heart [i. thou, out of the
abundance of thy heart, Matthew. 12.32. for otherwise the heart speaks not]
shall speak [vz. openly and in the presence of others] lewd things. [i.
filthy and unseemly things. Another reason why dronkennes is to be avoided,
because of the evil speech Verse. 34. And thou shall be [vz. when thou art so
dronke] as one that sleeps in the midst of the sea, [that is, it will make
thee careless and secure, as the sleepie man is [and as he that sleeps in the
top of the mast. [i. as one that is in great and continual danger, ready
(through the rage and violence of the sea) to be cast out of the mast into the
maine sea. Here is two reasons contained: the one, because it makes men
careless: the other, because they are in wonderful great danger, though Verse.
35. They [i. sundry men] have stricken me, [vz. grieuouslie and very hard]
shall thou [vz. O dronkard] say, [vz. when thou art waked out of the dead
sleep of thy dronkennes] but I was not sick: [i. I was not grieved or pained
for all their blowes] they have beaten me, [vz. very much] but J knew not [vz.
that they had so dealt with me, for dronkennes takes away almost all the
senses] when I awoke: [vz. out of the sleep of my dronkennes, till such time
as other made me know it by some one mean or other] therefore will I seek
[vz. diligently and carefully] it [i. strong and pleasant wine: meaning
thereby, that he would pursue dronkennes, notwithstanding all these
inconueniences] yet still. [i. somewhat longer: q.d. dronkennes will make thee
so much the more miserable, by how much thou shall glory of the dulnes of thy
body and mind, yea, which is worse by many degrees, thou shall of purpose
provoke thy self to continue and increase in thine old excess, riot, and
dronkennes: a horrible thing no doubt.

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches us, to have regard of time, place, persons, etc. Verse. 2.
Teaches us, that it is a hard matter to bridle appetite, and also that we
must deal earnestly in the subduing thereof. Verse 3. Teaches us, that we may
easily be overtaken with dainty fare, unless we take good heed to our
selves. Verse. 4. Teaches us to avoid covetousness, and trusting too much in
our own wit. Verse 5. Sets out the incertaintie of riches, and the vanity
thereof. Verse 6. Teaches us, to avoid the company of niggardlie minded men.
Verse 7. Sets out the hypocrisy of the niggard, speaking one thing and
meaning another. Verse 8. Teaches us, that there is not only no good gotten,
but much hurt done, both to our selves and others, by resorting to niggards
tables and feasts. Ver. 9. Teaches us, to take heed that we despise not
good counsel. Verse 10. Teaches us, not to incroch upon any, but to be
content with our own. Verse 11. Sets out Gods favor and love toward the
poor afflicted. Verse 12. Teaches us to imploye and lend all our forces to
obtain heavenly wisdom. Verse. 13. Teaches us, moderatly and in good order,
to correct such as GOD has committed to our bringing up. Verse 14. Declares
what good comes by reasonable correction. Verse 15. and 16. Teach us, that
good and wise children rejoice continually the hearts of their parents and
friends. Verse. 17. Teaches two things: first, that we should not be envious
at the wickeds prosperity: secondly, that we should continually meditate and
think upon the reverence and fear of Gods Majesty. Verse 18. Teaches us,
not only in patience to wait for good things, but to be assured also, that
we shall in good time obtain them. Verse 19. Teaches us, that Gods word
should be a continual direction of the affections of our hearts. Verse 20.
Teaches us to shun evil company. Verse 21. Sets out the inconveniences
of gluttony and idleness. Verse 22. Teaches obedience to superiors, and
others whom God has placed over us. Verse 23. Teaches us, not only to use
all means to get knowledge in Gods truth, but when we have obtained it, to
make much of it. Verse 24. Teaches us, that good children are matters of great
joy to their parents. Verse. 25. Teaches the same thing. Verse. 26. Teaches us
diligently to hearken to the good counsel of our parents and friends. Verse.
27. Sets out the dangers of whoredom. Verse. 28. Describes the qualities
and properties of harlots. Verse 29. Declares the great miseries and
mischiefs that ensue upon dronkennes. Verse 30. Teaches us to beware that we
be not overtaken even with the use of lawful things. Verse 31. Teaches us, to
withstand the beginnings, and to avoid the occasions of dronkennes. Verse 32.
Sets out the hurts that follow upon it. Verse 33. Teaches us, that
dronkennes has either whoredom, or inticements to whoredom annexed with it.
Verse 24. Teaches us, that dronkennes thrusts men headlong into most
dangerous dangers. Verse 35. Teaches us, that it bereaueth men even of their
senses for the time: and instructs us further, in time to cease from evil,
least going on in the same, an unavoidable judgment overtake us.

CHAP. 24.
Co.
THe holy Ghost having before lively painted out wicked men, and namely
dronkurds, knowing also our readiness to embrace such vices, begins this
Chapter with an admonition to avoid such company, which thing also he
expressed before Chap. 23. verse. 17, 20. so that it seems to be as it were a
continuance of the same doctrine.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into three especial parts. In the first, he
teaches mischief, and scorn at others, and instructs patiently to bear
adversity, and to defend and maintain the innocent, from verse 1. to the end
of the 12. In the second he sets out the excellency of wisdom, exhorts
the wicked to leave off their wickedness, and not to rejoice at the fall of any,
he teaches men not to be grieved at the wickeds prosperity, to yield
obedience to God and Magistrates, and to beware of sedicious persons, for fear
of punishments that shall fall upon the^, from verse. 13. to the end of the 22.
In the third, he wills men to beware of having respect of persons, and of
justifying the ungodly, and teaches them to speak good things, and to deal
wisely and prouidently in all their affairs, to beware of false witness
bearing, and of recompensing evil for evil, and of idleness, which brings
nothing with it but beggerie and poverty, from verse 23. to the end of the
Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. BE not thou envious against evil men, [it is the same in meaning
that we had before, Chap. 23.17. though it differ somewhat in words] neither
desire [i. have not so much as an affection] to be with them. [vz. in company,
or acquainted with them: and hereof he shows a reason in Verse. 2. For their
heart imagines [i. they themselves do nothing else but imagine and deuise]
destruction, [i. hurt and harm against other men: and mark how he says their
heart, meaning, that the wicked have but as it were one mind, specially in
working mischiefe] and their lips speak [i. they with their lips boldly
vtter] mischief. [vz. against other men: q.d. they fear not with their
mouths to speak the mischief that Verse. 3. Through wisdom [He means this
of heavenly wisdom and knowledge] is a house builded [He speaks not only
of the outward framing of a house, but of the increase also of a man's family,
and the attaining of things necessary for the same] and with understanding
[vz. of Gods will revealed in his word] it is established. [vz. firm and
Matthew. 7.24, 25.] Verse. 4. And by knowledge [i. right skill to govern the
things wherewith God has blessed men] shall the chambers [i. all the parts and
pieces of the house: yet he makes special mention of the chambers, because
men commonly lay up things in them] be filled [vz. plentifully and abundantly]
with all precious and pleasant riches. [He means no doubt specially outward
and earthly riches, yet so that under them he comprehends the true and right
riches: q.d. he that shall skilfully govern his house, shall obtain all
sorts of blessings.] Verse. 5. A wise man is strong [hee still commends
wisdom, showing that it has other excellent qualities adjoined to it] for [I
would rather read it, and] a man of understanding, [i. he that is endued with
right knowledge and wisedome] increases his strength. [i. is indeed very
mighty, and many times does that by his wisdom, which the strong cannot do
by their strength: and therefore is to be preferred: see Eccles. 9.13, 14, etc.
also Chap. 21.22.] Verse. 6. For with counsel, [i. with right thou shall
enterprise thy war: [i. the war that thou shall make against other men,]
and in the multitude of them [i. where there are many, or great store is,] that
can give counsel [i. good and right counsel, as before] is health. [i. great
store and abundance of all manner of blessings: see Proverb. 11.14. also 15.22.
also 20.18. and this is a reason why wisdom is to be preferred, because of the
good success it gives.] Verse. 7. Wisdom holy and heavenly wisdome] is high
to a fool, [i. to a wicked and ungodly man: q.d. A fool cannot attain
wisdom, but a wise man easily gets it, see Chap 14.6.] therefore [i.
because it is such an excellent thing, and not obtained by him,] he [i. the
fool or wicked man] cannot open his mouth [i. speak, see Matthew. 5.2. also
Acts. 10.34. the beginning of speech put for speech it self, for a man must
open his mouth before he can speak] in the gate, [i. the place of public
assemblies: see Chapter 1.21. and other places: in which meetings, wisdom
should most especially be manifested.] Verse. 8. He that imagines [vz. in his
heart: see verse. 2. of this Chap.] to [i. hurt and mischief against other men,]
men [i. many men, specially good men] shall call him [vz. justly, and through
his own wicked demerits,] an author of wickedness. [i. a most wicked and
ungodly person, as he that is the author of any evil is counted the most
notorious amongst them all.] Verse. 9. The wicked thought of a fool, [i. the
wicked man, which is sin: [vz. before God, though perhaps men deem not so]
and the scorner [i. he that derideth all matters appertaining either to God or
men] is an abomination unto men. [i. is loathed and abhorred of them,
specially of the good people.] Verse. 10. If thou be faintt [vz. harted] in the
day of adversity: [i. thy strength [i. the force and power that seemed to be
in thee] is small. [i. will then appear to be nothing when calamity shall set
upon thee.] Verse. 11. Deliver [vz. them that are drawn to death: [i. them that
are unjustly oppressed by what means, danger, or extremity soever it be,
Psalm. 79. they are called the children of death,] and will thou not [vz. what
in thee lies,] preserve [vz. by thy power] them that are led to be slain?
[vz. by others: q.d. If thou do it not, it shall be thy great sin.] Verse.
12. If thou say, [q.d. If thou would lay for an excuse] behold we knew not
of it, [vz. that he was ignorant: q.d. though thou would pretend ignorance
of the man or the matter, or both,] he that pondreth the hearts [i. God, for
this is a Periphrasis of him, because to him only it belongs to search the
hearts and reins,] does not he understand it [vz. both his just cause and
thy neglect of his defense: q.d. certainly he does, and will take the matter
into his own hands, as follows in this verse,] and he that keeps thy soul
[i. defends thee thy self from danger and distress, whereinto thy neighbor
is fallen, and that to this end that thou should help the oppressed: see
Esther. 4.13, 14.] knows he it not? [q.d. it cannot be, but that he does
know it, and will revenge it, for in both places the interrogation or demand
imports so much,] will not he also recompense [vz. uprightly, and justly,
and to the full,] every man [vz. of what state or calling soever he be]
according to his work [vz. which he has wrought: see Psalm. 62.13. Roman.
2.6.] Verse. 13. My son [see before Chap. 1.8, 10.] eat honey, for it is
good, [i. healthful, and profitable to the body,] and the honnie comb, for
it is sweet unto thy mouth, [i. pleasant and delectable to thy taste: q.d.
there is two commodities come by it, vz. profit, and pleasure: Psalm. 19.10.]
Verse. 14. So [i. both profitable and pleasant] shall the knowledge of wisdom,
[i. the understanding, feeling, and practice of Gods word, for so large is the
word knowledge in this place in my minde] be unto thy soul, [i. unto thee thy
self: and yet he does not without cause name the soul, because therein
consists both the beginning and continuance of all these things,] if thou
find it, [q.d. if thou once rightly and truly find it, and lay hold of
it: and this he speaks, because he would not have men go away, in an idle
imagination of the thing, not having the thing it self,] and there shall be an
end [vz. of thy study and labor, meaning such an end, as he himself could
well wish and desire] and thy hope shall not be cut off. [see Chap. 23.18.].
These two verses may be resolved by a similitude thus, as honey is both
profitable and pleasant to them that have it and use it, so is heavenly
wisdom, though perhaps it seem not so at the first.] Verse. 15. Lay not wait
[i. deal not subtillie nor craftely] O wicked man [vz. whosoever thou art]
against the house of the righteous [i. against himself, or any thing
appertayning unto him] and spoil not, [vz. by might and crueltie] his resting
place: [i. the things that apperteyne unto him: one, that is, his house, being
put for all. So he forbids two means whereby the wicked molest the good,
the one is fraud or craft, the other is force or Verse. 16. For [this is a
reason, why he should ceafe from working iniurie] a just man falls [vz. into
dangers and distresses, and that many times by means that wicked men procure
against them] seven times, [i. many and sundry times: a number certain for
an uncertain, Psalm. 119.164.] and rises [vz. through the aid, strength and
favor of God] again. [vz. out of those dangers and evils: q.d. though thou
may be encouraged to tread him down, through his often calamities, yet know
that the Lord will raise him up, for which see Psalm. 34.19. And for the number
of seven: Job. 5.19.] Verse. 17. Be not thou glad [vz. in thy heart: neither
yet declare any such thing, by any outward show,] when thine enemy falls
[vz. into calamity and misery, as verse. 16. of this Chap.] and let not thine
heart rejoice [i. be not so much as inwardly ioyfull] when he stumbleth [vz.
at any thing, or any manner of way, and so comes into misery: he forbids
men to rejoice at the distress of their foes, yea though that they justly
suffer or have deserved the same, by some one means or other.] Verse. 18. Least
[this is not spoken as though he doubted whether God saw it or no, but here he
speaks of GOD according to the manner of men: see for the same word, Malach.
4.6. and it is rather a particle of threatening here, and there also, than of
doubting] the Lord see it [i. thy hard hartednes and wickedness,] and it
displease him [vz. greatly, yea so much that] and he turn his wrath from him
[vz. that is afflicted and distressed, and power it forth upon thee. And this
is a reason why men should not rejoice in other men's miseries, because it is
the next way to pull misery upon themselves.] Verse. 19. Fret not thy self,
[i. be not angry or grieved in thy selfe] because of the malicious [vz. men,
that is because they either flourish and prosper, or else in the malice of their
hearts attempt hard things against thee,] neither be envious at the wicked.
[see before Chap. 23.17. also verse. 1. of this Chap.] Verse. 20. For there shall
be no end of plagues to the wicked man: [i. he shall be, as and the light of
the wicked shall be put ott [i. both his felicity and whole life, shall be
void of all glorious remembrance: see Chap. 13.9.] Verse. 21. My son: [see
1.8, 10.] fear [vz. withal thine heart, and that with the reverence and fear
of children] the Lord [vz. thy God, who is just and powerfull] and the King
[vz. who is his substitute and deputy, he sets God before magistrates,
because in God and for God, they must be feared and obeyed: see 1. Peter
2.17.] and meddle out [vz. at any hand: q.d. have nothing at al to do,] with
them that are seditious: [the word signifies such as vary, vz. from the
commandments of God, and the kings commandments a greeing therewith.] Verse.
22. For [a reason of the premises taken from the sudden their destruction [i.
destruction laid upon them from the Lorde] shall rise [vz. up against them]
suddenly, [i. when they think least of it. 1. Thessal. 5.3.] and who [vz.
amongst men] knows the ruin [i. the great and horrible destruction: for so
much I suppose, the manner of propounding it in a demand importeth] of them
both? [i. that shall fall upon those two sorts of men mentioned verse. 19.20,
21. of this Chapter.] Verse. 23. Also these things [vz. either pertain to the
wise, [vz. to know and understand them.] It is not good, [i. it is evil and
hurtefull, as sundry times before, and namely Chapter 17.26. Chap. 18.5. to
have respect of any person, [vz. of what state or condition soever he be,
whether poor or rich, good or badde] in judgment, [i. in the place of public
judgment, or in pronouncing of sentence: see Chap. 18.5. also Deutero. 1.17.
q.d. it is a very evil thing to look upon any man's person: the thing that is
to be regarded is the matter and not the man, and accordingly must the
magistrate Verse. 24. He [vz. whosoever he be] that says [vz. in good earnest]
to the wicked [vz. man,] thou art righteous, [i. thou art a good man, and
mainteynest a good cause:] him shall the people curse [i. either they have a
good cause so to do, or else in the frowardnes of their own hearts shall do
it, not allowing hereby cursing of others, which is condemned, Romans 12.14. but
showing, that such men's wicked dealings, provoke other men to great
extremity also,] and the multitude [vz. of men and people,] shall abhor him.
[i. loath and detest him as a leude and evil Proverb 17.15. also Isaiah. 5.20,
23.] Verse. 25. But to them [vz. whether they be private men or magistrates, but
specially magistrates, for of them he seems to speak in this place] that
rebuke [vz. sharply, and according to the notoriousnes of the fault,] him, [i.
the wicked, and the ungodly person] shall be pleasure [i. great store and
abundance, of pleasant and good things, yea even from the Lord,] and upon them
shall come [vz. without all fail and most assuredlie] the blessings of
goodness. [i. good and gracious blessings. Some understand it thus, as though al
good me^ should bless, that is not only speak well of, but pray for, and wish
all good things to be Verse. 26. They [i. the people] shall kiss the lips of
him [i. both love and reverence him: he puts the sign for the thing it
self: see 1 Samuel. 10.1. 1. King. 19.18. Psalm. 2.12. and Hosea. 13.2.] that
answers [i. speaks: as Matt. 11.25.] upright words. [vz. in judgment,
Verse. 27. Prepare thy work without [i. have an eye to those things of thine
that are abroad, as corn, cattle, etc.] and make ready [vz. with what speed
conveniently thou mayest] thy things in the field, [i. such things as thou have
abroad,] and after [i. when thou have performed these things] build thine
house. [i. do that that thou art to do for thine own good, and the good of
thy people, and furnish so thy whole house with things necessary; to which
purpose, thou must of necessity get in such things as are abroad, whereupon
thou may live within doors. This may be a good sense: and yet I take this
rather to be his meaning: that before he attempt any thing, he should be
furnished with all the means whereby he might perform it, whether things in
his own Verse. 28. Be not a witness [vz. in any matter, nor for any man's
cause] against thy neighbor [i. against any, specially against him that
dwells nigh unto thee] without cause: [i. falsely: for otherwise he does not
forbid to bear witness in a truth:] for will thou deceive [vz. other men]
with thy lips? [i. with thy words which thy lips shall utter: a reason why
men should not use false witness bearing, because Verse. 29. Say not [i. neither
think nor speak, for if it be unlawful to speak, it is unlawful to
think,] J will [if I live or be able] do to him [vz. that has done me
iniurie] as he has done to me, [i. do him injury or wrong] I will
recompense every man [vz. that deals injuriously with me] according to his
work. [vz. which he has practiced or performed against me: see Chap. 20.22.]
Verse. 30. I [vz. trauailing] passed by the field of the slothful, [i. ground
appertaining to an idle and sluggish person] and by the vineyard of a man
destitute of understanding. [i. by a negligent and careless man's vineyard, whom
he says to be destitute of understanding: or as it is in the Hebrew, void of
a heart, because he seldom or never thinks upon his business or affairs.]
Verse. 31. And lo, it was [i. lying untilled and unhusbanded, it was barren and
unfruitful, for thornie ground is not good: see Matthew. 13.7.] and nettles had
covered the face thereof, [i. the upper or outward part of it: he notes
thereby, the barrennes and unfruitfulness of it] and the stone wall thereof [i.
that which was made for the defense of it] was broken down. [vz. so that it
lay as it were a wast or common plot, ready to be spoiled: see Isaiah 5.5.
Also Psalm 80.12. He notes in this verse the confusion that idleness works.]
Verse. 32. Then I beheld [vz. both the ground, and the discommodities and I
considered it well: [i. I weighed it deeply in my mind: and he speaks of
them both together, as it were of one thing, because they follow one another,
as the shadow does the bodie] I looked upon it, [vz. attentively and
diligently] and received instruction. [vz. thereby, that I might learn by his
example to beware of idleness and sloth.] Verse. 33. Yet a little sleep, [These
be the words of the idle person, a little slumber, [q.d. besides that I have
had, counting notwithstanding even a great deal but a litte] a little folding
of the hands to sleep. [see Chapter 6.10. And also Chapter 19.15. where it is
said, that slothfulnes causes sleep.] Verse. 34. So [vz. as is before
expressed, by means of thy idleness and slothfulnes] thy poverty [i. the need
and want that thou must indure] comes [vz. upon thee and thine] as one that
trauaileth by the way, [i. very suddenly and speedily, as the wayfaring man
will not stay long or much till such time as he come to his iornies end] and
thy necessity [i. that necessity and want, which through idleness shall fall
upon thee and pinch thee] like an armed man [i. with great force and violence,
so that thou shall not be able to resist or withstand it: see Chap. 6.11.]

Verse 1. Teaches us, to shun fellowship and society with the wicked. Do.
Verse 2. Does not only teach the disposition of the wicked and ungodly, but
instructs good men also to labor the reformation of their thoughts and
words. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that wisdom is able to bring great and hard
things to pass. Verse 4. Teaches us, that wisdom is many times crowned with
great store of pleasure and profit. Verse. 5. Teaches us, that wisdom is
better than strength. Verse 6. Sets out not only the commodities that come
by wisdom, but also teaches us to attempt nothing, but in a wise
consideration of the same before hand. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that wicked and
worldly minded men cannot attain heavenly wisdom. Verse. 8. Teaches us, to
bridle our hearts from imagining evil. Verse 9. Teaches us, that wicked
thoughts are sin, also to avoid scorning and scoffing. Verse 10. Teaches
us, in the days of affliction to strive to be of good courage. Verse 11.
Teaches us, to use all the power and lawful means that GOD has endued us
withal, to deliver the innocent being oppressed. Verse 12. Teaches us, that
ignorance of any matter, will be no excuse before God: it sets out also the
knowledge and providence of God, and manifests Gods great and eternal
justice. Verse. 13. Teaches us, with moderation and thanks giving to receive
and use the blessings of God. Verse 14. Teaches us, to embrace holy and
heavenly wisdom, for the fruits and effects that it will work in us. Verse
15. Teaches us, to do no injury to any, but specially to the good people.
Verse 16. Teaches us, that many are the miseries of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers them out of all. Verse 17. Teaches us, not to rejoice at the
misery, hurt or hinderance of any. Verse 18. Teaches us, first that God sees
all things: secondly, that for the sin of hard hartednes he punishes very
sharply. Verse 19. Teaches us, that the prosperity of the wicked should not
make us either to murmur against God, or to be malicious against the ungodly
themselves. Verse 20. Teaches us, that the prosperous and flourishing estate of
the wicked shall soon come to an end. Verse. 21. Teaches us, to obey first
God, and then in and for God, the Magistrate: also to beware of seditious and
rebellious people. Verse 22. Does teach us, not only what great judgment
shall overtake the wicked, but also how suddenly it shall come upon them.
Verse. 23. Teaches us, to cast from us all respect of persons. Verse. 24.
Teaches us, not to flatter or commend the ungodly in their sin. Verse 25.
Teaches us, to rebuke plainly, according to the notoriousnes of the offense,
any offending party. Verse 26. Teaches us, that upright and faithful dealing
both in words and deeds, is the way to obtain both reverence and love. Verse
27. Teaches men in wisdom, to be sure of the means to perform a thing by
before they attempt the same. Verse. 28. Teaches us, to beware of unjust of
false witness bearing. Verse 29. Teaches us, that we should not recompense
evil with evil, but rather overcome evil with weldoing. Verse 30, 31, 32,
33, 34. Tend all to the dispraise of idleness and sloth, showing what effects it
brings forth: as first, unfruitfulness and barrennes of ground. Verse 31.
Secondarilie, speedy and unavoidable beggerie. Verse. 34, 32. Teaches us
further this doctrine, even by the hurt of others, to learn to make our own
good and profit: as when we see any given to any vice, to learn in the
beginning of it in them to shun it in ourselves.

CHAP. 25.
Co.
THis Chapter depends upon the other thus, that the holy Ghost proceeds
still in delivering unto us more of Salomons proverbs and sentences, which may
appear by the word also, verse. 1. q.d. not only these that you have heard
already were Salomons, but these that follow unto the end of the book.

Di.
THis Chapter may be divided into three parts. In the first, he speaks verse
1. to the end of the 10. In the second, verse 11. to the end of the 20. In the
third, he teaches verse 21. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. THese [vz. following, as well as those that go before] are also
parables of Solomon, [i. such as he himself spoke and writ, and seem to be
contained amongst those three thousand mentioned 1. King. 4.32. Concerning the
word parables, see chap. 1.1.] which the men of Hezekiah [i. the servants of
King Hezekiah] king of Judah [of him you may read, and of his acts, 2. King.
chap. 18, 19, 20.] copied out. [vz. of sundry writings or books, and made as
it were but one body or matter of them.] Verse. 2. The glory of God is to [i.
because Gods judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, as
Romans 11.33. his glory is so much the more great and excellent] but the Kings
honor is [i. it is a very honorable and glorious matter for him] to search out
[vz. very diligently, and when he has found it, to manifest the same unto
others] a thing. [i. every thing or matter that he may set out: q.d. on the
other side, nothing is so honorable for a king, as to look thoroughly into all
matters, and to know every thing, and to make manifest every thing that
appertains to kingly dignity, and may get credit thereto.] Verse. 3. The
heavens in height, [vz. do exceed man's and the earth in deepenes [vz. goes
beyond all the reach of his understanding and reason] and the Kings heart [i.
the imaginations, devises, and actions that he thinks upon, and performs.
Here he puts the heart for them all, because it is the fountain from whence
they proceed] can no man [vz. how wise or cunning so ever he bee] search out.
[vz. by any means: q.d. as the height of the heavens and the depth of the
earth cannot certainly be comprehended of man, so can no man search the
affections of a King, no not of any other, as to have a certain knowledge
thereof: see 1. Take [i. let a man take] the dross from the silver, [vz. after
it is fined] and there shall proceed [vz. from the silver so fined] a vessel
[i. a good and a profitable vessell] for the finer. [.either for his use or
sake that Verse. 5. Take away the wicked [i. let the ungodly be remoued] from
the King, [i. from the Magistrates presence, house, court, or kingdome] and his
throne [i. his whole kingdom shall by that meanes] be established [vz. very
certainly and surely] in righteousness. [i. in upright and just dealing: see
Chap. 20.8. I would join these two verses together, and read them as a
similitude: q.d. as when the dross is removed from the silver, there remains
nothing but good and pure matter for the finer to frame a good vessel: so the
way to have his kingdom established in peace and prosperity, is to take away
the wicked: for he resembles the wicked to dross, the King finer, and his
kingdom to fined silver, or a vessel made thereof.] Ver. 6. Boast not thy
self [i. make no glorious show of the things thou have, either in words,
countenance, apparel, etc.] before the King, [i. in his presence, court, or
kingdome] and stand not [vz. either over long, or else gloriouslie] in the place
of great men. [i. either in their palaces, or in such places as do properly
appertain to them: q.d. be content with thine own place and calling, He
means, to draw men from ambition, and to teach them, not to affect Verse. 7.
For it is better, [vz. by much or many degrees] that it be said unto thee, [vz.
openly and before others, and that by them that are the rulers and governors
of the house] come up hither, [vz. higher, and so should be exalted] than
thou to be put lower [vz. for lifting up thy self too high, and that to thy
great shame] in the presence of the prince [i. before some great or noble
personage] whom thine eyes has seen. [i. to whom thou have drawn nigh, that
thou might very Luke 14.7, 8, 9, 10.] Verse. 8. Go not forth [vz. at any
time, out of thine own house, land, or limites] hastily [i. rashly,
unadvisedly, or without cause] to strife, [vz. against thy neighbor or any
man] least [vz. thou be thereby brought to such extremity, that] thou know
not what to do [vz. against thine adversary, or in thine own defense: and
this he speaks, not only because rashness makes men rush into unlawful
things, but depriueth them as it were for a time of all their senses] in the
end of thereof [i. at the end of that strife and contention] when thy
neighbor, [i. he that deals against thee, or against whom thou have dealt]
has put thee [vz. by the sober and wise handling of his matters, and through
thine own rashness and hastines] to shame. [vz. before men.] Verse. 9. Debate,
[q.d. confer rather quietly between thee and thy matter [i. the cause that
thou hast] with thy neighbor, [i. with him whom thou have to deal: our
Savior seems to give the same counsel and to allude thereto Matthew. 5.25,
26. Matthew. 18.15.] and discover not [vz. at any hand] the secret [vz. of
another man, which is committed to thee,] to another. [vz. that is not
acquainted with that cause.] Verse. 10. Least he [vz. from thy mouth thou
blabbing abroad, another man's secret,] put thee to shame: [vz. not only by
calling thee a blabbe, but also by blasing it about, to the discredit of the
party whom it touches, and thine own discredit also that cannot better
keep counsell] and thine infamy [i. that infamy, that thou shall endure and
suffer] do not cease [vz. amongst men: we may see by that, that there arises
a double, yea a treble discommoditie, of blasing abroad secrets, first the man
uttering them may be justly counted a blabbe, or babbler, and unfaithful;
secondly, the party whom it touches, may by that means, be brought to such
a dislike, as friendship will never grow between them afterward; thirdly both
the parties shall incur, an vnauoideable report, the one of vntrustines, the
other of his evil committed.] Verse. 11. A word [i. a speech which may give
sense and understanding spoken in his place [i. fitly, and when there is
regard and consideration had to time, place, persons, manner of doing, etc.]
is like appels of gold [i. like golden apples, i. gold cast or made in the
form of appels,] with pictures of silver, [i. which golden apples also have
pictures of silver set about them, or graven in them, whatsoever it is, the
holy Ghost meaning under these two terms, is nothing else, but to note, that
such speeches are most precious and pleasant, even as things made of silver and
Gold, which are either cunningly graven, or else have pictures, figures and
shapes set about them.] Verse. 12. He that reprooueth discreetely,] the wise
[vz. man, or men,] and the obedient care [i. such a one, as will attentively
hearken to good counsell] is as a golden earing, and an ornament of fine gold
[i. is to be esteemed, as a most comely and precious thing, as who is not
only decked himself, but also indeuoreth to adorn others with good things.
And though this be a good sense, yet I rather allow, both his text and sense:
that turns it thus.] A wise reproouer, [i. one that can in holy wisdom and
discretion reprove another] is to an obedient ear, [i. to one that will
hearken unto him] as an ouch or collor of silver, and as an ornament of fine
gold, [i. is unto him a singular ornament, because the one laboreth to reform,
and the other yeldeth consent to amendment, which is also his grace and glory:
see Proverb. 1.9.] Verse. 13. As [i. even as great cold, vz. is pleasant and
profitable to trauailers and workmen for their refreshing: for he means not,
that it did snow in the summer time] in the time of harvest, [i. in a very hot
season or time is, as was said before comfortable and profitable unto them] so
is [vz. both pleasant and profitable:] a faithful messenger [i. one that
faithfully delivers the errands committed to him, and deals trustily in the
same with as speedy a return as may be,] to them [vz whosoever they bee] that
send him: [vz. about any business whatsoever,] for he refreshes the soul of
his Masters, [i. of such as employ him in any service: by soul he means the
whole man, who during the time of his absence because he did greedily desire
to hear an answer, was sometimes in fear and doubt almost half dead, but
when he was returned took as it were his spirits again unto him, by reason
of the good message which he brought him, see Chap. 13.17. 25. of this Chap.]
Verse. 14. A man [vz. who soever he bee] that boasts [vz. in his words,] of
false liberality: [i. of a liberality, which he has not done: or else thus,
he that promises mountains of gold, and yet performs little or nothing] is
as clouds and wind without rain, [i. have a show of some what in words, and
yet in deed and effect have nothing at all: Jude. verse. 12.] Verse. 15. A
Prince, [i. a great personage] is pacified [vz. many times meaning that he is
sometimes let and hindered from his outrageous purposes] by staying of anger:
[i. by seeking some means, to turn away his wrath: which how grievous and
fearful a thing it is, see Chap. 16.14. which cannot be better performed,
than by gentleness and long suffefering] and a soft tongue, [i. soft and
gentle words, uttered with the tongue] breaks the boanes, [i. most hard
things, meaning thereby that it puts back the greatest rage and anger, see
before chap. 15.1. and examples thereof. Judges 8.2, 3. 1. Samuel. 2.23, 24,
etc.] Verse. 16. If thou [vz. of what calling so ever thou be,] have found [i.
atteyned and gotten] honey: [i. any manner of sweet or dainty thing] eat
that is sufficient for thee, [vz. and no more:] least thou be ouerfull [vz. by
eating over much,] and vomit it [vz. to the hurt of thy stomach, and shame of
thine own person, for that thou could not bridle thine appetite. This may
be understood, either particularly of honey, which because it is sweet may
easily be immoderately taken, and because it is hot being taken immoderately
does provoke vomit: or else it may be understood of all pleasures and
delicates, putting a particular Verse. 17. Withdraw, [i. be careful to withdraw
and hold back] thy foot [vz. from often going,] from thy neighbors house, [he
means not to forbid fellowship or friendship, but wills us to take heed,
least by over much boldness, we make not the party weary of vs] least he be
weary of thee [vz. and of thine aquaintance also,] and hate thee. [i. loath
and dislike thee, in steed of his former love and friendship, for things that be
common breed lothsomnes, whereas such things as are rare, are far more
acceptable.] Verse. 18. A man that bears false witness, [i. a false witness
bearer against any, but speciallie] against his neighbor [for this
circumstance aggrauateth the offence] is like a hammer and a sword, and a
sharp arrowe: [q.d. he uses all the means he can to destroy him, and is by all manner of means most deadly and dangerous unto him: see Psalm. 120.3, 4.
Proverb. 12.18. 1. King. 21.13.] Verse. 19. Confidence, [i. trust and affiance
in an unfaithful man [i. in one that deals not faithfullie] in time of
trouble [i. when a man is in trouble and distresse] is like a broken tooth [vz.
which is unprofitable to chewe meat withall] and a sliding foot [vz. which is
ready to fall, and not able to go when a man has need: q.d. there is no more
trust to be had in an unfaithful friend, than in a broken tooth or sliding
foot.] Verse. 20. He that takes away [vz. from another man, the garment, [vz.
which he should we are] in the cold season [vz. of the year, as in the
winter, etc.] is like vinegar powered upon niter: [i. a consumer and deuourer of
others, for vinegar does waste and dissolve niter which is a matter or
substance much like salt, but is not salt, and is of color light ruddie, with
holes like a sponge: it is of some corruptibly taken for salt peeter,] or like
him that sings songs to a heavy heart: [vz. who is so far off from being
comforted thereby, that he rather has his grief increased. This may be a
sense, but I approve his text and sense rather that reads it thus:] as he
that puts upon him a garment in the time of cold [vz. does thereby depell
and put back cold,] or vinegar upon niter: [vz. does thereby dissolve and waste
it, and that very easily because it is most cold, for that this is the nature
of niter, (which is a certain workmanship of the earth, made thick, by a dry
heat) as Aristotle shows. lib. 4. Meteoro. cap. 6, 7.] so is he that sings
songs [vz. of mirth and joy,] to a heavy heart, [i. to one that is distressed
and oppressed with heaviness: q d. as garments put back the force of cold, and
vinegar dissolve niter: so does music or singing put away sadness and heaviness
of heart: see examples hereof in Saul 1. Samuel 16.23. in Elisha. 2. King.
3.14, 15. in Darius If he that hate thee be hungry, [i. be distressed any
manner of way, he puts one kind of distress for all,] give him bread to
eat, [i. relieve him and succor him] and if he be thirsty, [i. distressed any
manner of way, as before in the word hungry:] give him water to drink, [i.
relieve and comfort him what in thee lies: by hunger and thirst, he means
any misery whatsoever: by bread and water, he understands all kind of
vitaile, yea every good turn whereby a man may help another q.d.: do good to
them that hate and persecute you. Matt. 5.44. see also Romans 12.20. Exodus 23.4,
5.] Ver. 22. For [this verse conteyneth a double reason why thou shall lay
coals upon his head, [i. by that means, thou shall so move him, that laying
down his hatred he shall become thy friend, for thy benefits bestowed upon him
shall be even as light burning coals, showing the earnestnes of thine
affection toward him:] and the lord shall recompense thee. [vz. that kindness
that thou have done unto him: q.d. though he should be ungrateful, and would
not acknowledge thy love, yet the Lord will requite that unto thee that thou
have bestowed upon him.] Verse. 23. As the north wind drives away the rain,
[vz. out of that quarter especially: not meaning that it does always so, but
sometimes it does,] so does an angry countenance, [vz. either of a man or
magistrate, into whose presence slanderers and backbiters come: putting also
the sign of displeasure, for displeasure it self:] the slandering tongue. [i.
him that with his tongue is given to slander and backbite other: the reason is,
because that when he sees his tales are not regarded, he will be quickly
Verse. 24. It is better [vz by many degrees,] to dwell [vz. solitary and
alone,] in a corner of the house top, [i. in a very narrow, strait, and
incommodious place,] than with a contentious woman [i. one given to brawling
and chiding,] in a wide house, [i. in a most large, and commodious house, see
before chap. 19.13. yea the very same sentence and words chap. 21.9.] Verse. 25.
As are the cold waters, [i. as cold waters are pleasant and profitable] to a
weary soul: [i. to a person or man wearied with labor, and by that means
also waxen dry, for so much I think the word will bear properly signifying
weary, and yet because drought cleaves to them that are weary, including
them also,] so is good news [vz. brought] from a far country: [vz. either
concerning any thing he has there, or any friend of his: not meaning also but
that good news brought from a more nigh place is profitable Verse. 26. A
righteous man falling down [i. humbling himself, or otherwise cast down
through aflictions,] before the wicked [vz. or ungodly man,] is like a troubled
well, [i. is disgraced and defaced: as the clearenes and sweetenes of the well,
is by the gravel or other things in it when they are stirred up,] and a
corrupt spring. [i. like a spring of water, which of it self is good, yet by
the access of other hurtful waters, is marred: he means hereby, not only
that it is against all right and reason, that the wicked trouble the good, but
also that the good themselves, are by such means much disturbed, yea and many
times unless God wonderfully keep Verse. 27. It is not good, [i. it is hurtful:
see Chap. 18.5. also Chap. 24.23.] to eat much honey, [vz least thou surfeit
through the sweetenes thereof, and be driven to vomit thereby: see verse. 16. of
this Chap.] so [vz. for men, or for any man,] to search their own glory, [i.
to seek praise, glory, and commendation unto themselues] is not glory [vz. but
shame and confusion rather, yea a dishonest and wicked thing, see John A man
that refraineth not his appetite: [vz. even by all the means that possibly he
can, of which see before chap. 23.2.] is like a city which is broken down
[vz. by the enemies, that besieged it, or else by inward factions and stirs
in it self: meaning that he is in a dangerous and desperate case,] and without
walls, [and therefore the enemy may more easily enter, meaning thereby, that
he has not only, been once conquered, but that he is subject daily and
howrely even at the will of the enemy, to a new spoil.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to have a care to reserve monuments and coppies of good
things. Verse 2. Teaches us, what is the duty of good Princes, vz. to search
into all causes. Verse 3. Does not only confute the Astronomers, that will
measure the height of the sky, but shows that the imaginations of men's
hearts cannot be searched out. Verse 4, 5. Teach kings and princes this, that
they are to remove from about them wicked and ungodly persons. Verse 6.
Teaches us, to beware of pride, vaineglorie, and boasting. Verse 7. Teaches,
that humility is the way to come to honor. Verse 8. Teaches us, quickly to
cut off the occasions of strife and contentions. Verse 9. Teaches us two
things: first, in matters of controversy to use charitable conference one of
us with another: secondly, faithfully to conceal matters committed to our
credit. Verse 10. Teaches us, to labor to prevent and put away shame and
ignominy amongst men. Verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. Do by excellent similitudes teach
us, first to speak wisely and seasonablie: secondly, to reprove others
charitablie and discreetlie: thirdly, to deal faithfully in the matters or
messages committed unto us: and lastly, to beware of boasting when we have no
cause. Verse 15. Teaches us, to repress wrath, and to use courteous and gentle
words. Verse 16. Teaches us, to beware of surfeiting, specially in those
things that are sweet and pleasant, and draw us on to eating. Verse 17.
Teaches us, to beware that we do not by overmuch resorting to our friends
make them weary of us. Verse 18. Teaches us, to fly false witness bearing.
Verse 19. Teaches us, to take heed that we trust not untrusty persons. Verse
20. Teaches us, that honest and good mirth is a mean to put away heaviness of
heart. Verse 21. Teaches us, not only to love, but also to do good unto our
enemies. Verse 22. Teaches us, that God will leave nothing vnrecompensed that
we do in his fear. Verse 23. Teaches us, to declare our disliking of
slanderers, both by word, deed, and countenance. Verse. 24. Sets out the
discommoditie that does arise by brauling and contentious women. Verse 25.
Shows us, that good news are delectable to the party whom they concern.
Verse 26. Shows, that the godly in the hands of the wicked are in a poor
case. Verse 27. Teaches men not to seek their own glory. Verse 28. Teaches
men to bridle their appetites, for fear of after-clappes and mischiefs that
may otherwise ensue.

CHAP. 26.
Co.
IN the latter end of the other Chapter he showed that men should not seek for
honor and glory: and now in the beginning of this Chapter he shows to whom
it does not belong, and by the contrary to whom it does appertain.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into two parts only. In the first, he deals
verse 1. to the end of the 12. In the second, he deals more particular
against idle and slothful persons, against busy bodies, against deceitful
persons, against talebearers and contentions people, and against such persons
as will craftily color the hatred of their heart with glorious and glosing
speeches, from verse 13. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. AS the snow in the summer, and as the rain in the harvest are not
meet, [i. as snow and rain do not agree to those seasons, and therefore it
is counted as a miracle to have rain in wheat harvest, 1. Sam. 12.17. And
Jeremy writes, that while he was in Judea he never saw rain there in June
and Iulie, yea he affirms it to be an impossible thing that any should fall
there then] so is honor unseemly for a fool. [i. titles and places of honor
appertain not to him, either because he knows not how to use them, or else
abuses them to the oppression of others, and Verse. 2. As the sparowe by
flying, [vz. from place to place escapes danger] and the swallowe by flying
escape [vz. from hurt or snares] so the curse that is causeles, [i. the curse
that one man does without cause or reason with to fall upon another] shall not
come. [vz. upon him whom he did without cause curse, but shall pass away into
the air as those birds do.] Verse. 3. Unto the horse belongs a whippe, [vz.
to make him go apace, and couragiouslie] to the ass a bridle, [vz. to rule
and direct him in the way. He speaks this according to the custom of that
country, who did use horses in war, as Psalm. 20.7. Psalm. 76.6. Proverb.
21.31. and asses to travail withal. Genes. 22.3.] and a rod to the fools
back. [i. chastisements and correction appertains to fools: see Proverb.
10.13. Also Chapter 17.10.] Answer not a fool according to his foolishnes, [i.
in talk and speech between thee and him deal not with him with bitter and
cursed words, as he does with thee] least thou also be like him. [vz. in that
behalf, following his foolish vein: q.d. use wisdom in thy talk with
fools, and mark diligently Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his
foolishnes, [i. in speeches between you, deal with him according to the
naughtines he does bewray or commit] least [vz. thou not reproving him] he be
wise in his own conceit. [i. he take an occasion thereby to think better of
himself, than there is any cause why. And so these contrary sentences are
reconciled, not in respect of being silent in the first and speaking in the
last, as some have thought, but by answering in both, having notwithstanding
always regard to the circumstances of time, place, persons, manner Verse. 6. He
[vz. whosoever he be] that sends a message [vz. into any place, or to any
person] by the hand of a fool [i. by a fool himself, or unwise man; a part,
that is the hand wherein consists power, put for the whole: q.d. he that
commits any thing, either message, or matter to a foolish fellow to doo] is
[vz. as unwise in that behalfe] as he that cutteth off the feet, [vz. of the
messenger whom he sends: meaning, that he does deprive himself of the means
whereby his purposes should be performed: for as one that lacks his legs is
not fit to go on arrands; so a fool is as unfit to be employed about any
thing, because he wants wisdom, diligence, etc.] and drinks iniquity.
[i. takes that unto him that will hurt him: meaning, the conceit and good
opinion that he has of a fool, which is also iniquity, for he that
justifies the wicked, and condemns the righteous, sins both alike against
the Lord. One gives another sense and reads it otherwise thus] As though a
man did cut off a messengers feet, so shall he drink up the punishment of
violence that sends messages by a fool. [i. he does as much injury to
himself that sends a fool to be his messenger, as he that cutteth off his
own messengers feet: for neither can the fool perform things enjoined him,
neither he that has his feet or legs cut off dispatch his iornie or
message.] Verse. 7. As they [vz. lose their labor that lift up the legs of
the lame [vz. thinking thereby to make a lame man go of himself without the
aid and help of another] so [vz. unprofitable and vnseemelie] is a parable
[i. a wise sentence] in a fools mouth. [i. uttered by a foolish and wicked
man. Some read it otherwise, and give it another sense, but me thinks this
is plain enough.] Verse. 8. As the closing up of a precious stone in an heap
of stones, [i. amongst q.d. it is a very unseemly and fond thing for a man to
place a precious jewel even amongst stones of the street, both because it
shall be trodden upon, and that is not the place for it] so is he [vz. fond and
unwise, that is to say, he is so to be accounted] that gives glory to a
fool. [he means it of more glory than belongs unto him.] Verse. As a
thorn standing up in the hand of a dronkard, [vz. is many times hurtful both
to himself and others] so is a parable in the mouth of fools. [see verse 7.
of this Chapter. q.d. A fool does not better use words, than a dronken man
does thorns or briers, who (the strength of wine carrying away his minde]
wounds both himself and all that he meets.] Verse. 10. The [i. God, who is
called great and excellent, because he excels all other] that formed [i.
made and fashioned, and that of nothing] al things, [vz. both in heaven and
earth] both rewards the fool [i. punishes him for his want of wisedome] and
rewards the transgressors. [i. punishes all other manner of offenders
whatsoever. Others read it otherwise, and make other senses of it, but I like
this well enough.] Verse. 11. As a dog turns [i. to eat up that which he
had vomited before, so filthy a beast he is] so a fool turns to his
foolishnes. [i. in like sort the wicked do often repeat and commit one and
the self same thing which they have observed to be hurtful unto them: see 2.
Pet. 2.22.] Verse. 12. See [i. do thou know by familiar acquaintance] a
man wise in his own conceit? [i. one that in his own judgment thinks
highly of himself, and likes all things that comes from himselfe] more hope
is [vz. there, of the conversion and winning] of a fool [i. one that has no
wisdom at all] than [vz. that stands so high in his own imagination.]
Verse. 13. The slothful man says, [vz. because he would not do the things he
should doo] a lion is in the way, a lion is in the streets. [i. he puts
many difficulties and doubts which either are not indeed, or else makes them
greater than they 22.13.] Verse. 14. As the door [vz. or gate of a house]
turns upon his hinges, [i. upon the hinges and hooks whereupon it is set,
and yet is not removed from the place] so does the slothful man upon his bed.
[i. he turns him often, and yet will not lift up himself, or be removed or
raised Verse. 15. The slothful [vz. man or person] hides his hand in his
bosom, [vz. and will not pull it out to work or labor: see Chap. 19.24.] and
it grieueth him [vz. very much] to put it again [vz. when he has taken it
away, so sluggish and slothful is he] to his mouth. [vz. to feed and nourish
himself: q.d. he will not only not labor for his sustenance, but Verse. 16.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, [i. as he himself thinks of
himself, or he seems so to himself, and in his own mind, and not that he
is so indeed] than seven men [i. than a great number: a number certain, for an
vncertaine] that can render a reason. [vz. of the things they do or speak: he
means hereby very wise men. One reads it thus] than seven calling him back
unto reason. [i. than many wise men, laboring in their wisdom to reclaim
Verse. 17. He that passes by [vz. the way when men are striving together] and
medleth with the strife that belongs not unto him, [i. is angry, or
begins to chide and braule for another man's cause that appertains not unto
him] is as one that takes a dog by the ears. [vz. without any cause,
thereby stirring him up, and provoking him to bite him: he means hereby, that
he pulls by so doing danger and hurt unto himself that medleth with other
men's iarres when he may abstain there from.] Verse. 18. As he that faineth
himself mad, [i. either is mad indeed, or so faineth himselfe] casts [vz.
abroad and at other men, if he can get to them] fire brands, arrows, and
mortal things, [i. all manner of things that come to his Verse. 19. So deals
the deceitful man with his friend [i. a deceitful person and one that
circumuenteth his friend, yea though he do it as he says afterward, under the
pretense of jest and sport, is no better to be regarded than a mad man] and
says, [i. and yet in the way of excuse or color he saith] am I not in sport?
[i. did I not jest or dally with you? q.d. Verse. 20. Without wood, the fire is
quenched: [i. If there be not a new supply made of wood, the fire will go out,
for wood is the matter of fire,] and without a talebearer strife cease: [i.
if there be not some that carry tales between man and man, strife will dye
quickly, for a tale carier fostereth strife, he spoke the same before,
Chapter 22.10. of a scorner: and sure it may well be, for commonly a scorner,
is a tale carier also.] Verse. 21. As the coal [vz. vnkindled, for so much
difference I take to be in the makes burning coals, [i. is apt and fit, not
only to be kindled it self, but to kindle and burn it self, and others
also,] and wood a fire: [i. is apt and meet to make a fire with all,] so the
contentious man, is apt [i. is very meet, prone, and readie] to kindle
strife. [vz. not only in himself, but in and between others also.] Verse. 22.
The words of a talebearer, [i. such are as flatterings, [i. are as sweet and
pleasant to the party that hears them and delights therein, as if he were
flattered:] and they go down [vz. smoothly, sweetly, and pleasantlie] into
the bowels of the belly. [i. into the most secret place: meaning hereby, that
they are not only readily received, but earnestly laid up, and deeply
remembered: see before chap. 18.8. the same sentence and words.] Verse. 23. As
silver dross over laid upon a potshard, [vz. is but a base and so are burning
lips, [i. hot and great words of friendship and love,] and an evil heart: [i.
a heart that thinks otherwise than the words make show of. q d. an enemy in
heart, making outward show of a duetifull friend, is no better than a potshard,
covered over with the dross of silver.] Verse. 24. He that hates [vz. another
will counterfeit with his lips, [i. will speak fair in words,] but in his
heart he lays up deceit, [i. he does not only imagine mischief, but also
waits his opportunity and time to perform it: see examples hereof in Caine,
Ioab, Judas, and others.] Verse. 25. Though he [vz. that hates thee,] speak
favorably, [vz. either for thee, or to thee,] believe him not [vz. for all
that, for many have done so, and yet performed mischief:] for there are seven
[i. a wonderful number: see verse. 16. of this chap.] abominations [i. things
to be abhorred, as mischiefs, hurtes, and such like:] in his heart [vz. he
thinking upon them to perform them in convenient time.] Verse. 26. Hatred [vz.
conceived in the heart of a man] may be covered [vz. for a season] by deceit:
[vz. of the party whom it possesses, as by glorious words, fair
countenances, and such like hypocritical dealings] but the malice thereof [i.
the chief mischief that it devised, and the extremity and rigor of the
same] shall be discovered [vz. in good time, and that many times without the
hurt of him to whom mischief is pretended] in the congregation. [i. before the
people, q.d. openly and plainly.] Ver. 27. [vz. for to take another man in it,
or to hurt him] shall fall therein: [i. through Gods just judgment shall be
taken in the same snare: see Psalm. 7.15. also Ecclesiastes. 10.8.] and he that
rolleth a stone [vz. upwards, and as it were toward the top of an hill] it
shall return [vz. with violence,] unto him. [i. upon him, and to his own
hurt.] Verse. 28. A [i. a man, that uses his tongue to falshoode and lying,
howsoever he flatter with his words for a time, yet he] hates [vz. in heart
and deede] the afflicted [i. him that is in poverty and misery:] and a
flattering mouth [i. the party that uses his mouth, to flattery,] causes
[i. works and that by his flattery,] ruin. [i. hurt and destruction, and
that to another man, whilst believing his fair words, he thinks to be in
good estate, when indeed he is nigh to danger and hurt.]

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, that godly and wise men should be advanced to titles
and places of honor. Verse. 2. Teaches us, that we should not fear rash
curses, and such as are uttered without cause and advise. Verse. 3. Teaches us,
that correction is a good mean to amend men that go astray. Verse. 4. Teaches
us to beware, that we fall not into the fury or folly of the unwise. Verse. 5.
Teaches us, according to the notoriousnes of an offense committed in word to
reprove it. Verse. 6. Teaches us, to make special choice of them, whom we
will employ about our affairs. Verse. 7. Teaches us, that wise and grave
speeches are unseemly in the mouths of foolish persons. Verse. 8. Teaches us,
not to give glory to any, but to them to whom indeed it does appertain.
Verse. 9. Teaches us, that wise words in a fools mouth, are very hurtful
things. Verse. 10. Sets out the justice and judgment of God against the
wicked. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that the ungodly perform with greedines all
naughtines, and are hardly, or not at all reclaymed from the same. Verse. 12.
Teaches us, to beware of trusting in our own wit and wisdom. Verse. 13.
Teaches us, that the slothful fayneth many excuses, because he would not be
employed in labor. Verse. 14. Teaches us, that the sluggish person loves his
bed well. Verse. 15. Teaches us, what fruits idleness brings forth, vz.
neglect and contempt even of a man's self. Verse. 16. Teaches us, that commonly
the slothful man stands high in his own judgment, and contemns other men
in respect of himself. Verse. 17. Teaches us, to beware of busying our selves
in other men's matters. Verse. 18, 19. Teaches us, neither to use deceitful
dealings with our friends, neither to cloak it with any colorable words. Verse.
20. Teaches us, to beware of tale carrying. Verse. 21. Teaches us, to shun the
fostering of contention, either in ourselves or others. Verse. 22. Teaches us,
not to believe every tale that is told us, though they seem pleasant and
profitable unto us. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that a friend in words only, and
not in deed and truth, is not to be much regarded. Verse. 24. Teaches us,
that with hatred, there is commonly joined hypocrisy, the better thereby to
perform wickedness pretended. Verse. 25. Teaches us, not by and by to trust
every fair and fawning word. Verse. 26. Teaches us, that howsoever hatred lie
lurking a while, yet God will discover it in the end. Verse. 27. Sets out
Gods justice against the imaginers, deuisers, and performers of wicked things.
Verse. 28. Teaches us, to beware of false speeches, and flattering words.

CHAP. 27.
Co.
IN the last verse of the other Chapter, he spoke against such persons as
abused their tongues in lying and flattery. And now because such men are
puffed up into pride and boasting, persuading themselves that with their
tongues they will prevail and do great things, he begins this Chapter, and
wills men to take heed of vain glorious boasting, saying we will do this,
and we will do that, etc.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into three parts. The first reaches from verse.
1. to the end of the 10. Wherein he speaks against boasters, and
vaineglorious persons, and against anger and envy, he speaks also of
rebukes, of full and hungry persons, of inconstant men, and of the pleasure
and profit, that comes by old and faithful friends. The second reaches verse.
11. unto the end of the 19. Wherein he sets out the duty of parents, and
provident persons, teaches men to beware of suertiship, and flattery, and
speaks against contentious women, and haste to wrath, and provoke men to
diligence in their calling. The third reaches from verse. to the end of the
Chapter, wherein he speaks of man's eyes, of magistracy or government, of
foolish persons, of provident, painful, and rich men, and of the bodily
gifts of this life, which we receive from the Lord, and of the sole and right
use thereof.

Se.
Verse. 1. BOast not thy self [vz. of any thing thou will do,] to morrow: [i.
against to morrow, as though thou would do this and that, see James 4.13,
etc.] for thou know not [vz. at any hand] what a day may bring forth. [i.
what things may fall out in a days space: q.d. In a days space some things
may fall out which may hinder thee from the performance of that thou did
boast thou would do the day following.] Verse. 2. Let another man praise
thee [vz. and not thine own mouth, [i. thou thy self, for it is not seemly
for a man to praise himself,] a stranger, [i. one that knows thee not] and
not thine own lips. [i. thine own words uttered with thy lips: quoth. let
another man praise thee, rather than thou thy self.] Verse. 3. A stone [as may
appear, by that it is carried downward,] and the sand weighty: [vz.
specially by reason of moisture in it,] but a fools wrath [vz. conceived or
uttered against another,] is heavier [i. more intolerable and hard to be
borne] than them both, [i. than stones or sand.] Verse. 4. Anger [vz. conceived
against another man] is cruel, [i. never leaves off or is satisfied, till it
have committed cruelty,] and wrath is raging [i. full of rage and fury, see
Job. 5.2.] but who can stand [vz. fast and sound without hurt] before envy?
[i. before an envious person: q.d. envy is more dangerous, by Verse. 5. Open
rebuke [vz. for a fault committed,] is better [vz. by many degrees,] than
secret love. [i. love kept close and not manifested by word or deed, showing
it self when need is.] Ver. The wounds [i. the grave and sharp
reprehensions, which seem for the time even as it were to wound] of a lover,
[i. of one that does unfeignedly love, and bear good affection] are faithful:
[i. such as a man may trust, because they proceed from a loving and faithful
heart,] but the kisses of an enemy [i. the fair and flattering countenances
or behauior of one that hates a man. In the word kisses, he alludeth to the
manner used in the Eastern countries, who did use to kiss one another,] are
pleasant. [i. seem to be so, but indeed are bitter, and therefore to be
shunned: look in Ioabs example 2. Samuel. 3.27. also 2. Samuel. 20.9. And for
reproof: see Psalm. 14.4, 5.] The person that is full, [i. has meat and
drink at his will, and that in all abundance,] despises a honey comb, [i. al
delicate and sweet meats.] but unto the hungry soul, [i. to him that is
indeed pinched with hunger and wants] every bitter thing is sweet. [i. he
allows and likes of most mean Verse. 8. As a bird [vz. is in great danger,]
that wandereth [vz. without good cause] from her nest: [vz. wherein her young
ones are, or she her self rests,] so is a man [vz. in great danger] that
wandreth from his own place. [i. that strayeth from the standing or place
wherein God has placed him: q.d. he that rashly changes his dwelling place,
and stays not in the state wherein God has set him, but enterpriseth new
things, and that not being well assured of Gods will, and his own calling, is
no wiser or better Verse. 9. As ointment [vz. applied outwardly to the body,]
and perfume [vz. being put into the fire, by their sweet savor and smel]
rejoice the heart: [i. even affect and pearce the inward parts, and that to
their great good and delight,] so does the sweetness of a man's friend [vz. much
delight and rejoice him, specially when it is declared] by hearty counsel.
[i. by sound and sincere advise in every thing, and by mutual conference and
communication specially of the Psalm. 55.14.] Verse. 10. Thine own friend, [i.
one whom thou haste had trial of to be friendly to thee,] and thy fathers
friend [i. he that has continued friendship to thy father also:] forsake not,
[i. cast him not off at any hand, nor break not friendship with him: he
wills men to continue friendship with those whom they have had good trial
of. In which respect one says well, forsake not an old friend, for the new
shall not be like him: a new friend is as new wine, when it is old thou shall
drink it with pleasure] neither enter into thy brothers house [i. think to
have as little succor from thy brother and the things that he has as may be,
for all the brethren of the poor hate him, Chapter 19.7.] in the day of thy
calamity: [i. when thou art distressed and in pouertie] for better [i. more
comfortable and profitable] is a neighbor [i. any friend or acquaintance
whatsoeuer] that is near. [vz. not only in respect of place, but good will:
the reason of this is, because a friend loves always: Chap. 17.17. see also
18.24.] Verse. 11. My son, [see Chap. 1.8, 10.] be wise, [i. strive by all the
means thou can to obtain and get wisedome] and rejoice mine heart, [i. make
me glad by thy wisdom, and by thy godly conversation as a fruit of the same:
by which things indeed parents are made glad, as Chap. 10.1. also Chap.
23.24, 25.] that I may answer [vz. boldly and truely] him [i. any man] that
reprocheth me. [vz. either for lack of doing my duty toward thee, or for
thy evil behavior, or for any other cause: q.d. let thy life and conversation
approve how faithfully I have performed the duty of a good parent: see Psalm.
127.3, 4, 5.] Verse. 12. A prudent man [i. one that is enlightened with holy
sees the plague, [vz. approaching or drawing near: understanding by plague,
calamities and afflictions of all sorts sent from God] and hides himself:
[vz. from it: meaning, that he labors by all means to put it from him, and
to escape it] but the foolish [i. the wicked and vngodlie] go on still, [vz.
forward in their sin and naughtines] and are punished. [vz. justly for the
same: q.d. God does justly afflict them, seeing they will not be reclaimed: see
this very sentence Chap. 22.3. [Vers. 13. Take his garment etc. [This verse is
also word for word put down before Chap. 20.16. where you may see it also
wholly expounded.] Verse. 14. He whosoever he be] that praises his friend [vz.
with a flattering mind, and fauning words. I suppose the Hebrew word would
better stand here it self, and the sense also be more plain thus.] He that
blesses his friend [i. wishes well unto him in words only and not in heart,
and that to this end that he may be seen of men] with a loud voice, [i. so
that he may be heard of others, and by that lewd means purchase favor from
the partie] rising early in the morning, [vz. for to do it, and that before
others] it shall be counted to him as a curse. [i. it shall be so far off,
this kind of dealing of his, from being esteemed as a blessing or good wishing,
that it shall be taken rather as a certain kind of cursing, because it
sauoureth of flattery: not that he forbids us, either to salute or to
commend our friends justly, but always to have an eye to avoid flattery and
ostentation in the same: q.d. the false flatterer which makes a show as
though he did at all times his duty, is rather cursed of God and men than
well liked of.] Verse. 15. A continual dropping into a man's house, or upon the
goods in the same] in the day of rain, [i. when it raineth much] and a
contentious woman [i. a woman given either altogether or very much to brauling
and chiding] are a like [vz. both dangerous and discommodious: for as the rain
rotteth the things it falls upon, and consumes in time the same, so does
contentions and braulings a man and his family: see Chap. 19.13. Also Chap.
21.9.] Verse. 16. He that hides her, [i. he that labors to keep close her
braulings and iarres] hides the wind, [i. labors as much in vain, as if
he would go about to cover, keep, close, or shut up in a place the wind it
selfe] she is the oil in his right hand that utters it self. [vz. by the
smell and savor thereof, though perhaps it may not be seen, by reason it
is kept close, or hidden in some vessel: q.d. her rage can be restrained by no
means, no not by shame amongst people, but spread abroad it will be; for a man
may sooner keep the wind in his hand, or repress the savor of ointment that
other should not smell it, than stop her in her course, or keep back the
flander that she pulls upon Verse. 17. Iron sharpneth iron, [i. as man by one
iron makes sharp another, which we may see to be true by daily experience
by whetting one knife upon another] so does a man sharpen the face of his
friend. [i. so does one man stir up and provoke another: which I refer not
to wrath and anger, as the Geneua note does, but to the partaking of studies,
counsels, conferences, etc. One reads this whole verse more plainly, and
gives a better sense of it thus.] As a man sharpeneth iron by iron: so does
the face of his friend sharpen a man. [i. a friend, by the friendship and
presence of his friend is instructed, does increase, and is as it were whet on
to good things.] Verse. 18. He that keeps [vz. diligently and carefully,
trimming and dressing it, that it may yield fruite] the fig tree, [i. his
own fig tree which God has given him: meaning hereby, he that looks to
the things wherein God has blessed him] shall [vz. in good time] eat the
fruit thereof: [vz. through Gods especial blessing] so he that waits [vz.
diligently and painfully] upon his master, [vz. whom the Lord has placed over
him] shall come to honor. [i. shall be highly esteemed both of his master and
other, and in the end also be much advanced. And here he makes mention of
fig trees, because Judea was full of them, and bears as we know a most
sweet fruit: besides, as one of their own Rabbis does note, the fruit of it
is not all at one time ripe together, but as it were one after another,
whereupon a man does by the diligent keeping thereof, receive a continual
profit as it were: Verse. 19. As in water face answers to face, [i. as a man
may in water see the face of another man that is there with him, and looks
into the water as he doth] so the heart of man [vz. is seen and knowne] to
man. [i. to another man. True it is that man's heart is secret, and God only is
the searcher thereof, yet it is many times declared by outward show, as the
semblance and proportion 20.5.] Verse. 20. The grave, [vz. receiving dead
corpses] and destruction [i. death that brings them thether] can never be
full, [i. are never satisfied, but always receive though a man bring daily
new: see Chap. 30.15, 16.] so the eyes of a man [i. either his bodily eyes,
or the eyes of his mind] can never be satisfied. [vz. with looking, seeing, or
beholding, specially of new and pleasant things: see Eccle. 1.8. we may
understand also by eyes, either the lust of the eyes, as 1. John 2.16. or else
the mind which uses the eyes as ministers and means to convey things to it.]
Verse. 21. As is the fining pot [vz. serueth] for silver, [i. for the and the
furnace [vz. serueth] for gold: [i. for the trying of it, that it may appear
good: see for this part Chap. 17.3.] so is every man [vz. to be esteemed and
thought of] according to his dignity. [vz. whereunto he is advanced, and that
for good causes: q.d. As silver is fined in the pot, and gold in the furnace
purged from the dross, so by the laudable works that any man has done, or by
the authority whereunto he is justly exalted, he is to be known and allowed
what manner of man he is.] Verse. 22. Though [q.d. Though thou would use
great and vehement means to reform some, yet it will not prevail: not that
he forbids us to labor the amendment of wicked persons, but that there are
some such as by no means can be bettered. Some join these two verses 21, 22.
together thus: All things and instruments have their use, and a way or order to
bring them to their use: gold and silver are tried and purged after their
manner, and all things are through man's skill made fit for their good and
laudable use: but there is no way to purge, prepare, make fit, or instruct a
fool.] Verse. 23. Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, [by q.d. look
carefully to thy household affayres] and take heed to the herds: [vz. of
beasts that thou have, that if they be well, thou may see them so continued:
or if they be otherwise, thou may in good time labor their redress.]
Verse. 24. For riches remain not always, with a man] nor the crown [i. glory
and estimation, to wit, continueth] from generation to generation. [i. for
ever: this is a reason why he should have a diligent eye: q.d. Do thou
think that thy riches are glewed to thee, and that thou can never forgo
them? thou art much deceived so to deem: for they are brittle and flitting
things, yea though they be never so great and glorious: therefore look to thy
things well, and rest not slothfully in another man's labor.] Verse. 25. The hey
discovers it self, [vz. when it is and the grass appears, [i. springs
out of the earth, and that in great abundance] and the herbs of the
mountains [i. the grass that the mountains yeeld] are gathered. [vz.
together, that they may be food and nourishment for the cattle: q.d. all these
things show themselves, and do after a sort crave thee as it were to gather
them for thine own good, and the good of thy beasts, as sheep, oxen, horses,
etc.] Verse. 26. The lambs [i. serve to minister cloth unto thee and thine]
and the goats [i. the increase that comes of them] are [vz. sufficient
enough, not only to pay] the price of the field. [i. the rent of the grounds
wherein they go, but also to enlarge thine own possessions, and to make thee a
purchaser of lands. And in this verse he sets out Gods great goodness in
giving man these gifts: as in the next he sets out the moderate and sober
use of them.] Verse. 27. And let the milk of thy goats be sufficient for thy
food, [he means not to tie men only to this kind of sustenance, but to
teach them frugalitie and sparing] for the food of thy family, [q.d. good
reason there is that thy household should be content with it when thou thy
self art] and for the sustenance of thy maids* [i. of the maidseruants that
thou have.]

Do.
Verse 1. Teaches us, to hang upon God, and not upon our selves for the
accomplishment of all our purposes. Verse 2. Teaches us, to take heed that
we praise not our selves, but rather to endeavor that others for our good
dealing may do the same. Verse. 3. Teaches us, to beware that we provoke not
fools to wrath. Verse 4. Teaches us to beware of anger, wrath and envy.
Verse 5. Teaches us, that open rebukes are many times better, than secret
love. Verse 6. Teaches us, not to condemn our friends reprehensions, nor to
regard of our foes flatteries. Verse 7. Teaches us, to beware that we be not
overtaken with excess: and that hunger is the best sauce. Verse 8. Teaches
us, to stand in the callings wherein God has set us. Verse 9. Teaches us,
what an excellent thing holy friendship and sound advise is. Verse 10.
Teaches us, not to forsake old friends for new. Verse 11. Teaches children
to strive to all goodness. Verse 12. Teaches us, to labor to prevent Gods
judgment, and to take heed of continuance and growth in sin. Verse 13.
Teaches us, to beware of rash and hasty suretiship. Verse 14. Teaches us to
beware of flattering or fanning upon any, specially without good cause. Verse
15. Declares what a continual consumer a contentious woman is. Verse 16.
Teaches us, that the rage of women will hardly (if at all) be kept under.
Verse 17. Teaches us, that presence and conference of friends is a great mean
to increase love. Verse 18. Teaches us, that as the diligent reap profit by
increase of their fruits, so does the painful servant promotion by obedience
and diligence to his master. Verse 19. Teaches us, that a man many times
either by his own experience, or other men's behauiours may enter deeply into
other men. Verse 20. Teaches us, that the sight and concupiscence of a man is
insatiable. Verse 21. Teaches us, that men are to be esteemed according to the
good things that God has bestowed upon them. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that some
men are so hardened in their sin, that there is no hope of their amendment.
Verse 23. Teaches men to have a provident eye to the things wherewith God has
blessed them. Verse 24. Teaches us, the instabilitie and uncertainty of
riches. Verse 25, 26. Show, that God gives all his creatures for man's use and
great good. Verse 27. Teaches us, the moderate and sober use thereof.

CHAP. 28.
Co.
THe holy Ghost in the beginning of this Chapter, passes from oeconomicall and
household affairs, which he had dealt in in the latter end of the other
Chapter, to more general points; as to the evil conscience of the wicked, and
the bold persuasion of the righteous, and to speak of evil and good
Magistrates, etc.

Di.
THis Chapter may be divided into four parts. In the first he speaks verse.
1. to the end of the 7. In the second he speaks against usurers, contemners
of Gods word, deuisers verse. 8. to the end of the 14. In the third he deals
with wicked magistrates, violent and froward people, idle and slothful men,
covetous and partial persons: verse 15. to the end of the 21. In the fourth, he
entreats of making haste to be rich, of rebukes or reproves, of verse. 22. to
the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. THe wicked [i. every one of the wicked, for he uses a nominative
case singular with a verb plural, as though he would declare that one of the
wicked flying, ye rest follow after:] flee [i. endeavor to escape by all the
means that they can,] when none pursues: [vz. them, except it be the
testimony of their own conscience, see Psalm. 53.5. And this seems to be
taken from the great threatening, which is pronounced in Gods law against the
wicked. Leuit. 26.36.] but the righteous are bold [vz. not with any trust in
themselves, but by the faith they have in God, and that in all their
afflictions, how great or how little so ever they be:] as a Lion. [i. fearing
nothing, for as a Lion fears no other beasts, so shall not they dread any
tempests whatsoever.] Verse. 2. For the transgression of the land for the
sins, that the people inhabiting the land do commit,] there are many
princes; [i. rulers and governors of it: not at one time, as some have thought
(though that be a great confusion) but by often changing: every one of them
reigning but a small season,] but by a man of understanding and knowledge [i.
by wise men and magistrates, specially, such as fear God: he puts one for
many] a realm likewise indureth long. [i. a kingdom on the contrary side is
preserved a great while: see Hosea. 13.11. The holy ghost means, that whereas
in any common wealth or kingdom, either the princes, or the people, or both
depart from their duty, there are often changes; but where, either both
states, or any one of them, yea some wise man amongst them does by his
authority guide and govern the whole or some part of them in vprightnes,
there the state is durable and flourishing: 2. Samuel. 20.16, etc.] Verse. 3. A
poor man [i. a man of a mean estate,] if he oppress [vz. either by fraud,
or by force, by bargayning or otherwise] the poor, [vz such as he himself is,
whose cause he should tender and pity, because in them he is put in mind of
his own estate] is like a raging rain [i. is like great rivers and floods
which arise by abundance of rain, or else like a great storm and tempest of
rayne] that leaves [vz. remaining upon the land, or behind it] no food. [vz.
for cattle or men to live Verse. 4. They that forsake the law, [vz. of God, and
will not have it to be the rule of their life,] praise [vz. very highly,] the
wicked [vz. man or men, even such as are like themselves,] but they that seek
the Lord [vz. earnestly, and with an unfeigned heart strive to perform it,] set
themselves [vz. both in word and deed] against them. [i. against such notorious
wicked persons.] Verse. 5. Wicked men [i. given to wickedness:] understand not
judgment, [i. know not, or regard not to perform their duties to God and
man,] but they that seek the Lord [vz. earnestly, and with an unfeigned
heart,] understand all things. [i. know and endeavor to perform the duties
which they owe both 1. Corinthians. 2.15.] Verse. 6. Better [vz. by many degrees] is
the poor [vz. man,] that walks [i. leads a life and conuersation] in his
vprightnes, [i. uprightly: and it is called his vprightnes, not because he has
it of himself, but because the Lord has given it him] than he [vz. whosoever
he bee] that peruerteth his ways [vz. from the light and truth of the word
of God, which is the only way of righteousness,] though he be rich. [i. though
he be never so rich, or of never so great credit. And when he says it is
better, we must not understand him, as though the other were good; for it is
always a vile thing to go astray from the holy commandment, but he speaks
here according to the common custom of men: see Proverb. 19.1.] Verse. 7. He
that keeps [i. indeuoreth to keep, and that unfeignedly, and with a good
heart,] the law [vz. of GOD, and the good instructions that his father shall
give him out of the same:] is a child of understanding: [i. is, and shows
himself to be a wise, and obedient child,] but he that feeds the gluttons
[vz. with his meat, and so is familiarly acquainted and keeps company with
them: under glottons he means al other ungodly ones whatsoever, and yet he
makes special mention of them, because he used the word feeding] shameth his
father. [i. does what in him lies, to bring his parents to shame and contempt,
for the leudnes of the son, is many times ascribed to the parents: and as
has been sundry times before, there is no greater grief to them in this
life, than the leudnes and wickedness of their children: see Chap. 10.1.] Verse.
8. He that increases his riches, by [i. by any unlawful mean, for under
these two, he comprehends all of what sort soever they bee] gathers them
[vz. though happily he himself think not so,] for him that will be merciful
to the poor. [i. not only kind minded but liberal handed also toward them:
q.d. the Lord does appoint, that the riches the usurer has wickedly gotten,
shall be taken either from him or his posterity, and come into a good man's
hand, who will give the poor that which was before taken from them unjustly:
see Chap. 13.22.] Verse. 9. He [vz. how great or how little soever he bee] that
turns away his ear from hearing the law; [vz. of GOD, read or taught unto
him: by turning away his ear, he means all manner of contemning and despising
of it; and by hearing, he means all the exercises of the word, as hearing,
reading, meditating, etc. q.d. he that any manner of way contemns, either
all, or any of the exercises of Gods word,] his prayer shall be abominable
[vz. before the Lord. q.d. the Lord will loath and abhor the prayer he makes,
and not hear him: see Chap. 21.13. where the same is spoken of contempt of the
poor.] Verse. 10. He that causes [i. indeuoreth the righteous to go astray
[vz. from the way that God has prescribed in his word] by an evil way, [i. by
causing him to turn into an evil way which God has condemned:] shall fall
into his own pit, [i. shall not only loose the labor and time that he
spends in intisement and provocation, but shall through Gods just judgment
fall into the danger that he supposed the other should fall into: see Chap.
26.27.] and the upright [vz. in heart, who^^ God shall have stayed from
falling,] shall inherit good things. [i. shall be blessed with great and
continual blessings contrary to the imagination of the wicked, who thought to
bring him into all misery and danger.] Verse. 11. The rich man is wise in [i.
he deemeth so of himself, because he sees all things to fall out
prosperously unto him,] but the poor [vz. man] that has understanding [vz. of
Gods will revealed in his word:] can try him [i. by the light that God has
given him, can diligently consider and weigh his whole life and actions, and
that not by outward show only, as the rich man does, but by the rule and word
of God: q.d. The rich man looks not upon himself, but upon his substance;
and by that judges of himself, but the wise man though he be a poor man,
judges by another rule, both himself and the rich man.] Verse. 12. When the
righteous men rejoice [i. when good men there is great glory, [i. there is all
kind of honor and goodness,] but when the wicked come up [vz. to authority and
credit in the common wealth,] the man [i. every man] is tried [vz. what is in
him, and what he has: q.d. when good men rule, all are in good case, and the
common wealth florisheth, but when the wicked are aloft, no man does safely
possess the things he has, but either by fraud or by force even the
seacretest things he has are searched out and looked into, that they may be
a pray to the ungodly: see Chap. 11.10, 11. also verse the last of this Chap.
29.2.] Verse. 13. He that hides his sins [vz. which he has committed:
meaning by hiding, cloaking or covering of them from God which he cannot do:
or concealing them from men, or lessening them when they are made manifest,]
shall not prosper: [vz. long, either before GOD or men,] but he that confesses
them [vz. unfeignedly and fully, either before God if they be secret, or before
men if they be open] and forsakes them, [i. loatheth and abhors them,
carrying with him a purpose never to fall into the like] shall have mercy. [i.
shall obtain grace and favor before God 1. John 1.9. also Psalm 32.5. Verse.
14. Blessed [vz. even before God, howsoever he seem miserable in his own
eyes or othermens judgments,] is the man [vz. of what state or condition
soever he be] that fears always: [vz. to offend God and break his law:
neither is this continual fear against steadfast trust in GOD, but is put
down as a fruit of faith and repentance: see 2. Corinthians. 7.11.] but he [vz.
whosoever he bee] that hardneth his heart [vz. against God and his law, so
that he either regards not, or fears not to break Gods precepts:] shall
fall into evil. [i. it cannot be avoided, but that he must run into sundry
sorts of sins, and Verse. 15. As a roaring Lion [vz. is fearful and
terrible to the rest of the beasts of the Forest Amos. 34.] and an hungry
Bear [vz. that runs up and down for to seek a pray, will never be in
quiet till it be obtained:] so is a wicked ruler [i. cruel and deuouring] over
the poor people. [vz. that cannot resist him, no more than the lamb the Lion,
or the Rid the Bear: he means that a tyrant spoiling and praying upon the
weak and poor people, does in his Verse. 16. A prince destitute of
understanding [i. void of the knowledge of Gods will revealed in his worde] is
also [vz. as well as the tirannous ruler,] a great oppressor: [vz. of the
poor: he shows that the lack of the knowledge of the truth of Gods word,
is the mother and nurse of all naughtines in magistrates,] but he that hates
[vz. unfeignedly and from his heart] covetousness [i. the desire of having more
than he has: and will not seek by any unlawful means to get money] shall
prolong his days. [vz. upon the earth before men, for I Verse. 17. A man that
does violence against the blood of a person, [i. he that in rage and violence
does shed man's blood, or take away his life,] shall fly unto the grave, [i.
shall make haste unto destruction, because all means that he looked and hoped
for shall fatle him] and they [i. neither men nor means, which he reposed some
confidence in,] shall not stay him. [i. shall not be able to stay him, or
deliver him from death and destruction: q.d. it shall so fall out that the
murderer thinks himself in no place safe, and flying from place to place,
as Caine says of himself according to Gods judgment pronounced before,
Genes. 4.12, 14. shall fall into such great danger, as none shall have either
ability or will to deliver him there from: see Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.14.]
Verse. 18. He that walks uprightly [i. he that leads a godly and just
conversation: 10.9. Also verse 6. of this Chap.] shall be saved: [vz. not only
from hurt and danger in this life, according to Gods good pleasure, but brought
at the end to eternal saluation] but he that is froward in his ways, [i.
leads a perverse and dissolute life both toward God and men] shall once [vz.
at the last, though presently he seem to stand strongly] fall. [vz. into Gods
most horrible and fearful judgments: see 1. Cor. 10.12. Also Hebr. 10.31.]
Verse. 19. He that tilleth his land, [i. painfully trauaileth shall be satisfied
with bread: [i. shall have abundance of all necessary and good things: see
Chap. 12.11.] but he that follows the idle, [vz. in their idleness, and is
idle as they are] shall be filled with poverty. [i. shall be most poor and
miserable: for beggerie is the end of idleness. Chap. 23.21. Also Chap. 24.34.]
Verse. 20. A faithful man [i. he that deals uprightly and soundly with men,
deceiving none: which may appear, because in the Hebrew text he calls him a
man of faithfulnesse] shall abound in blessings: [vz. both from God and man:
q.d. All men shall wish him good, and speak well of him, and he shall be
blessed also of the Lord] and [I would rather turn it, but] he that makes
have to be rich, [vz. not respecting whether it be by right or by wrong, so he
have it, but dealing unfaithfully with men] shall not be innocent. [i. shall
not be counted clear, nor escape punishment before God and good men: for this
phrase, see Chapter 6.29. For making have to be rich, see Chapter 20.21.] Verse.
21. To have respect of persons [vz. in judgment, as to regard a great is not
good: [i. it is hurtful and evil, not only to the party using it, but to
the man that thereby is injured and wronged, yea to the party that has that
favor showed him, because he is flattered as though he had a good cause, when
indeed he maintains a bad one: see chap. 24.23.] for that man [vz. that so
respects or regards men's persons] will transgress [vz. Gods law and man's
law, by perverting iudgement] for a piece of bread. [i. for a very small
matter, or a thing of no importance: for this phrase, see Chap. 6.26.] Verse.
22. A man with a wicked eye [i. that 23.6.] hastes to riches, [i. makes have
to be rich, which how dangerous a thing it is, see before verse 20. of this
Chap.] and knows not that poverty shall come upon him. [vz. suddenly and or
ever he look for it, so does God dispose of men's purposes and practices.]
Verse. 23. He that [vz. upon just cause, and in the spirit of love and meekenes]
shall find more favor [vz. of him which is so rebuked] at the length, [q.d.
though at the first the one seem to be displeased, and the other to get no
good] than he that flattereth [vz. another man] with his tongue. [i. with his
speech and words uttered with his tongue. Some read it otherwise and give
another Ver. 24. He that robs his father and mother, [i. spoyleth them of
the goods and things they haue] and says [vz. either within himself, or to
others] it is no transgression, [vz. against God or man] is the companion of a
man that destroys. [vz. himself or others: q.d. he is to be reckoned with a
murderer. And the holy ghost does not only speak this, as though he would
have men so to esteem of such prodigal and wastfull children, who if they
could tarry the Lords leisure, should be heirs of their fathers goods; but
that he would also have Magistrates to punish them for it: q.d. a stubborn
child that ryotously consumes his fathers goods, and scorneth at the
admonition of his parents, should as well be punished by death, as a man
murderer: see Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, etc.] Verse. 25. He that is of a proud heart,
[vz. either against GOD or man, trusting in himself and not in the Lord]
stirs up strife: [vz. amongst others, and that to his own hurt] but he that
trusts [vz. steadfastly and vnfeignedly] in the Lord, [vz. onely] shall be
fat. [i. shall be abounding with all manner of blessings from the Lord: see
Chap. 11. 25. and the text according to the Hebrew set in the margin.] Ver.
26. He that trusts in his own heart, [i. in himself, or any thing belonging
unto him] is a fool: [i. a wicked man, and therefore cannot choose but perish]
but he that walks in wisdom, [i. wisely: q.d. he that prudently behaueth
himself, and continually hearkeneth to the counsel and precepts of wisdom,
following the same, and not his own mind and fond persuasion, leaning upon
himself onely] shall be delivered. [vz. through Gods goodness, and that Verse.
27. He that gives [vz. liberally, willingly, and freelie] unto the poor,
[i. to such as are in need and distresse] shall not lack: [vz. any thing that
God shall see to be good and meet for him] but he that hides his eyes, [vz.
from the poor, or beholding of their misery: meaning hereby, he that wants
compassion toward them] shall have many curses. [vz. laid upon him from God,
and become himself most miserable and needy. He means not that the people
should curse him, as though that were allowable in them, but that God should
pursue him with Verse. 28. When the wicked rise up, [vz. to honor, and are
exalted to gouernment] men hide themselves: [vz. even for fear: q.d. there is
great occasion given of fear and trembling] but when they perish, [i. when the
wicked and ungodly decay or dye] the righteous increase. [vz. both in number
and in courage, because those that for fear kept themselves close before, do
then boldly bewray themselves: see verse 12. of this Chapter.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches what great difference there is between the testimony of a
good conscience and an evil conscience. Verse 2. Teaches us, that the sins
of the people pull upon them all alterations of state: also what a good
blessing it is to have a good Magistrate. Verse 3. Teaches us, that there is
no oppression to the oppression that one poor man exercises toward another.
Verse 4. Teaches us, to be so far off from commending the ungodly, that we
must rather by all means lawful oppose and set our selves against them. Verse
5. Shows, that God reuealeth his will and all good things to them that seek
him unfeignedly. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that no good man should be despised for
his poverty, nor no wicked man esteemed for his riches. Verse 7. Teaches us,
to have care and conscience to walk in the obedience of Gods law: also to
beware of keeping company with gluttons and dronkards, and to take heed that
we bring not our parents name into discredit and obloquie. Verse 8. Teaches
us to avoid usury and interest: also that man purposes one thing, but that
God does according to his pleasure dispose it another way. Verse 9. Teaches
us, to beware that we offer no contempt to the word, nor any exercises thereof:
also that the prayers of such as despise Gods word are abominable in his sight.
Verse 10. Teaches us, what punishments shall fall upon the intisers and
prouokers of other men to mischief, and also what graces GOD will power upon
his own servants. Verse. 11. Teaches us, that a poor man which is wise, is
better than a rich man that is foolish. Verse 12. Teaches us, that it is a
great blessing to have good governors, and that it is a great testimony of
Gods wrath when the Magistrates are evil. Verse 13. Teaches us, humbly and
vnfeignedlie to confess our sins, and not at any hand to cover them. Verse
14. Teaches us, always to stand in awe of Gods justice and judgment, and of
offending his Majesty, and to take continual heed that we have not our
hearts hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. Verse. 15. Sets out the
cruelty and rapine of wicked Magistrates. Verse 16. Does the same, declaring
further, that it is a goodly virtue for all, but especially for magistrates to
hate covetousness. Verse 17. Teaches us, that God will never suffer man
murderers to be unpunished. Verse 18. Teaches us holy conversation, and that
we should decline from every crooked path. Verse 19. Teaches us, to be
diligent in our callings, and to avoid idleness. Verse. 20. Teaches us
faithfulness and vprightnes in all our dealings, and to beware of desire to be
suddenly rich. Verse 21. Teaches Judges and Magistrates not to respect any
man's person in judgment. Verse 22. Does lively paint out the mind and
condition of miserable and niggardly men, showing also that none can be rich
without Gods especial blessing. Verse 23. Teaches us, as on the one side
plainly and charitablie to reprove, so on the otherside to beware of flattery
and dissimulation. Verse 24. Teaches us, first to beware of unnaturalness
toward our parents: secondly, to take heed that we do not justify our
sins: and thirdly, it declares how grievous disobedience and unnaturalness
toward parents is. Verse 25. Teaches us, to trust in nothing neither within
us nor without us, but in the Lord only. Verse 26. Teaches us, that
obedience to godly wisemen, shall be a mean to deliver men from many dangers.
Verse. 27. Teaches us to be liberal toward the poor, and to beware of hard
heartednes toward them. Verse 28. Shows in what a miserable case good men
are when evil Magistrates are set up, and in what good case they are when it
pleases the Lord to remove them and to take them away.

CHAP. 29.
Co.
IN the 23. and 28. verses of the former Chapter he had spoken of rebukes, and
of wicked Magistrates, and now as it were resuming those matters again, he
shows in the beginning of this Chapter, and namely verse. 1, 2. what an evil
thing it is to harden a man's heart against rebukes, and to have an evil
Magistrate and ruler: and so from these proceeds on to other matters in the
Chapter.

Di.
verse 1. to the end of the 9. wherein he speaks of such as contemn
admonitions, of wicked Magistrates, of whorehunters, of bribers, of flatterers,
of the wicked and the godly, of scorners, and such as can endure no reproof
verse 10. to the end of the 18. wherein he speaks of cruel men, of fools,
of credulous Magistrates: of the poor and usurer, of a good King, of
correction of children, of the wicked and the godly, and of the want of the
word how hurtful it verse 19. to the end of the Chapter, wherein he deals
against evil servants, against hasty men, against angry persons, against
proud men, against thieves and theft: and shows what it is to trust in the
Lord, and not in men: declaring, that the godly cannot abide the ungodly, nor
the ungodly the godly.

Se.
Verse. 1. A Man [i. any man, of what calling so ever he be] that hardneth his
neck [i. that willingly submits not himself: it is a metaphore, taken from
oxen or other beasts, that refuse the yoke which should be put upon their
neck, and will not bow their neck unto it,] when he is rebuked, [vz. justly
of others for his transgressions: and the hebrew phrase as I take it imports
some what more, for he is called a man of rebukes, that is such a one as has
been sundry and several times reproved of others for his naughtines] shall
suddenly be destroyed [vz. even then when he thinks least of it:] and cannot
be cured, [vz. by any means of the afflictions that God shall lay upon him
for the contempt of corrections and admonitions, which God himself and his
children gave him: he means, that he shall be destroyed and that there shall
be no remedy nor hope of restoring.] Verse. 2. When the righteous are in
authority, [vz. over others,] the people rejoice: [i. they have good cause
given them to be merry and glad:] but when the wicked bears rule, the
people sigh. [vz. even for grief and sorrow of heart, or at the least they
have a good cause so to do: see Chap. 11.10. also Chap. 28.12, 28.] Verse. 3. A
man that loves [vz. vnfeynedly] wisdom, [i. rejoices his father: [i. makes
his parents glad thereby: see Chap. 10.1. also Chap. 15.20.] but he that
feeds harlots, [vz. with the goods and substance he has: meaning hereby not
only keeping company with them, but mainteyning them also,] wastes his
substance. [i. consumes all that he has, and comes in the end to beggerie:
see Chap. 5.9. also Chap. 6.26. see also Luke. 15.13.] Verse. 4. A king [i. a
good king by judgment, [i. by faithful execution of justice and judgment to
every one, without partiality of persons] maintains [vz. in peace and
prosperity,] the country: [vz. wherein God has placed him to reign, or
whereof through Gods appointment he is made ruler and governor:] but a man
receiving gifts, [vz. to pervert judgment: that is a magistrate which is a
bribe taker] destroys it. [i. does what in him lies to pull destruction upon
it, and to overthrow it.] Verse 5. A man that flattereth his neighbor, speaking
him fair when he should reprove him, and calling evil good in him]
spreads a net for his steps. [i. goes about secretly to hurt and hinder
him, or else lays wait for his life: q.d. while he flattereth him he lays
snares and grinnes for him to catch him in, even as the fowler does for the
bird, and laboreth to bring him into evil.] Verse. 6. In the transgression [i.
in the very sin that a wicked man commits,] is his snare: [i. is his own
snare to catch him in: q.d. the wicked need nothing to entangle them but their
own sin,] but the righteous [i. such as have a care for righteousness of
life,] do sing and rejoice. [vz. because they fear no snares or intanglings:
q.d. the wicked man's sin, does at the last bring with it sorrow and
heaviness; but the godly do possess grace and joy.] Verse. 7. The righteous
knows the cause of the poor: [i. does not only but the wicked regards not
knowledge. [i. he has no right knowledge to look into, or to defend the
cause of the poor: for he that understands a cause, and defends it not as
it is good, is as though he understood it not at all: yea his not regarding of
it, is as much as if he neglected it utterly.] Verse. 8. Scornful men [i. men
given to scoffing and bring a city [vz. in which they dwell] into a snare: [i.
into very great danger, and be as it were the authors of the ruin thereof,]
but wise men [i. such as are rightly wise indeed, for many have the show of
wisdom and not the thing:] turn a way [vz. from it, and that by their
wisdom,] wrath. [i. either the wrath of God, or of men conceived Verse. 9. If a
wise man contend [vz. by word or otherwise, meaning by this speech, reasoning
with him for his amendment] with a foolish man, [i. with a wicked and ungodly
man,] whether he [i. the just man] be angry [i. deal roughly, or hardly with
him] or laugh, [i. deal more gently or mildly with him] there is no rest. [i.
he gains neither ease nor profit by it, the other is so incorrigible: q.d.
what way soever a wise man use to reform a fool, yet he prevails nothing,
but Verse. 10. Bloody men [i. cruel and hard hearted men, which are given to
shedding of blood,] hate [vz. deadly, and pursue even unto the death,] him that
is upright: [vz. in his ways, meaning such a one as looks narrowly to his
steps either toward God or man,] but the just [i. godly and kind hearted
people whom he calls just, because of the fruits of justice and
righteousness which they show foorth] have care of his soul. [i. care greatly
to maintain Verse. 11. A fool powers out all his mind, [i. he has nothing
within him, but he will easily bewray it,] but a wise man keeps it in, till
afterward. [i. he conteyneth whatsoever he has in his mind, that he may
afterward utter it in time and place most commodious and fit for it: see chap.
14.33. also chap. 15.2, 28.] Verse. 12. Of a prince that hearkeneth to lies, [i.
not only hears them but consents unto them,] all his servants are wicked.
[for such Verse. 13. The poor [vz. man] and the usurer [i. the rich, he gives
rich men this name, either because commonly usurers are rich men, or else
because they attain their riches by vsurie] meet together, [i. are conversant
and live here together in this life,] and the Lord lighteneth both their eyes.
[i. gives either of them their life and being, see John. 1.9. Acts. 17.28. or
as he said before, Chap. 22.2. the Lord is the maker of them all, and not
only this, but preserves A king [i. every Magistrate, but he names him
because he is chiefe] that judges the poor in truth, [i. does pronounce
true and upright judgment for the afflicted, not pitying his cause for his
need sake, nor yet wronging him therefore] his throne [i. his kingdom and
government, a part put for the whole] shall be established for ever. [i. it
shall continue and endure long: see Chap. 20.28. 25.5.] Verse. 15. The rod and
correction [vz. given with the same, used yet moderatly and tempered according
to the notoriousnes of the fault] give wisdom: [i. are instruments and means
to make the parties upon whom they are occupied, wise] but a child set at
liberty [vz. to follow his own will, and do what he lusts, and not being
restrained there from] makes his mother ashamed. [vz. by his dissolutenes and
lewdnes: meaning under shame, not only reproach before people, but also inward
grief and sorrow of her own heart: see cha. 13.24. also cha. 22.15. also cha.
23.13, 14.] Verse. 16. When the wicked are increased, [vz. either in number or
in authority, transgression increases: [vz. by that means: for the more
wicked people, the more sin; and the higher a man is in authority (if he be
naught) the more boldly dare he offend, and the more often also,] but the
righteous shall see their fall. [i. the destruction and overthrow of the
ungodly: see Psalm. 91.8. also Malach. 4. almost throughout.] Verse. 17. Correct
thy son, [vz. for his fault: meaning by son, children: one and he will give
thee rest, [i. thou shall see pleasure and profit ensue thereupon unto thee,]
and will give pleasures to thy soul. [i. he shall greatly delight thee both
inwardly and outwardly, so that thy whole man shall take delight and pleasure in
him: see cha. 13.24. also verse. 15. of this Chapter.] Verse. 18. Where there is
no vision, where there is no sound and sincere preaching of Gods doctrine out
of the law and prophets: now as the doctrine is here called a vision, and so
likewise Isaiah. 1.1. so the prophets and messengers thereof are called seers
1. Samuel. 9.9. for vision, see also Samuel. 3.2.] the people decay: [i. it
cannot be avoided but that they must come to ruin both of body and soul,] but
he that keeps [i. strives unfeignedly to keepe] the law [vz. of God] is
blessed. [vz. from the Lord: meaning also that he shall be blessed; for the
Scripture uses to speak of things to come, as if they were present or done
already by reason of the certainty of them.] Verse. 19. A servant [i. a
stubborn and will not be chastised [i. corrected and amended] with words;
[vz. only but men must now and then use strokes, as the faults shall
deserve,] though he understand, [i. though he know what you mean by your
words] yet he will not answer. [vz. according to that you speak and propound
unto him: this is a reason why stripes must be joined with words: q.d. bare
reproof of words mendeth not a servant, which is deaf to good exhortation or
reproof.] Verse. 20. See thou a man hasty in his matters, one that is
headlongly carried without advise to take in hand every thing,] there is more
hope of a fool [vz. that thou shall reclaim him,] than of him. [vz. that is
so hasty in doing his things: see Chap. 26.12.] Verse. 21. He that delicately
brings up his servant [vz. both in meat, drink, apparel, from youth, [i.
from his first beginning even a long season after] at length he will be even as
his son, [i. he will at the length through that delicacie, take state upon
him, and be as it were a son and a Lord to the rest. One reads it thus,]
at length he shall be void of children. [i. that delicate servant shall go
about, either to displace his masters children, or to slay them, as Jeroboam,
and other of the kings of Israel did.] Verse. 22. An [i. a man given to anger]
stirs up strife, [vz. both to himself and others by the means of his
strife: see Proverb. 15.18.] and a furious man [i. he that gives his fury and
rage the raines] abounds in transgression. [i. is not only prone to many
evils, but commits sundry sins.] Verse. 23. The pride of a man [vz.
either in his heart, or expressed by word, deed, countenance, gesture,
apparel, or such like] shall bring him low: [i. shall be a mean to debase
him: see Chapter 15.33. Chap. 18.12.] but the humble in spirit [i. such as are
of a lowly mind] shall enjoy glory. [vz. both before Job. 22.29. also Luke.
14.11.] Verse. 24. He that is partner with a thief [vz. any manner of way
either by counsel or consent, or in the act of the every, or in receiving of
stolen goods,] hates his own soul: [i. does after a sort lay violent hands
upon himself and his own life: for not only they that do evil, but such
as favor them that do it, are guilty Romans 1.31.] he hears cursing, [vz.
either against God or man,] and declares it not. [vz. abroad and therefore
consents to sin: see Leuit. 5.1. Verse. 25. The fear of man [i. that fear
that a man has in himself, as while he does not wholly commit himself to
God and depend of him, being persuaded of his good will toward him] brings a
snare: [i. great danger to him that is seized therewith: for snare: see verse.
8. of this Chap.] but he that trusts [vz. continually and assuredly [in the
Lord [vz. onely] shall be exalted. [vz. into Verse. 26. Many [vz. men] do
seek [vz by all means possible] the face of the ruler: [i. his favor and to
obtain his good will, and that they may obtain right at his hands, they do
humbly entreat him: see chap. 19.6.] but every man's judgment [i. the
judgment of every man's cause] comes from the Lord: [vz. who uses man as
his instrument to pronounce the same: q d. men may well go to Magistrates and
Judges, but yet they should first go to GOD, in 21.1.] Verse. 27. A wicked man
is an abomination to the just, [i. a good man loatheth and cannot abide a
wicked man; not because he is a man, but because he is wicked,] and he that is
upright in his way [i. leads an upright, godly, and holy life,] is
abomination to the wicked. [i. the wicked and ungodly cannot abide such a man:
see verse. 10. of this Chap.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, readily and willingly to yield to good counsel, for
fear of destruction. Verse. 2. Teaches us, what a great blessing it is to have
good magistrates, and what a misery it is to have wicked ones. Verse. 3.
Teaches us, that whoredom brings with it beggerie and poverty, Verse. 4.
Teaches us, that justice is the proppe of kingdoms, and briberie the ruin
thereof. Verse. 5. Teaches us, to avoid flattery, and shows the danger
thereof, to him that is flattered. Verse. 6. Teaches us, that a wicked man's
sins, are cords strong enough to tie him, so that he shall not stir. Verse
7. Teaches us, to look into, and to defend the just cause of the poor. Verse
8. Sets out the discommodities of scorning, and the commodities which ensue
of holy wisdom. Verse. 9. Teaches us, that there is no way to reclaim a man,
that is frosen in the dregs of his own sin. Verse 10. Teaches us, that
the ungodly cannot abide the good, but the godly for all that, yea the rather
for that, should make much of, foster, and defend one another. Verse 11. Does
teach us, not only not to blabbe out our own secrets, but to reserve the
uttering of them to a most convenient time and place. Verse. 12. Teaches us,
that wicked men and Magistrates have many times wicked servants and officers.
Verse 13. Teaches us, that all the being, that al men either good or bad have,
they have it from the Lord. Verse 14. Teaches us, that execution of justice is
a notable mean to make a kingdom sure. Verse 15. Shows what difference
there is between a reasonable correction and letting children and servants
run as they list. Verse 16. Shows, that the ungodly may flourish for a
time, but they shall come down at the last. Verse 17. Teaches parents
moderatly to correct their sons and servants. Verse 18. Declares, in what a
miserable case those people are that have not the word preached amongst them.
Verse 19. Teaches men to correct froward servants, not with words only, but
with stripes also. Verse 20. Shows, that it is easier to reclaim a fool,
than a man given over to hastines and unadvisedness in his affairs. Verse 21.
Teaches us, to beware that we bring not up our servants over daintilie. Verse.
22. Teaches us to avoid anger and fury. Verse 23. Teaches us, to shun
pride, and to embrace humility. Verse 24. Teaches us, to beware of all
consenting to any manner of evil whatsoever it be. Verse 25. Teaches us, that
such as trust steadfastly in the Lord shall never be confounded. Verse 26.
Teaches us, to go to God in our just causes before we go to the Magistrate,
and afterward to go to him for justice, and then no doubt we shall speed
better. Verse 27. Teaches us, that the wicked cannot abide the godly, and that
the godly on the other side should loath them in their wickedness.

CHAP. 30.
Co.
THis Chapter cannot well be connexed to the former otherwise than thus, that
the holy Ghost proceeds in delivering other holy and wholesome instructions
concerning faith and manners, but yet by the ministry and mean of another
than Solomon, as may appear by the title and inscription of this Chapter.

Di.
I Would divide this Chapter into four parts. In the first he shows how
verse 1. to the end of the 9. In the second, he deals against unjust
accusers, verse 10. to the end of the 17. In the third, he entreats of things
beyond his reach, of the trade or order of an adulteress, and of certain
things that breed great disorder and confusion in the earth: also of some
creatures which in their kind do instruct men, and this reaches from verse
18. to 28. In the fourth, he speaks of the lion, of a grayhound, of a goat,
and of the majesty of a King, teaching men to beware of pride, and wrath: from
verse 29. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
I Would make but one verse of the title of this Chapter and the first verse it
self, and read them both together thus.] Verse. 1. The words of Agur [vz. which
he spoke, are these that follow. Some would have this Agur to be Solomon,
but I see no likelihood of it: and me thinks the petition which is made verse
7. of this Chap. should plainly prove it, because Solomon was a King, and had
great store of riches, and a promise given unto him thereof: see 1. Kings 3.13.
I rather think some other good man, whose name is not expressed save here, was
the writer, and that these were joined to Salomons Proverbs, both for the
likeness of the argument, and the brevity or shortness of the sentences] the
son of laketh. [He expresses also his fathers name: of which name we read
in no place of the scripture but in this only, the holy Ghost teaches us
thereby, not curiously to search into these things, seeing it has not pleased
him to reveal more concerning them.] The prophecy [i. the good and holy
speech; for prophecy is taken here for a speech concerning good and holy
matters] which the man [vz. Agur himselfe] spoke [vz. plainly and pithilie
also as followeth] to Ithiel, even to Ithiel, and Vcal. [i. to these and these
men who were (as it is well noted) either his scholars or his friends, who
also he did instruct in good and necessary matters. I know some both read it
otherwise, and from the interpretation of the names give another fense,
applying it to Christ the Messiah; but with the good leave of so good men, I
hope I may upon some good reason dissent from them in it: for though the sense
may be good, and the doctrine gathered upon it, yet I would not so allegorise
upon the scripture, specially when we have other plain places even in the old
Testament, that are plain prophecies indeed of our Savior Christ: and
therefore I take Ithiel and Vcal to be men's names, for whose Verse. 2. Surely J
am more foolish than any man, [It may be, and I do not much dissent from some
of the Rabbis in this, that Ithiel and Vcal demanded his judgment concerning
hard matters: and that he beginning to speak of them, sets out his own
vnmeetnes: q.d. you think thus and thus of me, but I surely may rather say
unto you, why ask you these things of me that am so unskillful my self, as no
man more, and so he extenuateth or debaseth his judgment, beginning even in
his speech to them with that] and have not the understanding of a man in me.
[i. have not so much understanding in me as a mean man: for he uses the word
Adam here, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies for the most part one of the
common sort of people, as the word Isph does a noble and excellent personage.]
Verse. 3. For I have not learned wisdom, q.d. so far of is it that I can
well speak of these things, that I have not yet attained wisdom or knowledge]
nor attained to the knowledge of holy things. [vz. such as God and his word
are, of which he speaks in the next verses: some read of the saints:
meaning thereby Angels, and such faithful ones as are already gathered to God
in heaven, but the other is more plain: q.d. I am not instructed with the
knowledge of divine things, that I should be able to declare such hard points
as these are.] Verse. 4. Who [vz. amongst men] has ascended up to [vz. that he
should fetch from thence the knowledge of God] and descend? [vz. from thence,
that he might tell us what things he has seen and learned there: see Deutero.
30.12, etc. It is true that Paul and others have been rapt up thither, but yet
not of themselves, but by God; and withal they have seen things that it was
not lawful for man to speak: see 2. Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.] who has gathered the
wind in his fist? [i. who does hold the wind in his hand that it blows not,
and lets it lose when he will to blow. This only can God above do, and
not any man: see Isaiah 40.12.] who has bound the waters in a garment? [i. as
it were in a garment: q.d. is it not God only that keeps the waters in the
clouds as it were in a garment, and afterward when he sees it good,
dissolueth them into rain that falls upon the earth? see Psalm 104.3. Some
understand by the waters here, the waters which are above the firmament, and
are vpholden by the wonderful power and providence of almighty God, of which
you may read Genesis 1.6, 7. and in other places: but I think it better to
understand them of the waters in the air and firmament, which is often in
scripture called heauen] who has established all the ends of the world? [q.d.
by whose means is it that the earth and all the wastes thereof remain so
firm and stable as they are, is it not by the only power of the almighty?]
what is his name, [q.d. can thou name a man that can perform these things]
and what is his sons name, [he speaks this according to the custom of the
Jews, who used to make men known by their kindred, as Isaiah the son of
Amos, Michaiah the son of Imlah, and such like: q.d. that he may be the more
known and famous, tell what is his kindred or stock, and what is his sons
name] if thou can tell? [q d. if thou can name any let us hear. I am not
ignorant that many good writers apply ^his to God the Father, and to his son
Christ; but the former is the more plain and simple sense. His meaning is,
that none can do or tell these things but God only, and therefore he is most
meet to deal in those hard matters and speeches concerning the same. And thus
having laid down, as it were by the way of extenuation, his own
insufficiency, he enters in his measure to discourse of the points, and
first he treats of the word of God.] Verse. 5. Every word of God [i. both the
whole word of GOD generally, and every part and particle of the same] is pure:
[i. true, just, holy, and free from all corruption whatsoever: see Psalm
12.6. Psalm 18.30. Psalm 19.8.] he [i. God himselfe] is a shield [vz. of
defense and protection against the rage and assaults of their enemies: see
Psalm 18.2.] to those [i. to all those, both generally and particularly] that
trust [vz. steadfastly and vnfeignedly] in him. [vz. only: see Chap. 29.25.]
Verse. 6. Put nothing [vz. of thine own invention and deuise] unto his words,
[i. unto the word that he has delivered unto thee: and he speaks nothing
here of taking away, because men be more prone to add, under the show of
interpretation and fense, than to take away: see Deutero. 4.2. Also Deutero.
12.32. Reuelat. 22.18, etc.] least he reprove thee, [vz. for thy sawcines and
malapertnes: understanding also by reproving, correcting and punishing] and
thou be found [vz. by that meanes] a lier. [for lying is committed not only by
speaking less than the truth, but also by speaking more. So he shows that
there is a double sin committed by adding to the word: the one is the sin
of pride and presumption, Verse. 7. Two things [vz. particularly and by name: as
may appear verse 8.] have I required of thee: [vz. earnestly and oftentimes,
yea I require and crave them still: for the phrase see Psalm. 27.4.] deny them
me not [i. graciously grant me the same] before I dye. [He means that he
would have and inioye the same so long as he should live here: for after the
course of this life were once finished, they would stand him Verse. 8. Remove
[vz. of thy goodnes] far from me [vz. yea so far that it may never take
hold of me] vanity [i. all vain delights, as Psalm. 119.37.] and lies: [i. all
unjust and unfaithful dealing: understanding also by one, all manner of
transgressing: q.d. pardon all my former sins, and give me grace daily more
and more to prevail against the seed of all corruption in me] give me not
poverty, nor riches: [i. not too much of either: he shows the reason in the
next verse: and we must note, that though the condition be not here expressed,
yet he means according to Gods will, and so far forth as he should see it
good for his glorie] feed me [vz. of thy gracious goodness and liberality: see
Psalm 104.27, 28.] with food convenient for me, [I take it to be the same in
other words that our Savior Christ teaches us to pray, Matthew. 6.11. meaning
as much or as little, as Verse. 9. Least [vz. if thou give me abundance of
riches,] I be full [vz. of all plenty and abundance,] and deny thee, [vz. to
bear sway over me, and forget thee; for fulness works many times pride,
security, and forgetfulness: see Deutero. 8.10.12.14. also Deutero. 31.15.
Ezech. 6.49.] and say [vz. either within my self, or openly unto others] who
is the Lord? [vz. that I need to care for him, see Exodus 5.2.] or least I be
poor. [that is a reason why he would not be pinched with poverty,] and steal
[vz. for the satisfying of my need: see Chap. 6.30, 31.] and take the name of
my God in vain: [either by false swearing as the poor people do to get
somewhat, or else by my theueerie and loose life slander that glorious name and
profession after which I am called: mark that both riches and poverty are
from the Lord.] Verse. 10. Accuse [vz. falsely, or without good and great cause]
a servant to his Master, [i. any to his superior; for by a servant he
understands all in subjection to others: he means by this, that he would
have men to have peace and friendship with all, yea even with the meanest, and
to foster concord amongst all sortes] least he curse thee [i. least by his
prayer unto God he pull a curse from him upon thee, who is the defender and
revenger of the poor: see Exodus 22.23.] when thou have offended. [vz. against
him, accusing him falsely, and without any just cause.] Verse. 11. There is a
generation [i. a sort that curses their father, [i. both wishes and speaks
all manner of evil against him,] and does not bless their mother. [i. does
not wish well unto her, meaning thereby cursing of her: for the punishment of
such children, read Exodus 21.17. And this kind of hebrew speech where one and
the self same thing is repeated by the contrary with a denial, is usual in
Scripture: see Deuteron. 33.6. and other places: his meaning is: q.d. such
children, as provoke, contemn, and despise their parents, and utter slanderous
and cursed speeches against them are a vile kind of people, and show
themselves to be rebellions persons.] Verse. 12. There is a generation 11.] that
are pure in their own conceit, [i. think themselves holy, just, etc.] and yet
[vz. for all their own imagination and outward show to others] are not washed
[vz. by the water of the word and spirit; he means that they are not made
clean: for washing, see Psalm. 51.2, 7.] from that filthiness. [vz. from that
filthiness of sin which they have both in body and in spirit: see 2. Cor. 7.1.
In the other verse he spoke against perverse and stubborn people: and here he
deals against hipocrites (a perilous kind of people) who outwardly making
show of holiness of life, are notwithstanding in their mind most impure, and
many times even by deeds declare the same, though that they think by an
outward vizard of holiness to cover their filthiness.] Verse. 13. There is a
generation [see verse 11. of this Chap.] whose eyes are hautie, [i. who do
declare the pride of their heart by their very lookes] and their eye liddes
are lifted up. [vz. on high far above others: he puts the sign of pride
for pride, because even in the eyes and countenance there is a manifestation of
pride, as chap. 6.17. or else for proud persons themselves using the same;
against whom he here deals.] Ver. 14. There is a generation whose teeth are
as swords, [i. very sharp and there chawes as knives, [vz. ready and prepared
to cut,] to eat up [i. utterly to destroy and deuoure] the afflicted [i. the
poor and needie] out of the earth, [i. from dwelling in the same] and the
poor from among men. [vz. that they alone might dwell upon the earth: Isaiah
5.8. And here he speaks against tyrannous men and oppressors of the poor.]
Verse. 15. The horse-leach [The creature here named is well knowne] has two
daughters [in her tongue, whereby first she pricketh and pearceth the skin,
and afterward sucketh the blood: see Plin. lib. 32. cap. 10.] which cry [vz.
in their manner] give, give [vz. unto us: meaning by the doubling of the word,
that they are seldom or never satisfied. And under this speech he sets out
the insatiable desire of such as oppress the poor: q.d. as the horse-leach is
never satisfied but when she is filled, at which time she falls of; and yet
afterward if she take hold either of the same place or some other, she will
suck more blood: so these oppressors are not content once to have spoiled men,
but come again, and never leave till they have deprived them of all their
riches and substance.] There be three things that will not be satisfied: yea
four that say not, it is enough; [these words and the meaning thereof are
plain, Verse. 16. The grave, [for that is never satisfied with bodies, but does
devour al things put therein, how many or how great soever they be: see
Chapter 1.12.] and the barren womb, [I do not only refer this as some do
unto barren women, but to incontinent women also whose lust is never satisfied]
the earth that cannot be satisfied with water, [but drinks in all water
powered upon it, yea that great store of rain that falls from heaven, and is
always ready (as it were) to receive more] and the fire that says not, it is
enough: [for how much wood or other matter soever is laid upon it it burns
and consumes the same. I suppose that all these similitudes tend to express
the insatiable desire of the covetous men and oppressors, that as these are
never satisfied, Verse. 17. The eye [i. the person himself, a part put for the
whole: and he speaks of the eye, both because it is a very excellent part of
man's body, and also because in it many times is contempt and scorning most
bewrayed] that mocketh his father, [vz. for any cause,] and despises the
instruction of his mother: [i. the good counsel that she shall give him,] let
the Ravens of the valley pick it out, [he makes mention of those Ravens; that
abide commonly in valleys and by rivers that run in valleys, because they
are thought of some to be more fearce and cruel upon their prays: and that
which is read here by the way of a wish (as it were) some read it by the way of
a prophecy, thus; they shall pick it out: but the sense comes all to one:
meaning that he should be destroyed,] and the young Eagles [vz. who are more
busy, and better able with there beakes and talents to devour their pray,]
eat it. [vz. up, and utterly spoil it, so that there be no memory or
remembrance of him nor his Verse. 18. There are three things hidden from me, [i.
they are more high than I can atteyne unto, and exceed my capacity far,] yea
four [vz. things there are: all which four he reckons up in the next
verse] that I know not; [vz. how to yield a certain and sound natural reason
of them.] Ver. 19. The way of an Eagle in the air, [i. flying in the air: for
she leaves no notes or paths (as it were) of her flights: and though this be
common to all other birds, yet he names specially the Eagle, both because she
is the chiefest of birds or foul, and also flies most high, and very swift
with all,] the way of a Serpent upon a stone, [vz. or sharp and steep rock:
that a Serpent, as an Adder, or snake should crawle upon the earth being flat
and even, is no great matter: but how she should go up into craggie and
steep mountains, is very wonderfull] the way of a ship in the midst of the
sea, [this is strange also: for though it be true, that when the ship goes
(specially in a calm) there is some path of it left; yet after that the waters
have come together again it cannot be seen: see Job. 9.26.] and the way of a
man, [i. the order, course, dealing, or knowledge of a young man: he speaks
of an unclean and dishonest thing in clean and honest terms,] with a maid.
[i. with one that would so be taken, and so will shamelesly affirm her self
to be, when it is neither so nor so: as may appear by that which follows in
the next verse.] Verse. 20. Such is the way also of an adulterous woman, [i.
she eats, and wipeth her mouth; [i. when she has committed wickedness, she
makes a goodly show as though she were honest: in good terms expressing
evil matters teaching us thereby to avoid filthy talk,] and says; [vz.
impudently and shamelesly,] J have not committed iniquity. [and yet her own
heart and knowledge can tell her the contrary: all this tends in my mind,
to set out the closenes and shamelesnes of strumpets, whose wicked facts can
hardly be known: q.d. when they have committed whoredom they will deal as
some do, who when they have devoured somewhat which they should not, they will
wipe their mouths, as though they had not done it: so in the shamelesnes of
their face they will deny the fact of evil, and behave themselves toward
their husbands as though they had not deceived them, because no note or mark
of their filthiness appears whereby it may be known.] Verse. 21. For [vz.
amongst men,] the earth is moved, [i. either the inhabitants of the earth
themselves have good occasion to tremble and shake: or else, by Hyperbole to
expound it thus; that it were reason when three things following are done upon
the earth, the earth it self should as it were tremble for horror and fear:]
yea for four [vz. things, which he reckons up afterward, verse. 22.23.] it
cannot sustain it self. [vz. in any good strength and order: he means
nothing else hereby, but that the things themselves are intolerable amongst
men.] Verse. 22. For a servant when he reigns, when any unmeet for high
callings are advanced to the same: for they know not how to use authority,
but abuse it, both to their own h^^rt, and oppression of others,] and a fool
[i. a wicked man] when he is filled with meat, [i. when he has all
abundance and plenty of every good thing: for both he abuses the things in
excess, and being puffed up through pride becomes hateful to all.] Verse.
23. For the hateful woman [i. (...) her that husband to whom she is married,
and the whole household. One readeth] for the hated woman [i. for her that is
hated of her husband for her evil manners and conditions, and for the same is
put away: see Deutero. 24.1. see also Deuteronomy 21.15.] when she is married [vz. to
another man, which cannot choose but be intolerable and grievous to her first
husband, besides that, it is the plain committing of adultery as Christ
shows. Matthew. 19.9. which should cause the land to tremble because it
defiles the same as Ierem. 3.1. and this latter do I allow of,] and for a
handmayde [i. for one that has been a servant before] that is heir to her
mistres, [i. is married to her master, and so possesses all that her mistres
had before: the reason is, because that having gotten a better state, she will
swell and wax proud, and hardly Verse. 24. These [vz. things following] be
four small things in the earth, [i. be four of the smallest creatures in the
earth,] yet they are wise [vz. in their kind] and full of wisdom; [yea so
full, that men many times are sent to them to learn of Verse. 25. The pismires,
a people not strong; [i. a very weak sort of creatures: and he resembles
them to people, because of their multitudes] yet prepare they [vz. very wisely]
their meat [i. their food and sustenance which shall nourish them] in summer,
[i. in summer season: he means that these little things while they can and
the season is convenient, labor to get against an unseasonable and hard time
that which may keep them: see 6.6, etc.] Verse. 26. The connies [One reads
the mice of the mountains; whereunto also I do consent, because connies are
seldom to be found in the mountains or the rocks, as it is said hereafter in
this verse: and also because Jerome writing to Sunia and Fretella, affirms
that Syria (that is the land of Judah and the countries thereabout) was full of
such mice,] a people not mighty: [i. a company or troop not able for all
their company to perform any great thing:] yet make they their houses [i.
places for them to dwell in] in the rock. [by their continual labor: q.d.
through labor and continuance Verse. 27. The grasshopper [i. the multitude of
grasshoppers: one for many,] has no king [i. no principal or chief ruler of
them, as the bees have (as some affirm)] yet go they forth [vz. to destroy
and eat up the fruit of the earth,] all by bands, [i. not only in good
order, but as it were all consenting to one thing; even as though they Verse.
28. The spider takes hold with her hands, [vz. of the th^ed or web which she
has spunne: he says with her hands, not that they are hands indeed, but
because they are set some of one side, and some of another as men's hands are,
and because they do the office of hands; that is apprehend and lay hold of
things, otherwise in proper speech indeed they are fee^^] and is in kings
palaces: [laboring busily about his ^ebbe: of the Spiders nature and diligence,
see Plini. lib. 11. cap. 24.] Verse. 29. There be three things [vz. amongst
other creatures] that order well their going, [i. that go very stately and
comely,] yea four things [vz. which follow hereafter] are comely in going,
[vz. about any thing they do.] Verse. 30. A lion which is strong [i. most
strong] among [vz. of the field or forrest] and turns not [vz. back again
out of his way or pace] at the sight of any: [vz. either man or beast.] Verse.
31. A [i. a swift and very nimble dog for a race or hunting. I allow rather
his reading, who turns it] a horse girded in the loins, [i. not only well
trussed, but apt and prepared for a race: the metaphore being taken from the
people of the East and their custom, who when they went chearefully about any
thing, would trusse up their garments about their loins: and I rather yield
unto this, not only because there is no great state or comelines in a
grayhound, but also for that which is written concerning the horse: Job. 39.22,
23, etc. And I think the nature of the word will also somewhat help it:] a
goat, [vz. going stately, and with great chearefulnes before the rest of the
flocke] and a King, [i. a Magistrate or ruler] against whom there is rising up.
[vz. either by his home enemies, or by his foreign foes. He means a mighty
and strong Prince whom none dare resist, neither dare any offer himself to
stand against him.] Verse. 32. If thou have [i. if thou have declared thy self
to be vnwise] in lifting thy self up, [vz. above others: q.d. If thou have
bewraied pride, or have been proud, beware thou do so no more: and I refer
it not only to pride, but to anger and contention the inseparable companion of
pride; and that so it must be understood the verse following sheweth] and if
thou have thought wickedly, [vz. against another man or men] lay thine hand
upon thy mouth. [i. do not abstain only from speaking of it, as Job. 29.9.
but continue not in those evil imaginations, much less in the performance of
that evil.] Verse. 33. When one churneth milk, [vz. a good while together] he
brings forth butter: [vz. at the last] and he that wringeth his nose, [i.
blows it often and rubbeth it very hard] causes [vz. at the length] blood to
come out: [vz. of his nose] so he that forces wrath, [i. provoke other men
to wrath by his lewd speaches] brings forth strife. [vz. between himself
and others: q.d. as churning brings forth butter, and the rubbing and wiping
of the nose blood, which may be hurtful to him that uses it: so he that is
stirred up to wrath in himself, or provoke other men thereto, stirs up
contention and strife: therefore men must take heed that they be not stirred up
to wrath in themselves, neither provoke others thereto, for thereupon rises
contention, which is the cause of many and great mischiefs.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, to have care of other men, and to instruct them what we
can. Verse 2. Teaches us, to think lowly and humbly of our selves. Verse 3,
4. Teach us, that no man, as man, is able to discourse of such high and great
secrets, as God has revealed in his word. Verse 5. Teaches us, the
excellency of Gods word: also how good the Lord is to those that trust in him.
Verse. 6. Teaches us, the perfection of Gods word, and instructs us to bridle
our own presumption that would many times add thereto. Verse 7. Teaches us,
that earnest prayer to God is the mean to obtain from him such things as we
need. Verse 8. Teaches us, to hate vanity and lies: also to pray for
contentednes in whatsoever state GOD shall place us. Verse 9. Teaches us, that
riches commonly breed pride; and poverty distrust in God and theeuerie,
unless men be marueilously assisted with grace from him. Verse 10. Teaches
us, to beware of al false accusations. Verse. 11. Teaches us, to beware how we
practice frowardnes and unnaturalness toward our parents. Verse 12. Teaches
us, to take heed of hypocrisy, and that we think not our selves holy, when
indeed we are filthy. Verse 13. Teaches us, to beware of pride, and of all
outward shows appertaining thereto. Verse 14. Teaches us, to shun violence
and oppression of others. Verse. 15, 16. Teach us, to beware of covetousness and
an insatiable desire of riches. Verse 17. Declares, what punishment shall fall
upon contemptuous and disobedient children. Verse 18, 19, 20. Teach and set
out, not only the vnsearchablenes of a harlots heart, but the hypocrisy that
is in her, yea even then when she has committed filthiness. Verse 21. Teaches
us, that confusion and disorders should make men, yea and the earth it self to
tremble and shake. Verse 22. Shows us, that government is not meet for a man
of mean condition, and that abundance and riches cannot agree with a fool.
Verse 23. Teaches us, that it is a great confusion for a man to marie another
man's wife, that without just cause is divorced from her: also that it is an
unseemly thing for a master to marie his maid-seruant. Verse 24. Teaches us,
that we may many times learn good instructions even from the least of Gods
creatures. Verse 25. Teaches us, in the Pismire to learn in time convenient
to provide for us, and those that depend upon us. Verse 26. In the examples of
the mice of the mountains, to be laborious and diligent in those things that
concern our own good. Verse. 27. Teaches us, by the Grasshopper to learn to
join together in order and unity, though we had none to conduct and lead
us. Verse 28. Teaches us, that we should not inshame lean off our work for
any man's presence, no more than the spider does hers in the Kings palace.
Verse. 29. Teaches us, that we may even in the creatures many times behold
excellent qualities, that God the creator has put into them. Verse 30.
Shows, that in the lion there is great courage. Verse 31. Teaches us, that
there is great liuelines and swiftnes in a horse: and that there is also great
majesty in a good Prince. Verse 32. Teaches us to beware of pride, and also
to take heed that we conceive no evil in our thoughts, or if we do, to
repress it there, and not to let it break forth either in words or deeds.
Verse 33. Teaches us, rather to beat down wrath and contention in our selves
and others, than to foster it our selves or others.

CHAP. 31.
Co.
THe holy Ghost in the other Chapter had interposed certain notable and
godly speeches of one Agur the son of Iaketh, between some sentences of
Salomons before going and those now following; which being dispatched, he
returns again in this Chapter, and puts down certain grave speeches
that Solomon speaks, as it were from his mothers mouth.

Di.
THis whole Chapter being an exhortation of Salomons mother made to him, may
be divided into two parts. In the first, with wonderful mother verse 1. to
the end of the 9. In the second, she Solomon as from her mouth delivers the
same) the virtues and qualities of good women, which in sum are these; she
loves and obeieth her husband, flies sloth, is liberal toward her
household, is an example of diligence, labor, godliness, looks into the ways
of her people, takes care of her children, and greatly fears the Lord, from
verse 10. to the end of the Chapter.

Se.
Verse. 1. THe words of King Lemuel: [i. which he himself spoke, having before
received them as instructions from his mother: no doubt but this Lemuel was
Solomon, because he is named a king] the prophecy [i. an excellent doctrine,
which also for the notablenes thereof might be esteemed as a prophecy: see
Chap. 30.1.] which his mother [vz. Bathsheba, 2. Samuel 12.24.] taught him.
[vz. being certainly persuaded that God had ordained him to be king, as
appears 1. King. 1.13. What time she taught him, as whether it was before he
was king or after, it is uncertain: and yet I suppose rather before than
after, because then he was endued with most singular wisdom: see for this
purpose Chapter 4.3, 4.] Verse. 2. What my son! [vz. I say unto thee: she
begins as it were with what the son of my womb! [i. my natural son,
and most tender and dear unto me: see Isaiah 49.15.] and what O the son of
my desires! [i. whom I have not only greatly desired, but for whose cause also
I have made and performed many vows unto the Lord (for so much the word
imports) as mothers were wont to do for their children, specially for their
males or sons: see 1. Samuel 1.11.] Verse. 3. Give not thy strength unto [i.
to strange women or harlots: by strength she understands not only his
substance, but also the very powers and strength of his body and mind: see
before Chap. 5.9, 10.] nor thy ways, [i. make not thy endeavors, purposes, and
actions known to such] which is to destroy Kings, [q.d. that will do nothing
else but bring destruction upon Kings and Kingdoms: see Deuteronomy. 17.17.] Verse. 4.
It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, [i. it does not belong unto them] to drink
wine, [vz. excessiuely, or immoderatly] nor for Princes [vz. it does not belong
unto them neither: by Princes, he means such as pronounce sentence of law to
others] strong drink, [i. to drink strong drink excessiuely or immoderatly.
Wine and strong drink soberly used are not here forbidden, but dronkennes: for
Kings and Magistrates are to use the one soberly, and carefully to fly the
other, because the whole people is committed to their charge, least also being
overcome with wine, they should forget Verse. 5. Least he [a reason of that
which goes before: and mark how suddenly he changes the number from the
plural to the singular] drink [vz. ouermuch] and forget [vz. by that meanes]
the decree, [i. not only the law and ordinance of God, but also the certain
and appointed order of law and equitie] and change [i. turn vpside down and
pervert, as where he should help and succor to hurt and hinder] the judgment
[i. the right sentence and iudgement] of all the children of affliction. [i. of
al those that are greatly afflicted: meaning least being overcome with drink,
he should pronounce a wrong sentence against them. And he makes special
mention of these, rather than of the rich because they are more subject to
injury and oppression, and for the most part Verse. 6. Give ye strong drink
unto him [q.d. I will show you to whom abundance of wine and strong drink
appertaineth] that is ready to perish, [vz. through the manifold afflictions,
both inward and outward that lie upon him. Some interpret it to such as are
condemned to death, and ready to be executed for their faults: but I rather
understand it of those that are afflicted, either inwardly or outwardly, by
reason of some great calamitie] and wine [i. give wine] unto them [i. unto
such: a sudden change of the number: he said before, him: now he says them]
that have grief of heart. [i. are sad and heavy at their heart, which also
they testify by heaviness of countenance.] Verse. 7. Let him drink [vz. either
of wine or strong drinke] that he may forget [vz. thereby] his poverty, [i.
the poverty and want that lies upon him, and under one kind he comprehends
all his calamities or evils: and this shows that it cannot well be referred
to the^ that by law are appointed to dye, but to such as are otherwise
afflicted] and remember his misery [i. the misery that he is in] no more.
[vz. for a long while, for wine or strong drink dispatcheth men's cares, Verse.
8. Open thy mouth [i. speak boldly and plainly] for the dumme, [i. for such as
cannot defend themselves, either for fear of their mighty adversaries, or else
dare not do it, or have no skill to lay open their own causes: q.d. defend
them boldly, and that in public judgment, which are not able or meet to
defend and declare their own cause and right, whether they be dumme, deaf,
blind, or any other manner of way distressed: for under one he comprehends
all; yea the rather for their wants should the Magistrate succor them] in the
cause [q.d yea open thy mouth in the just cause and defence] of all the
children of destruction: [i. of all such as are in great misery, and in the
present danger of their lives as it were: see Psalm. 79.11.] Verse 9. Open thy
mouth, [this is expounded before, ver. 8. and yet he repeateth it not again
without cause, thereby declaring how hardly men are brought to the performance
of their dueties] judge righteouslie, [vz. to every man, not respecting the
person of any] and judge [vz. uprightly and soundly,] the afflicted and the
poor. [i. such as are in misery and want many things, or rather have nothing
of their own: for so much one of the hebrew words here signifies.] Verse. 10.
Who shall find [vz. by any thing that he himself can a virtuous woman? [i. a
good and holy woman endued with blessed virtues: he speaks thus in the way of
a question, not only because good women are hard to be found for the
scarsitie of them, as Eccles. 7.30. but also because such women are Gods rare
and singular gifts: see Chap. 18.22. also chap. 19.14.] for her price is far
above the pearls. [q.d. she is not only as rare as most precious stones: but
being once obtained a man cannot set too great a price or value of her. And I
take this part of the Chapter to depend upon the former thus, that Solomon
after he had recited his mothers rules and doctrines delivered unto him, does
by occasion thereof annexe thereto the praise of a godly and painful matrone,
beginning every verse with the several letters of the Alphabet as Psalm. 119.
does, also Psalm. 145. and some of the Chapters of Ieremiahs lamentations.]
Verse. 11. The [vz. not only for her chastity, but also does unfeignedly commit
the government and disposing of the things that are within door unto her,]
and he shall have no need of spoil. [vz. because by the labor and good
government of his wife he shall wax rich. One readeth] and spoils want not.
[i. his family does abound in all good things, even as soldiers do when
they have sacked a city, or overcome their enemies: but I allow rather the
former.] Verse. 12. She will do him good, and [i. she will deserve well of him,
and never be grievous unto him, but always show her self pleasant and
courteous, and provoke him to love her unfeignedly, by reason of the good
duties she will perform toward him,] all the days of her life [i.
continually, so long as they shall live to gether: see Chapter 12.4.] Verse
13. She seeks [vz. diligently wool and flax, [i. every manner of thing
whereon she may keep her household in work: for under these two, he
comprehends all] and laboreth cheerefullie with her hands, [i. she her self
lays her hands to work as well as others, and she takes great delight and
pleasure therein, to the end that by her example she may draw them on.] Verse.
14. She is like the ships of Merchants, [he shows wherein in the next
part of this verse,] she brings her food from a far. [q.d. as Merchants
ships fetch things necessary from far countries, and go and come with
all conunieent speed, losing as little time as possibly they may: so she
provides for her family, yea even from far places many times all things
meet for her family, as meat, drink, cloth, etc, and spending as little
time in the doing of Verse. 15. And she rises [vz. from her sleep, and out of
her bed,] whiles it is yet night [i. very early in the morning, and that long
before day, specially in the winter season] and gives the portion [vz. of
meat and drink allowed them for the day: see Psalm. 111.5. see also Luke.
12.42.] to her household, [i. to every one of her household both old and young,]
and the ordinary [vz. of work and labor,] to her maids. [i. to her servants
that she has in house with her: q.d. she both provides meat and work for
them; because meat without work breeds idleness, and work without meat
Verse. 16. She considers [vz. deeply and carefullie] a field, [vz. either
offered to be sold: q.d. she makes no bargain rashly; but as she looks
whether she be able to pray, so she considers whether the thing be worth her
money, not deceauing any in buying, or buying any thing less than the value:]
and gets it; [vz. for the price agreed upon,] and with the fruit of her
hands [i. with the labor thereof: for labor is the fruit of the hands, as
praise and thanksgiving is the fruit of the lips, Hebrew. 13.15.] she
planteth a vineyard. [vz. in the ground or field that she has bought:
meaning by this, that she imployeth it to the best commodity according to the
nature of the soil, as in grazing, tillage, or such like,] Verse. 17. She
girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms. [i. she
diligently and cheerefullie prepares hirselfe to her work, and carefully
performs it, sparing no labor. It has been sundry times heretofore noted,
that when in the old time they went about diligently to do any thing, they
girded their loins: see Job. 38.2. also 40.2. and because great strength (as
we know) is in the arms, he therefore makes special mention of them.] Verse.
18. She feels [i. perceaueth, and that by experience] that her merchandise
[i. every labor and work which she takes in hand: q.d. she knows that
while warely she governs her household matters, and by diligence increseth the
same, it is as profitable to her as any traffic or merchandise]: is good [i.
commodious and profitable,] her candle is not put out by night: [i. she is very
watchful and diligent about her business: he puts the whole night for a
good part of it; meaning that she is more given to labor Verse. 19. She
puts her hands to the wherle, and her hands handle the spindle, [or after
some distaffe, which for my part I do rather allow of: he means that she is
continually well occupied in spinning, and doing things necessary for her
self and family.] Verse. 20. She stretches out her hand to the poor, and
puts forth her hands to the needy [i. she is very liberal to such as want
things necessary: the doubling of the sentence notes (in my mind) the
abundance of her liberality: and this he adds, least any should think that
because he had said before, she was so painful in her work, she were
miserable, and had no care of the poor.] Verse. 21. She fears not the snow
for her family: [i. least for all her family is clothed with scarlet. [i.
they have not only things for necessity, but for comelines and pleasure: and
so the reason is strong, that if ability will serve to minister things tending
to the decking of the body, it will serve to minister things necessary for
the use thereof.] Verse. 22. She [i both for her self, and with her own hands
also,] carpets, [the word (as I take it) imports rather couerlets for beds,
and is the same word, that is used before Chap. 7.16.] fine linen and purple
[i. cloth of purple colour] is her garment. [i. she wears fine linen and
purple: see Luke. 16.19. and that of her own making, and that not so much for
riot as that she may be honestly and comely apparailed. And this also sets
out her diligence, that she makes such things at home as clothes her self and
her whole family; and that not to cover nakedness only, but for honest and
comely attire: which is not to be neglected of any, according to the ability
that GOD has given him, or the place or calling wherein he is occupied in the
common wealth.] Verse. 23. Her husband is known [vz. unto others,] in the [i.
in the places of public judgment,] when he sits [vz. there] with the
elders of the land. [i. with them that have the rule and government of the
people thereof; and sit there uprightly to hear, and justly to determine all
causes: and this I understand thus, not only that this appertains to the
good woman's praise, that as she her self is excellent in value, so she has
a noble and famous husband; but also that her labor and diligence appears in
the comely attire of her husband, and such other apparel as is beseeming his
dignity: and that thus it should be understood, both that which goes
before, and that which comes after does sufficiently prove.] Ver. 24. She
makes [vz. with her own hands] sheets, [i. all kind of necessary and
sells them [vz. for gain: that not only she and her family may live
thereby, but also wax rich] and gives [i. delivers to be sould] girdles [i.
sundry kinds of ware: under one, co^prehending many] unto the Merchant: [vz.
that tradeth them to other places. In the Hebrew text it is word for word to
the low people? Which name is given to Merchants, because these people
dwelling nigh to the Sea, traded much that way: see Zephan. 1.11. Of
merchandise he spoke before also in the 18. verse of this Chap.] Verse. 25.
Strength and honor is her clothing, [It Psalm. 104.1. that he is clothed
with glory and honor; the same he speaks here (but in another sense) of a
good woman: q.d. she is so compassed with strength and adorned with glory on
every side, that all that she does, she does courageously and comely: for
strength and glory stick as fast unto her as her garments,] and in the latter
day, [i. in all times afterward to come, whether it be the day of death, or
judgment, or winter, or famine, old age, or any other calamity whatsoever,]
she shall rejoice. [or as it is in the hebrew laugh: by which kind of speech,
the holy Ghost does note Job. 39.10, 25.] Verse. 26. She opens her mouth [i.
she both begins speech, and continues therein: see Matthew. 5.2.] with
wisdom [i. wisely: q.d. she speaks wisely, and frames her self to speak
not of toys and vain things, as women commonly use to do, but of grave
matters, as of wisdom and virtue,] and the law of grace is in her tongue, [by
law of grace in her tongue he means that she does ever propounde the
doctrine, and show the way how to do good unto others: q.d. she is always
speaking, how and by what means she and others may exercise liberality to
such as are in need, and how they may show forth the duties of charity:
for by grace, he understands kindness toward Verse. 27. She ouerseeth [vz.
with a very watchful eye] the ways of her household, [i. the whole order of
the right government thereof, and the life and conversation of those that are
therein] and eats not the bread of idleness. [i. she is not slothful, neither
eats meat slothfully, and consumes the time in idleness, nay rather feeds
not but when she has diligently performed her work: the contrary of this is
called the bread of sorrow, Psalm 127.2.] Verse. 28. Her children rise up, and
call her blessed: [q.d. her virtues are so great and so many, that her own
children seeing the same, cannot choose but commend her for them, yea even her
husband, as follows in the last part of this verse: by rising up, he means
preparing, or provoking of themselves to do somewhat, because they that sit,
and would take somewhat in hand, do rise up to attempt and execute the same]
her husband also shall praise her, [vz. even as her children do for her good
virtues and qualities,] saying: [vz. of her, and that unto her self, as may
appear by that Verse. 29. Many daughters [vz. of men: meaning by this term,
not maids only, but women or married wiues] have done virtuously: [vz.
toward their husbands, households and children, and that in many great and
gracious respects] but thou surmountest them all. [vz. in thy good dealings,
and that by much or many degrees. And thus he commends her, in preferring her
for her good government before many others.] Verse. Favor [vz. of a woman's
face] is deceitful, [vz. because it continues not long] and beauty [vz. in
the countenance] is vanity: [i. is not much to be regarded, for it will vanish
away: under these two he co^prehendeth al outward qualities and graces
whatsoeuer] but a woman that fears the Lord, [vz. unfeignedly and from the
bottom of her heart] she shall be praised. [i. highly esteemed, and magnified
both of God and man. Where first of al we are to understand, that with all
things before reckoned he would have Gods fear joined, or else that the rest
are little or nothing worth. And these words I take to be Salomons own,
declaring wherein specially consists the true praise and commendation of a
good woman, and not the words of her children, as some imagine, mentioned
before verse 28. see 1. Peter 3.3, 4. Also 1. Timoth. 2.9, 10.] Verse. 31. Give
her of the fruit of her hands, [i. attribute Ierem. 23.16. where he bids
them give glory to the Lord their God] and let her own works [vz. which she
her self has done] praise her [vz. though others would be silent and say
nothing thereof] in the gates. [i. openly, and by the public consent of all:
see verse 23. of this Chapter. I take these to be the words of him that writ
the book, and to be generally applied to all: q.d. seeing that the excellent
qualities of a good woman are so great, and so many praise her, as her works
deserve which she has done, that so she may receive the fruit of her labors,
and be worthelie commended therefore, and that not only secretly, but in the
places of public and politic meetings; and though other men conceal her
commendation, yet do you set it forth still.

Do.
Verse. 1. Teaches us, in the person of Lemuel, to have care to deliver good
things over to our posterity: it teaches mothers also what great care they
should have to instruct their children. Verse 2. Teaches what tender affection
mothers should carry toward their children, (provided always that they
train them not up wantonly) and that they should many times commend their
sons and their daughters to God in their prayers. Verse. 3. Teaches all men,
but chiefly Magistrates, to beware of whoredom. Verse 4. Teaches Magistrates
and rulers to abstain as from dronkennes, so from the excessive use of wine or
strong drink, which may provoke thereto. Verse 5. Teaches us, that dronkennes
depriueth men of memory of good things, and causes the parties to be void of
the feeling of other men's miseries. Verse 6. Teaches us, that pleasant things
belong to the heavy and sorrowful hearted, rather than to such as are fraught
with pleasures, because extremity of pleasures coming together, it is a hard
thing if man be not carried away therewith. Verse 7. Teaches us, that when men
are oppressed with misery, they should use all lawful means to put it away.
Verse 8. Teaches Magistrates to defend the just cause of all such as cannot
plead for themselves Verse 9. Teaches them also to judge upright judgment.
Verse 10. Teaches us, first that good women are very rare and skant: secondly,
that where men through Gods blessing have found the same, they should esteem
them as very excellent jewels. Verse 11. Teaches us, that a wife of good
government makes a rich husband. Verse. 12. Teaches women to do good to all,
but specially to their husbands and families. Verse 13. Teaches women, not
only to set their own servants on work, but to labor themselves also what
they may Verse 14. Teaches women with speed, and yet with good advise and
labor also to provide things necessary for their family. Verse 15. Teaches
them to be diligent in (...) fearefullie to provide, that servants may have, as
their (...) their work, and not the one without the other. Verse. 16. Teach^^^
(...) not to attempt any bargain rashly or unadvisedly, but to consider as of
their own ability, so of the thing it self. Verse. 17. Teaches them
cheerefullie and courageously, to go about their affairs. Verse 18. Teaches
women to pursue profit, while the Lord makes offer thereof, or gives them
knowledge and experience of the same. Verse. 19. Shows, that a good woman is
not so fine fingred, as many dainty dames are at this day, but will lay her
hands to any work, that may either save, or get. Verse. 20. Teaches us, that
good women have the bowels of compassion toward them that want. Verse. 21.
Teaches a good Mistress to prevent the fear of all danger, not only that
might fall upon her self, but upon her family, also to provide not only
things necessary, but for comelines. Verse. 22. Shows that good people, and
namely good women, may not only use things of profit but of pleasure and
comelines also. Verse. 23. Teaches us, that a good wife is even a great glory
and crown unto her husband. Verse. 24. Teaches, not only that good women
should be diligent for government of things within door, but also to be
dealing in those things abroad, that may raise up some mainteynance to the
household. Verse. 25. Teaches us, that it is a faithful walking in a good
woman's calling, that gives her peace of conscience in the days of affliction.
Verse. 26. Teaches good women, to leave tatling, and to speak wisely, and to
stir up, both her self and other women also to liberality to the needy.
Verse. 27. Teaches a good woman, to have an eye to the manners, and to the
matters of her household, and always to take heed of idleness, in her self or
them. Verse. 28. Teaches, that if there be good things in any, that either by
nature, marriage, or otherwise apperteyne to us, we may safely commend them for
the same. Verse. 29. Teaches us to keep a just measure in our commendation,
and to take heed we go not beyond truth. Verse. 30. Teaches us, that though
favor and beauty be to be regarded, yet without the fear of God, they are
nothing, and that women having that, are to be preferred before all. Verse. 31.
Teaches us, to commend of good things as they are meet, not to come to short;
for that is to deprive them of that which is due unto them, neither to go too
far, for that is lying and falsehood.

HEBREW. CHAP. 13.20, 21. The God of peace, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make us perfect in all good works to do his will,
working in us that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise, for ever and ever, So be it.


FINIS.

