ECCLESIA TRIVMPHANS: that is, THE JOY OF THE ENGLISH CHVRCH, FOR THE happy
Coronation of the most virtuous and pious Prince, JAMES by the grace of God,
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendour of the faith, etc.
and for the joyful continuance of religigion and peace by the same.

With a brief Exposition of the 122. Psalm, and fit application to the time;
wherein are declared the manifold benefits like to grow by these good
beginnings to the Church and Commonwealth of England.

Dedicated to the most gracious Lady and virtuous Princess, Ioland Anna, by
the grace of God, Queen of England, Scotland, France, etc.

Prove. 28. 2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice. Psalm.
118. 23. This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. v. 24. This
is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. PRINTED
BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1603.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the most noble and virtuous Princess, the Lady ANNA, by the grace of God
Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: A. W. wishes all spiritual
comforts and increase of honor in this life, and everlasting joy in the next.
MOst gracious Lady, and noble Princess) when Zerubbabel that faithful
prince of Judah began to build the temple, with the stone of tin in his
hand, Zachar. 4. 10.
the people rejoiced: but when he had finished the work, and brought forth the
head and chief stone thereof, then shoutings were heard, of those that cried,
grace, Zachar. 4. 7.
grace unto it. If then the people of God in this kingdom had great cause to
rejoice, when religion began first to be planted, and the spiritual building
of the Church to be reared, much greater ought our joy now to be, when we see
religion continued, and hope, if any thing yet be wanting, that the same in
good time may be perfited.

Others will strive diversely to express the joy of this happy day, and to
solemnize the entrance and initiation of so religious and much desired reign
of your Highness loving lord and our gracious Sovereign: some by pleasant
pageants and shows, some by valiant and martial feats of arms and iustings,
some by rich and costly presents and gifts: but we among the rest, the
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, both by preaching and setting forth the
great mercies of God toward us, and by writing to conserve a perpetual
memory thereof, will consecrate our tongues and pens to this service: that
we may say with the kingly prophet David, My tongue is the pen of a ready
writer, Psalm. 45. 1.
I will entreat in my works of the king.

Your Grace has great reason to be glad of this day, whose honor able estate
is thereby enlarged, according to the rule of the law, Mulier marito
concrescit* Iustini^n* cod. lib. 3. tit. 4. leg* 28.
the lady increases with her lord: your royal issue and princely heir
rejoices, whose noble title of inheritance is augmented: your Highness
faithful servants and domesticalls have not the least part in this common joy,
whose true and diligent service, is like to be highly recompensed. But all
these joys, which particularly in any of these may be singled, in the Church
and commonwealth of England do all concur and are not only dubbled, but
multiplied. God, has given in his mercy to us, both a comfortable husband to
his* Church, a careful parent to the Commonwealth, an honorable Master* to
all honest and loving subjects. The first shall have (we trust) joyful
experience of his Christian piety, the second of his fatherly benignity, the
third of his princely equity: that both Church may say with the spouse in the
Canticles. Cant. 1. 3.
We will remember thy love more then wine; and the Commonwealth as the Prophet
of Eliakim, Isa. 22. 21.
he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and* be whole realm, as
the same prophet says, he shall be called a repairer of the breach, Isa. 58.
^1.
and a restorer of the decayed paths.

And now most noble Queen, seeing God has advanced your H. to this great
honor, honor him again that has honored you. Forget not him that has
remembered you, and serve him faithfully, that has prevented you with blessings
liberally. Two Annaes are famous in scripture: 1. Sam. 1.
Anna of Elkanah for her godly posterity in Samuel, Anna of Phanuel for her
devout piety in praying in the temple. Luke 2. 36.
Elka^ab, whose wife the first Anna was, signifies, the possession of God:
Phanuel, whose daughter the second was, is as much to say, the sight of God.
Anna also is interpreted, gracious, or merciful. Answerable unto these names
were the effects: the first had a virtuous son Samuel, a possession of God in
deed: the second saw Christ in the temple and confessed him: and both of them
were virtuous women. God grant unto your Highness the possession of Elkanah,
increase of spiritual sight, and knowledge with Phan^els daughter, and to be a
right Anna, both to fin^ grace with God, and to show mercy and compassion to
men.

Two other of this honorable and Christian name, Anna, I find in the
Chronicles of this nation, both virtuous Queens, your Highness worthy
pr^decessours, one wife to Richard the 2. sister to Wincelaus king of Bohemie;
the other, lady Anna Bullen, wife to king Henry the 8. and mother to our late
gracious Sovereign Q. Elizabeth. The first is honored for her study in the
Scriptures; who had in those blind days the 4. Evangelists in English, For p.
507. col. 1.
and the doctors of the Church upon the same. The other is commended for her
excellent virtues; For ^. 10* ^.
as her sinceriti^ in true religion, her Christian charity and princely
liberality toward the poor, whose alms given that way in three quarters of a
year, are summed to be 13. or 14. thousand pound. And now God has sent us a
third Queen Anna, which we trust in all these princely virtues as she
continues the Christian name, so will reviue the honorable fame of these
virtuous matrones. That innocent lady Queen Anna Bullen, though by the malice
of her adversaries traduced, yet both by her godly death, and Gods blessing
upon her posterity is sufficiently cleared. At her coronation these verses
were exhibited: Regina Anna, paris regis de semine nata
Et paries populis aurea saecla tuis.
As Anna Queen of princely race does equally descend,
So to her people golden days her offspring shall extend.
These prophetical verses, if I may so call the^, had their due accomplishment
afterward, in the happy issue of this Lady, then unborn, Queen Elizabeth,
by whom indeed this Church of England enjoyed a golden time: such as the like
(as his Majesty says) has not been read nor heard of since the days of the
Roman Emperor Augustus. Prefac^ to the Reader in (...).
And it is the comfortable hope of this nation of England, tha^ God has raised
your Highness up another fruitful Anna, by whose royal offspring this lana may
long have fruition of like golden and happy days, which God in his mercy
grant.

The Lord make your grace, unto his Majesty, (...) D^borah to Baruch, as
Huldah to Ios^^^, as Esther to (...) A^ashuer^sh: Christ Jesus grant you the
piety of Rebecca, that consulted with God, the zeal of M^riam, that praised
God, 2. Sam. 14.
the knowledge of the Teko^^^, 2. Sam. 20.
that persuaded David, the wisdom of the matron^ of Abel that delivered the
city, the charity of the Shunamite, 2. King. 4.
that provided for the Prophet: that the Church of God^ beholding your zeal
toward God, your (...) to his Chur^^; desire to the truth, obedience (...) his
word, humility in your high estate* mercy and piety toward the po^re members
of the Church, constancy in virtue and all goodness, may bless you with the
saying of the wise man of the godly matrone; Prove. 31. 29.
many daughters have done virtuously, but your surmount them all: and that you
may be eternally blessed in heaven, that in that day it may be pronounced to
your comfort* verse. ^^.
Give her of the fruit of her hands, etc.

Your Highness ready to be commanded in the Lord, Andrew Willet, Minister of
the Gospel of Christ.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe Jews returning from captivity, did so wonder at their strange
deliverance, that they seemed to be as men, that dream: Psalm. 126 1. As
strange a work has God wrought for the Church of England: for though we are
not come from thraldom to liberty, or from captivity to our own country,
having many years under our late Sovereign enjoyed both true religion, and
therewith, as the handmaid waiting upon her mistress, all flourishing peace:
yet in respect of our deliverance from that danger to the state, which many
feared, the change of religion in the church, which some doubted, others
desired, we can no less wonder at the Lords strange work, and say with the
Church of God: The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice,
Psalm. 126. 3.

In this common joy who shall forbid any to rejoice? and where Gods mercies
are so manifest and evident to all the world, who can hold his peace? But as
benefits are not acknowledged, where first they are not well considered, nor
due thanks performed, where the grace received is not worthily esteemed: for
this cause have I addressed this short treatise, that Gods goodness to Israel
might be proclaimed, and that no man be ignorant what God has done for us,
that we again be not negligent to do to him, that which becomes us, to give
unto him thanks and praise.

Samuel, to dissuade the people from al their wanton desires to have a king,
whereas God was yet their king, tells them, what the properties of their king
shall be, and how hardly he should use them, and how little pleasing unto them
his government was like to be. 1. Sam. 8. As he would dissuade from their
unthankfulness to God in that headstrong request, by propounding unto them
the hard conditions of their king: so mine intent is to persuade to
thankfulness to God, by setting forth the princely and Christian endowements
of our gracious Sovereign, and the manifold benefits, which both Church and
common wealth are sure by Gods grace to enjoy under his Majesty's godly and
upright regiment.

For this cause have I sorted out this 122. Psalm, as serving most fitly for
this present occasion; which I have divided into 20. several meditations,
showing so many blessings upon this Church and commonwealth, answerable to
those which Israel enjoyed under David.

1. As David appeased the strife between him and the house of Saul, The
particular blessings in Israel under David, and in England like to be under his
Majesty.
and brought all Israel to one government, which was before divided: so these
two kingdoms of England and Scotland having been long at variance, and
exercised in time past with long and bloody battles, The uniting of two
kingdoms.
are now united in one: His Majesty is the corner stone, that has conjoined
these two walls together.

2. Under David true religion was continued: Continuance o^ religion.
and by our Sovereign the faith of the gospel by his Majesty truly
professed, and in his princely books protested, shall still be maintained.

3. David was a learned prince, A judicial and learned prince.
an inditer of heavenly songs and sonnets: And God has given unto us a wise
and judicial king, whose princely writings do give him the pre-eminence before
all his predecessors: another Solomon, a king and yet an Ecclesiastes, a
learned writer; such an one, as Gratian the Emperor was: of whom Ambrose
says, Epist. 25. ad Gratian.
Scripsisti tua totam epistolam manu, vt ipsi apices fidem tuam pi^^atemque
loquerentur: You have written (not an epistle only) but whole books with your
hand, that the very points and letters do utter your faith and piety.

4. In David's time there was free access to Gods house, Free access to Gods
house.
I rejoiced when they said, let us go up, etc And now the doors of
Protestants Churches shall be as wide set open as ever.

5. Then the faithful one exhorted an other saying, Mutual confe^^^e.
Let us go up to the house of the Lord: And now may Christians go hand in
hand, conferring freely and edifying one another.

6. David in bringing home the Arc, The example of the Prince.
went before himself, and was an example of godly zeal to his people: So it
is our David's godly precept to his princely son, Teach your people by your
example, p. 24. And such is the practice in his own royal person giving light
by his Christian life to all his subjects.

7. Before David's time religion was unsettled, Religion s^^led.
the Arc was flitting from place to place, but he brought it to Jerusalem,
where it stayed; and therefore he says, Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O
Jerusalem: and now whereas many feared an alteration of religion at the next
change, we verily hope, that the Gospel has set sure footing in the Church of
England, which both by his Majesty while he lives, (whose happy reign God
in his mercy many years prolong) and by his royal posterity walking in his
steps, we trust shall be continued to the end of the world: wherein his
highness also has delivered his sound judgment, and constant resolution:
That in the last estate (when the church is delivered from the thraldom of
Antichrist) without any more general mutations, Meditat. upon the 20. of the
Reuelat.
the world shall remain to the consummation and end of the same. p. 3. art. 8.


8. Under David the city flourished, being enlarged with goodly and
beautiful buildings: Increase of wealth.
Jerusalem was a city well compact and built together. And now also we hope
by Gods mercy, that men shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof,
build houses, and dwell in them.

9. David was brought up to Jerusalem, with the joint consent of all Israel,
who said, The general consent and desire of all.
we are thy bones and thy flesh, 2. Sam. 5. 1. And it is admirable to consider
the general resolution of all English people, and the conjunction of their
hearts and affections, both of high and low, in receiving their Sovereign.

10. Then, the tribes of Israel were not only united in one kingdom, but were
reconciled among themselves united also in one religion: thither the tribes
went up, etc. So not only external wars are like for ever to cease between
these two nations, Uniformity in religion.
but one uniform religion shall hereafter contain them in perfect love and
unity: that neither the Church of Scotland shall be jealous of the English
Church, as inclining in some things to popery; nor the English suspect the
other, as affecting a popular paritie: but as loving sisters and fellow tribes
shall hold one worship of God, and go up to Jerusalem together.

11. David expelled the Iebusites, not admitting contrary religion in
Jerusalem: Religion sincere without mixture.
And it is no doubt, but that God will so direct our David's heart, that
religion shall be sincerely professed among us, without any mixture or
toleration: as his Majesty most godly professes thus; Is there not now a
sincere profession of the truth among us in this Isle, Meditat upon ^5. of the
1. of Chron in the applica^.
oppugned by the nations about, haters of the holy word? and do we not also as
Israel profess one only God ruled by his pure word onel? yon the other part,
are they not as Philistims, Meditat upon 20. of the reuelat. 3. p. art. 1.
adorers of legions of gods, and ruled by the foolish traditions of men? And
again in another place, We must fear to fall from the truth revealed and
professed by us, that we may be free from the like punishment, etc.

12. David reformed many things that were amiss in Israel, he appointed the
Levites their courses and services, that were far out of order. Our zealous
David has given us great hope of the like, who in his princely treatise,
Reformation of things amiss. Preface to the Reader. (...).
Queen Elizabeth then living, thus writes: I doubt nothing, yea in her name I
dare promise, by the bypast experience of her happy government, that no good
subject shall be more careful to inform her of any corruptions stolen into
her state, then she shall be zealous, for the discharge of her conscience and
honor, to see the same purged and restored to the ancient integrity: and
further during her time, becomes me least of any to meddle in it, etc That
which his Majesty promised in behalf of our late Sovereign, God shall direct
his wisdom to perform by himself: the dealing wherein before, as it pleased
his princely modesty to call meddling, so now the whole managing thereof of
right appertains unto him.

13. In David's time there was both publicly and privately a free intercourse
of religion, Praising of God.
the praises of God were in every man's mouth: The tribes went up to praise the
name of the Lord. Their service was not mute and dumb, but the temple did ring
and sound again of Gods praises. And thanks be to God, that the Church of
England is not forced to hang their instruments of praise upon the willowes
with the Israelites in Babylon, and to intermit the comfortable exercise of
thanksgiving, as it has happened in some changes, but that we have as great
cause, and as much liberty as ever, to sound out Gods praises: that we may say
with the prophet, Psalm. 12^. v. 2.
the^ was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.

14. Then were the thrones set for judgment; and it is Gods mercy, that has
not given us over to the cruel desire of our enemies, Seats of justice, ^4.
benefit.
that the course of justice is not interrupted, but the law and seats of
judgment open for every man; whose heart do not his Majesty's princely speeches
revive, thus writing to his noble son, Preasse to draw all your laws and
processes to be as short, p. 9^. 92.
and as plain as you can, etc. weary not to hear the complaints of the
oppressed, aut ne rex sis.

15. Even the thrones of David: A prince no stranger, 15. Benefit.
God gave Israel no stranger to reign over them, but one of their own kindred:
And the Lord has raised unto us a Sovereign descended of David's stock, of
the royal blood of the kings of this land; a prince of the same language, of
the Island, of the English royal blood; yea of the same religion: who, as he
is no forrainer, so gives counsel to his princely heir, page 55.
To have ordinary councels and justice seats in every kingdom, of their own
countrymen.

16. David would have every one pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and not to
disturb it: So, whereas the peace of our Church has been hindered by the
opposition of strange and new doctrines, Consent in doctrine.
our hope is, that our David will restore the peace of the Church, and bring us
to one uniform doctrine; whose princely advice is, Page 10. l. 1.
That if any do urge to embrace their own fantasies in the place of Gods
word, etc. acknowledge them for vain men, etc, and gravely and with authority
redact them into order again.

17. Peace be within thy walls: The people under David were freed from the
fear of the enemy: External peace.
they needed not to set watchmen upon their towers, and garrisons upon their
walls. So we trust to have peace abroad with other nations: who if they will be
won with kindness: we have a prince that will use all other princes as
brethren, p. 56. (...).
honestly and kindly, and will strive with every one of them in courtesy and
thankfulness. But if they be ready to offend our nation, p. 55. (...).
we have a courageous defender, that will revenge and free his subjects from al
foreign injuries done unto them.

18. In David's time, plenty and peace was within their palaces and houses:
and now we trust, 18. benefit, domestical peace and plenty.
that even our children shall have cause to bless this day, whereby they may
obtain godly education, not distracted from their parents by iniquity of the
times, which was feared, and might have justly befallen us: that we may say as
it is in the Psalm: Our sons shall grow up as pla^ts, and our daughters as
the polished corners of the temple, Psalm. 144. 12.

19. David wishes all good to Israel because they were his brethren and
neigbours: A loving prince.
God has sent us a loving prince: Who as our natural father and kind master,
p. 25. (...).
thinks his greatest contentment stands in his subjects prosperity, and
his greatest surety in having their hearts.

20. David chiefly because of Gods house procures the peace of Jerusalem:
Such is the zeal and affection of our David to Gods house: Love of Gods Church.
who holds that the chief virtue which should be in a Christian prince,
Meditat. in 15. 1. Chro. part. 2.
namely feruencie and constant zeal to promoote the glory of God that has
honored him. And concerning the Ministers of the Church, p. 43.
his Majesty says, p. 20.
Love no man more then a good pastor, reverence and obey them as the heralds of
the most high God.

These singular mercies extented to the Church of England, I have dispersedly
handled in this treatise, that the consideration thereof may provoke us to
thankfulness. And in truth not only these, but many other blessings, with a
full horn the Lord at this present some in possession, some in expectation,
some in act, some in hope has powered upon us, so that the Church may say with
David: Psalm. 40. 5.
O Lord my God thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can
count in order thy thoughts toward us: I would declare and speak of them, but
they are more, then I am able to express.

Our princely Ecclesiastes declares, (...) p 89.
that a king should be custos vt riusque tabulae: the Guardian of both the
tables of the law: full well has his Majesty testified the same in every
particular, in his Christian and judicial treatises. (...)
For the 1. law, he professes himself an enemy to all atheism. p. 25. for
the 2. he condemns the adorers of legions of Gods, and such as are ruled by
the foolish traditions of men: for the 3. he says, beware to offend your
conscience with swearing, Medita in Chro. applicat.
or lying. p. 17. For the 4. always let the Sabbath be kept holy, and no
unlawful pastime used. p. 53. For the 5. Honor your parents for the
lengthening of your own days, The prince keeper of both tables.
as God in his law promises. p. 96. For the 6. There are some horrible crimes
(says his Majesty to his princely heir) that ye are bound in conscience
never to forgive: Such as witchcraft, wilful murder. p. 31. For the 7. God
commanding by the mouth of Paul to abstain from fornication, 1. Cor. 6. 20.
declares that fornicatours shall not inherit the kingdom of God. p. 74. For
the S. His Majesty has showed his worthy resolution for the reformation of
robberies, and oppressions of the Borderours. p. 36. For the 9. Our royal
Ecclesias^es says: Beware to offend your conscience with use of swearing, or
lying, etc. Lying comes much of a vile use which banisheth shame. page 17.
18. For the 10. His princely counsel is, Abstain from haunting before your
marriage, the idle company of dames, which are nothing else, but irritamenta
libidinis. p. 127.

Thus our Joshua well remembers the words of the Lord unto that valiant
captain: let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all, that
is written therein: of whom I trust, we may truly say, as Ambrose of
Theodosius, Licet in aliis laudabilis, Ambrose epist. 2^*
tamen apex tuorum operum pieta^ semper fuit: though in other things you are
praise-worthie, yet the chiefest of all your works is humility.

Further our noble teacher prescribes every man his duty: Every man's duty
prescribed in the kings book.
from this lamp there is no calling but may fetch light, and derive water from
this fountain. Even here may the nobility learn, not to thrall by oppression
the meaner sort, that do dwell by them, (...).
nor to maintain their servants and dependants in wrong. p. 45. Merchants are
taught not to buy the worst wares, and sell them at the dearest prices. p. 50.
Judges are admonished to take heed of briberie, advocates to decline the long.
somnesse of suites for the enriching of themselves, with the spoil of the
whole country. p. 90. Church governors to preserve doctrine and discipline in
purity, according to Gods word, p. 43. Yea ministers and preachers may receive
instruction for their calling, how to handle the word. 1. not to vary from
their text. 2. not to meddle with matters of state* p. 89. 3. that their speech
be not fairded with artifice, etc. but to eschew all affected forms. p. 115.
4. We are taught to use only Scripture, (says our Ecclesiastical Solomon)
for interpretation of scripture, Meditat. in 20. Reuelat 3. par. ^^rt. 7.
if we would be sure, and never swerve from the analogy of faith in
expounding. May we not now truly without flattery pronounce that saying,
which the kingly preacher uttered of himself? The more wise the preacher was,
Eccles. 12. 9.
the more he taught the people knowledge, and caused them to hear. And in this
sense we find that saying true, (...). Every good prince is of a priestly
order, instructing his subjects both by wholesome laws and precepts, and a
virtuous example.

Neither have we only from our christian Solomon the light of direction, but
the sweet influence also of comfort and consolation: The comfort and
contentment of all sorts in his Majesty's godly resolution.
that there is no sort or degree, that is not interessed in this common
benefit. The nobility shall be duly respected: eschew the other extremity in
lightlying and co^temning your nobility. p. 47. schools and scholars
maintained. p. 43. Ministers reverenced and sufficiently provided for. p. 44:
soldiers and martial men liberally rewarded. p. 59. faithful and diligent
servants recompensed. p. 71. the worthiest still preferred: let the measure of
your love to every one be according to the measure of his virtue. p. 152. all
subjects relieved, and their oppressions helped: be diligent to try, and
careful to beat down the horns of proud oppressors: embrace the quarrel
of the poor and distressed, as your own particular. etc. p. 34. What degree
then or calling is there in the land, which has not great cause to rejoice in
the advancement of so worthy a prince? I speak not this (God is my record) to
please by glozing speech, for I should so rather displease; his Majesty's mind
herein is well known: love them best, that are plainest with you. p. 71. but I
trust I may speak the truth without flattery, and all the world, I think
will witness with me, that I have not fabled. It is fit that Gods graces upon
his Majesty, and mercies therein toward us should be proclaimed and published,
that his highness may thereby be stirred up to proceed and go forward, and
the people provoked to be thankful. As herein no nation has greater cause to
joy then England, to whom God has given a prince respective to all sorts and
degrees in their places, and according to their necessities: who herein may be
compared with Eliakim, to a sure nail, whereupon all vessels both small and
great do hang, even from the cups to the instruments of music, Isay. 22.
13. 24. And as Ambrose applies that saying in the Canticles: Lib. 1. de
Virgini.
Species eius sunt cedrus Lebani, quae ramum nubib., radicem in terris inserit;
in altis habitat, humilia respicit: His countenance is like the Cedar of
Lebanus, which stretches the branches to heaven, and the root to the earth:
so being in high estate he respects the lowly. I trust of such a prince
England may more truly pronounce, then Rome of Scipio* (...): that Rome could
not fall as long as Scipio stood. But we assure our selves that this Church and
commonwealth through Gods gracious favor shall not miscarrie, as long as his
Majesty lives.

But because perseverance is Gods gift, and there is no mortal nature, but is
subject to change, it is our part to pray unto God, to give strength and grace
to our Christian prince, to hold out in this godly course, and that his
Majesty be not snared or entangled with this great honor, wealth, and
prosperity, to the which the Lord has advanced him, but may take heed by the
example of the fall of David, the backsliding of Solomon, the declining of Asa,
that he forget not the lord his god, that has exalted him: which by Gods grace
we doubt not, as his highness has herein a firm trust (thus professing of
himself) that it shall please God, Prefation. ad (...).
who with my being and crown gave me this mind, to maintain and augment the
same in me and my posterity. And God give us the people of England the like
grace, that we may continue obedient to God, loyal and dutiful to our prince,
that he may have comfort of us, and we joy of him, that he may many years
reign over us in godliness and peace, and his posterity after him: that God
may abundantly bless both prince and people in this life, and afterward grant
us both a joyful entrance into his everlasting kingdom through Jesus Christ,
to whom be praise for ever. Amen.

Certain fruitful meditations upon the 122. Psalm, by the example of the
people of God rejoicing under the reign of King David for God^ manifold
benefits, moving the Church and nation of England to the like thankefulnes to
God for his unspeakable mercies showed abundantly toward us.
Psalm. 122.
A song of degrees of David.
v. 1. I rejoiced, when they said to me, Let us go up to the house of the Lord:
2. Our foot shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem.
3. Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together in it self.
4. Whether the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, to the testimony of
Israel, to praise the name of the Lord.
5. For there are thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee:
7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
8. For my brethren and companions sake I will wish thee now prosperity:
9. Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will procure thy wealth.
THis Psalm, wherein the kingly Prophet David expresses his great joy for
Gods singular mercies to his Church, consists of two parts: the first
contains a congratulation with the Church of God, and a joyful declaration
of his gladsome heart, v. 1. with the causes thereof first generally
propounded, v. 2. then particularly proved: which are, 1. the great unity and
concord of the city, the Iebusites being now expulsed. v. 3. as we read in
the story 2. Sam. 5. 6. 2. The restoration of Gods worship, the arc being
now brought to Jerusalem, v. 4. see the whole narration thereof 2. Sam. 6. 3.
The administration of justice established, v. 5. which had been much hindered
by the division between the house of David and Saul. 2. Sam. 4. 1.

The second part of the Psalm is an exhortation to all Gods people, to pray
for the continuance of these benefits, verse. 6. which is enforced, by setting
down the form of their godly prayers and desires, v. 7. and propounding his
own example in the performance of that duty in his own person, and the
reasons moving him thereto; the law of his country, v. 8. his affection to
Gods Church. v. 9.

A song of degrees of David.
Before I enter to treat of this Psalm, three things are out of this
inscription of the psalm to be considered: 1. the occasion of making and
enditing this psalm: 2. the author thereof, which is David: 3. the title it
self, why it is called a psalm of degrees.

The 1. meditation.
First, the occasion, as is partly touched before, was threefold: 1. the
uniting of the city of Jerusalem before infested with the idolatrous
Iebusites. 2. The restoring of religion maimed before by the absence of the
Arc, which was twenty years in the house of Abinadab. 1. Sam. 7. 2. 3. The
reconciling of the kingdom before divided between the house of David and
Saul: for these so great blessings the Prophet rejoices before the Lord, and
exhorts the whole church of God to rejoice with him. We learn hereby, that
like blessings, require like thanks, and that we also should for all Gods
mercies to his Church remember to be thankful.

1. Thus elsewhere the prophet David says: My soul praise thou the Lord, and
forget not any of his benefits, Psalm. 103. 2. Yea this is an evident mark of
Gods Church to show themselves thankful: The voice of joy and health is in the
tabernacles of the righteous, Psalm. 118. 15.

2 This has been the practice of the Church of God from time to time: Thus
Moses and the children of Israel, as soon as they came forth of the red sea,
sung a song of thanksgiving unto God. Exodus 15. 1. David daunced and sprang for
joy, for the bringing home of the Arc. 2. Sam. 6. 14. Iehosaphat and his
people praised God for the victory over the Moabites and Ammonites, in the
valley of Berachah, which was so called, because there they blessed God. 2.
Chro. 20. 27.

3 Our thanksgiving unto God is as incense, Thanksgiving the incense of
Christians.
Psalm. 141. 2. that as they used to lay oil, and incense upon their
sacrifices. Levit. 2. 15. the one makes a cheerful countenance, the other is
grateful to the smell: ^o should all our actions be perfumed with thanksgiving
unto God. This duty of praise is compared by the people, to a young bullock,
that has horns and hoofes, Psalm. 66. 31. He then that remembers not to give
thanks unto God, is as though he offered an old and lean bullock, being
faint and slothful to praise God: without horns and hoofes: such an one
shall neither have strength to withstand and push the spiritual adversary,
neither is shodde with hoofes and prepared to bear all things patiently.

4 If the superstitious heathen do encourage themselves to praise the gods of
gold and of silver, Dan. 5. 4. to whom no praise is due, much more are we
bound to render praise to God, to whom it of duty belongs: it is all the
recompense which we pay unto the Lord. Quid repe^dam Iehouae? What shall I pay
unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me, I will take the cup of saving
health, and call upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 116. 12. Giving of thanks
then unto God for his benefits* is as our Landlords rent; unworthy are we to
hold our farms, if we refuse to pay so easy a rentcharge: our great
Landlord, of whom kings and princes hold their kingdoms, raises not his
rent, but only expects the old service of thanksgiving, which is the freest
rent that can be.

5 So then, as here the Prophet David made this song or hymn for his people,
to show their thankfulness to God, for those great blessings: we ought also,
upon the like occasion now offered to express our joy before the Lord: David
united the kingdom before divided; and now God has raised up unto us a
prince, in whom both the regiments of England and Scotland are conjoined:
great was the rent which in time past was between these two nations (though for
these 40. years, The uniting of these two kingdoms.
the gospel, 1. Benefit.
the only bond of peace, has maintained love and amity amongst us) yet
pitiful is the remembrance of former calamities: how continually these nations
did one offend another, with bloody and grievous battles: Sometime the
English prevailed, as in the 21. year of Edward the first, Lanquet.
there were 40. thousand of the Scots slain in one battle: Sometime the
Scotts had the upper hand, as in the 7. year of Edward the second, in a
battle fought at Retraueling in Scotland, there were put to the sword, and
taken, 10 thousand, or after the Scottish history, 50. thousand English* I
will not make mention of Flodden and Musleborough fields, and other fierce
battles between these nations By this ye may consider, what a great blessing is
like to ensue upon this joyful conjunction of these kingdoms.

David again brought home the arc, that a long time had soiourned abroad: and
this is our greatest comfort, 2. Benefit.
that contrary to the desire and expectation of the Papists, Continuance of
religion.
God has sent us a Princely shepherd, that shall still lead his people to the
green pastures, and refresh them still with the waters of the word of life.

David also expelled the Iebusites out of Jerusalem: and there are yet some
Cananites in the land; Jesuits they are called, but more truly Iudasites, and
other of Baals priests, with whom I trust such order shall be taken, that they
be no more as thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides. Thus you see how
just cause we have to celebrate a song of thanksgiving, with the Prophet David
for Gods great mercies: which shall be a means, when the Lord sees our
thankful acceptance of these good beginnings, that the proceedings shall be
answerable: for God by our thanksgiving is not profited, but we are altogether
thereby benefited: as it is said in Job, If thou be righteous, what give thou
unto him? thy righteousness may profit the son of man. Augustine teaches
this point well: Non laudibus nostris ille crescit, sed nos, deus nec melior
fit si lauda^eris, nec deterior, si vituperaueris, etc. God increases not by
our praise, but we: he is not the better for our praise, Psalm. 133.
nor worse for our dispraise: but we are the better if we praise him, and worse
if we praise him not.

The 2. meditation.
A song of David:] That Church and commonwealth is happy to whom god gives
a Prince, such as David was, whose heart is set aright to seek God. In that
David was occupied in godly meditations, and did exercise himself to endite
holy songs and sonnets, to the praise of God and comfort of his church; Princes
are taught to be devoted to the worship of God, and subjects do learn to pray
to God to send them* Kings and governors such as David was, after Gods own
heart.

1. Thus the prophet Esaias, speaking of the last times, says, that kings shall
be nourcing fathers, and Queens nourcing mothers of his Church, Isay, 49. 23.

2. Such was Solomon, that prayed himself in the audience of the people, with
his hands stretched out unto God at the dedication of the temple, 1. King, 8.
The same wise and virtuous Prince did write those heavenly books of the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Canticles; and gives himself the name of a
preacher, Eccles. 1. 1. Such an one was Josias, that himself read in the ears
of the people the books of gods covenant. 2. King. 23. 2.

3. For prayers should be as the he goats before the flock. Ierem. 5. 8. to
go before the rest by their good example; whose godly laws and wholesome
precepts are as the rain that comes upon the mowen grass, Psalm. 72. 6. So
they make religion and virtue to increase and flourish.

4. Hereunto Princes should be moved, considering whose place and office they
bear in earth: that as they are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. so they should seek
to set forth gods glory: for they are called gods, as our Savior expounds
it, because to them the word of God is given: John 10. 35. The chief charge
and care of preserving the word of God is committed to them. Philip an heathen
king could say, that a Prince must remember, (...).
that he had obtained a divine power, that he should command divine things.

Beside great is the reward of godly and virtuous Princes, who by their good
example draw others unto God: They that turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3.

5. Wherefore, as this consideration should stir us up to give great thanks
unto God, 3. Benefit, when God sends a learned and ver^uous prince.
that has in his mercy sent us a Prince, not only wise and learned, but
sound in religion, and devout in affection, as appears by his Majesty's
books, such as we found not the like written by any king of this nation before.
So let us not be slack to commend his Majesty in our continual prayers unto
God, that the lord would direct him by his spirit, and guide him in his fear,
and strengthen him to hold out to the end, that godly course which he is
entered into.

And further the people of God are taught, that where the Lord has vouchsafed
so great a blessing, then the which in this world there can be no greater, to
send his Church a Nursing father, and the Commonwealth a prudent and virtuous
governor, they should endeavor for their parts, in piety to God, and
obedience to their prince, and in all Christian duties to be answerable. It is
a monstrous thing, that there should be a good prince, and a bad people, a
sound head, and a diseased body. The subject should not by his untowardness
grieve the heart of a good prince; but show himself so conformable to all acts
of piety, that the virtuous governor may rejoice in the obedience and
devotion of his people; that in the end he may yield up himself and his
people with comfort unto God, and say with the prophet, Behold here am I, and
the children which thou have given me. Isa. 8. 18. For as Ambrose says of good
children, so it is true of good subjects: Stipendia militiae suae sunt, vernet
in dei laudem terra quia colitur, mundus, quia agnoscitur, ecclesia, quia
devotae plebis numerus a^getur. They are as the hire or reward of the princes
warfare: let the earth sprout forth to Gods praise, because it is tilled, the
world, because it is inhabited, the Church because it is with devout children
filled and replenished.

The 3. meditation.
Of degrees] There are thus entitled 15. psalms, that are here set together:
which are next this so called, as though the Leuits were appointed to sing them
upon the degrees and stairs of the temple, Thus seem the Septuagint to
think, translating (...) degrees, or ascending places.
for as yet in David's time, the temple was not built, nor the plot thereof
drawn, or the form and pattern set forth: neither is it to be referred to
the rising of the tune, wherewith those psalms were sung in the temple: for
other psalms beside these were tuned sometime with the falling, sometime with
the rising of the voice: Why they are called psalms of degrees.
some in an high tune were sounded forth, which was called Atamoth, 1. Chron.
15. 20. some in the eight or base tune, as psalm. 6. and 12. which was called
Sheminith, 1. Chron. 15. 21. This title then, if it depended of the tune, could
not be proper to these psalms. Wherefore psalms of degrees signify nothing
else, but excellent songs, of an higher degree, and more principal use: for so
the word magualah is sometime taken; as, 1. Chron. 17. 17. David says, Thou
have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Lord.

From hence then it may be gathered, that although the word of God in it self
is of the same excellency, as proceeding from one and the same author, yet in
respect of our use, and men's several necessities, some part of the Scripture
may be said to be more excellent, then an other.

1. For whereas the scripture is profitable to four special uses, The
scripture^ whereunto profitable.
to teach, to improoue, to correct, and instruct in righteousness, as the
Apostle shows, 2. Tim. 3. 16. which four properties are answerable to those
four set down by the prophet David; to give light to the eyes, wisdom to the
simple, to convert the soul, and rejoice the heart, psalm. 19. 7, 8. The light
is to know the truth, wisdom to discover and improoue error; conversion, to
turn the heart and correct vice; the rejoicing is to take delight and to be
instructed and go forward in well doing. Now every man has not need alike of
all these: some man had more need of knowledge to be instructed, other of
conscience to be converted: one has greater cause to be reformed of error,
and other to be reclaimed from vice. How one scripture is said to be more
excellent then another.
Therefore in respect of men's diverse and particular occasions, the scriptures
are diversely to be applied, and accordingly to be singled out.

2. It was not then by chance, that our Savior Christ opening the book in the
synagogue at Nazareth upon the sabbath day, did light upon that place of the
prophet Isai, Luke 4. 8. or that Eunuch was directed to read upon that
prophecy, Act. 8. But this prophet, as most directly foreshewing Christ, was
sorted out, as fittest to instruct them, that yet did not believe on Christ.
The same reason moved Ambrose to commend unto Augustine, August. epist. 3. ad
(...).
as yet but a new convert, the reading of this prophet.

3. For like as though all meats be wholesome in their kind, yet are they not
fit for every stomach; but a man of discretion will have a care of his diet:
and sitting at a great man's table (where is variety of dishes) will consider
diligently what is set before him, Prou. 23. 1. The like judgment should every
one bring to the reading of Scripture: as in an Apothecaries shop, though every
drug have his use, yet are they not to be ministered for every disease: so the
word of God must be applied according to the diverse maladies of the soul.

4. The reason why the Lord has thus tempered the Scriptures, the Apostle
shows: That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to every good
work, 2. Timoth. 3. 17. That from the rich treasure of Gods word we may draw
for every occasion: as the wise Scribe taught unto Gods kingdom, is as a wise
householder, that has in his storehouse both new and old, Math. 13. 52. both
old experience of Gods mercies to comfort him; I remembered thy judgments of
old and received comfort, Psalm. 119. 52. and new examples of Gods justice to
humble him, as the Prophet again says: Fear is come upon me for the wicked
that forsake thy law, Psalm. 119. 53. In the scriptures, there is milk for
babes, and strong meat for the riper age: there is instruction for the simple,
and meditation for the deeper wit. Augustine says well, Pascimur apertis,
exercemur obscuris, ibi fames, hic fastidium tollitur: We are nourished with
the easier, and exercised by the harder places of scripture: there are we kept
from famishing, here from loathing.

5. Let every man then learn, when he reads or hears the word, to sort
out that, which is most for his use: to lay up places of comfort against the
day of affliction: if he feel his heart to be dull, to quicken it with the
sense of Gods judgments. Thus the Prophet David teaches us to single out
scripture, where he gives this note (Selah) in diverse places of the psalms:
as thrice in the 3. psalm, v. 2. 4. 8. which is a mark of attention, whereby
he would have those sentences so marked, especially regarded. And in the same
sense are these called excellent psalms, because of their excellent matter,
and necessary use.

Whole men neglect this course, not knowing their own necessities, neither set
apart the spiritual food of the word, but take it as in a whole lump: The
particular application of Scripture.
they miss of the right use of scripture, and defraud their own souls. Ye
shall have some, that had need to be humbled, and as yet know not themselves,
dwelling and delighting in their sins, and yet forsooth, these men cannot
endure the law, every thing has an harsh sound in their ear, that rellisheth
not of the sweet com^orts of the gospel. Like as it is not good to eat too
much honey. Prou. 25. 16. so neither is it fit for such always to taste of the
sweetness of Gods promises. And as Augustine says well of Judas, De Ecclesiast.
dogmatio. c. 56.
mustum sancti spiritus potare non potui^, quo accepto continuo crepuit: he
could not drink the sweet liquour of the spirit, but after he had received
it, he burst: So impenitent persons, and such as are hardened in their sins,
when they hear of nothing but peace, peace, are thereby made more incurable:
and their wounds are not purged, but putrified. It is fit therefore for every
man, as his disease is, so to apply the medecin.

The 4. meditation.
v. 1. I rejoiced, when they said unto me. Let us go up into the house of the
Lord.] This princely prophet rejoices in the public and peaceable exercise of
religion, The joy of christian assembli^^.
that the people of God had now free recourse unto the house of God. And
indeed, this is a benefit wherein all Christian people are much to joy, that
they are not exiled from Gods house, but may chearefully and quietly thither
assemble.

1. So says the prophet David, Blessed are they, that dwell in thy house, they
will ever praise thee, Psalm. 84. 4. Therefore our Savior notes this, as a
fearful sign of future miseries, when they shall see the abomination of
desolation standing in the holy place: then let them that be in Judea fly unto
the mountains, Math. 24. 15. When the holy place of Gods worship begins to
be desolate and forsaken, what comfort can elsewhere be expected?

2. Therefore David desires this as first and principal above all other, that
he might dwell in Gods tabernacle all the days of his life, Psalm. 27. 4. And
he professes, that he had rather be one day in Gods courts, then a thousand
else where, Psalm. 84. 10. And he powers out his heart for grief, when he
remembered how he had gone up with the people to Gods house, as a multitude
keeping a feast, Psalm. 42. 4. but now was tossed from place to place, and
banished from that place of joy and comfort.

3. The people of God flocking together to Gods house, are resembled to doves,
that fly in at their windows, Isa. 60. 8. and as birds, that flicker to their
nests, Psalm. 84. 3. So even as the sparrowes and swallows being chased, do
resort unto their nests; so the house of God is a place of rest to a troubled
soul. And as in the poole of Bethesda, the lame and diseased, when the waters
were stirred by the angel, found remedy for their disease: so in Gods house
the waters of life do issue forth to the health of all, that thirst after them.

4. Great cause then have the people of God to frequent the Lords Sanctuary:
because the Lord sits between the Cherubins, Psalm. 99. 1. Gods way is in
the Sanctuary, Psalm. 77. 13. Gods power and beauty are in his Sanctuary,
Psalm. 96. 6. who then would not desire to enjoy God^ presence; to behold the
beauty of his face; to see the Lord in his word; to taste him in the
sacraments, to feel him by the operation of his spirit, to talk with him by
prayer?

5. Wherefore we all this day are much bound to give thanks to God, that in
his mercy still grants us to have free access to his temple. 4. Benefit,
fre^ accesie to God^ house.
This gracious intercourse of religion, we had just cause in respect of our
sins to fear, least it might have been stopped: but God has given unto his
gospel in this land an open door again, which should have been for ever shut
up unto us, if the Popes curses, and Papists wishes, and Iebusites practices
could have prevailed. How good yet and loving is God to Israel? in many
countries to this day Gods house is desolate, and his true worship abolished:
they which fear God are driven to hear the word in corners, in woods and
solitary places: O therefore let us rejoice in England, that we may safely go
up to Gods house. Some, while they have been serving God in his house, have
been robbed and spoiled at home: some in the Church have been put to the
sword, the house has been fired over their heads; their blood shed in the
sanctuary, as the Galileans blood was mingled with their sacrifice, Luke 13.
1. Thus we read that 20. thousand Christians in Nicomedia were burnt, Eusebius. l.
8. c. 6.
being all assembled in the Church to celebrate the nativity of Christ, under
the cruel persecution of Dioclesian: Thus cruel Miniers, Fox p. 952. col. ^.
commanded his captain John de Gaxe, to put diverse of the Merindolia^s to the
sword, which were gathered together in the Church: Hierome also makes mention
in his time, Hiero ad Gerontia^.
how that at Ments in Germany, the city being taken, diverse thousands were
slain in the Church. Thanks be to God we neither feel, nor see any of these
evils. Wherefore my brethren, let us love Gods house, and make much of this
blessing, while we may: let no man contemn or neglect the holy assemblies; let
not any worldly business draw us from the house of prayer, let not vain
pleasure hinder us. How many are there, that of purpose put off their iourneys
to the Lords day, thinking the time gained, that is spared from the exercises
of religion? How many, that sit quaffing and tippling, trifling and toying, when
they should present themselves before God? Let these things be now amended,
and let us begin to rejoice, that the Gospel has yet a free passage among us;
and lay we up in our storehouse plenty of spiritual instruction against the
evil day: The wise man sends us to the Pismire, Go to the Ant thou
sluggard, behold her ways and be wise, Prou. 6. 4. which similitude Augustine
does very fitly thus explicate: Vide formicam Dei, surgit quotidie, currit ad
Ecclesiam Dei, audit lectionem, recondit intus grana electa de horreo. in Psalm.
66.
Behold Gods Ant, he rises daily, goes to Church, hears the word, lays up
the chiefest corns, etc. The time of winter comes, some evil or cross
befalls him, modo intus formica comedit labores aestat is; now he does within
to himself enjoy the gatherings of summer. Let us in like sort learn wisdom
of the Ant, now while we may, to lay up store of spiritual food in the
granaries of our hearts, that we may be provided against the time of dearth and
famine come.

The 5. meditation.
Let us go, or, we will go into the house of the Lord.] The people did
encourage one another to go up to Gods house: whereby we are taught, that it
is every man's part, to help forward his brother, and to stir him up unto the
exercise of godliness.

1. Thus Isay prophesied of the last times: Many people shall say, come, and
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, Isay, 5. 3. Saint Paul also moves
the brethren one to comfort another, ^. Thessalonians. 4. 18. One to exhort and edify
another, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Neither yet, where Jeremy says: in those days,
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord, Ierem. 31. 34. is this prophet contrary to Esaias: but
this saying must be understood comparatively; that in regard of the abundance
of knoweledge under Christ, there shall not be such need of mutual
instruction, as was before under the law.

2. Thus Jacob encouraged his servants and whole family, Cleanse your selves
and change your garments, we will rise up and go to Bethel, and I will make an
altar there unto God, Genesis 35. 2, 3. The shepherds unto whom the angels
declared the glad tidings of the birth of Christ, said one to another: Let us
go unto Bethlem, and see this thing that is come to pass, Luke 2. 15. Thus
Andrew brought Peter, and Philip Nathaniel unto Christ, Ioh. 1. 41. 45.

3. Like as then, two are better then one, (as the Preacher says) if they fall
one will lift up the other, etc. If two sleep together, they shall have heat,
Eccles. 4. 10. 15. So by the fellowship of brethren, and their mutual
exhortations, zeal is increased, and spiritual strength augmented. And as in
the body one member helps another, and do communicate their offices; so
should we, being one body in Christ, seek and procure the good one of
another.

4. See we not the wicked how they one provoke another to mischeife, and
entise unto evil? Come, we will lay wait for blood, etc. cast in thy lot
among us, we will have all one purse, Prou. 1. 11, 14. They do claspe together
as briers, Mich. 7. 4. Much more should Christians one stir up and provoke
another to goodness.

For this is the property of charity, it seeks not her own things, 1. Cor.
13. 1. it desires to impart, what gift soever it has, to the good of many: as
Bernard well notes, upon the 134. Psalm: It is like to the precious ointment
upon the head, that runs down upon the beard, even upon Aaro^s beard, which
went down upon the border of his garments: Non remaneat in barba Aaron tota
vnctio salutaris; Sermon. 14. in Cantic.
capiat sane prima, non sola, refundat and inferioribus membris, quod accepit
ipsa desuper. Let not the wholesome anointing stay in Aarons beard, let it
receive it first, but not alone, but shed forth to the members below, which it
has received from above.

5. By this doctrine then, the great negligence of people is reproved, which
suffer every one to walk his own way: no man exhorts, admonishes one
another: but like as, if thou should see thy brother ready to fall into a
pit, which he was not ware of, and forbearest to tell him, thou art accessarie
to his danger: so says Augustine, Praecipitat se quis in vitia sua, praedicat
apud te malefacta sua, tu nosti mala esse and laudas, etc. Thou see a man to
run headlong unto sin, (...) Psalm. 49.
he vaunteth of his wickedness before thee, thou know he does evil, and
yet do not tell him: thou art guilty of his perishing. The time was, while
Popery reigned, that Christians could not meet to confer together, one to
exhort and admonish another without danger of their lives: as James Brewster,
for hearing one Sweeting to read ma^y good things out of a book: and because
the said Sweeting, when James had said, The son of the living God help us,
Fox p. 818. anno 1511.
answered, Now almighty God so do, were both condemned and burnt in
Smithfield.

Ioannes de Cadurco, for bringing forth this sentence at a feast, Fox p. 897.
Christ reign in our hearts, and prosecuting it by Scriptures, was burned.
ann. 1533.

Thomas Saupaulinus, because he rebuked one for swearing, Fox p. 904.
was suspected for a Lutherane, and burned at Paris. ann. 1551.

This was the miserable thrall of Christ's Church in those blind sottish days;
but now blessed be God, these 45. years it has been lawefull for Christians
to use godly conference, The 5. benefit, godly confere^c^
and mutual exhortation, and I trust this liberty shall contiuue still twice
so many years, and I hope to the worlds end. This benefit if it be not
cheerfully used, it shall be the peoples fault, not want of Christian freedom
and liberty therein. But it is no great marvel, that the common people
neglect this mutual duty, seeing they which have charge over others, as
fathers over children, masters over servants, do fail in this behalf; the
most part of these, leaving those who^e they are charged with to their own
election, and sway of their simple wit: Let these also know, that God will
require their blood, which perish by their negligence, at their hands. Let them
remember how severely Elie, otherwise a good man, was punished in himself and
his posterity, for his remissness toward his children, 1. Sam. 2. And so I
conclude this place, with that golden sentence of Augustine: Adduc eos ad domum
dei tecum* Epist. 70.
qui sunt in domo tua t^cum, matter ecclesia aliquos a te petit, aliquos
repetit, petit eos, quos apud te invenit, repetit eos, quos per te perdidit,
acquirat solers quos non habuit, non pla^gat, quos habuit: Bring those unto
Gods house with thee, which thou have in thine own house with thee: the mother
Church does crave some of thee, other she does challenge: she craves those
which she finds with thee, she challenges those which she has lost by
thee: let her get what she had not, not grieve for that she had. Wherefore
masters, fathers, and governors should rather seek by their godly care to
win those unto God, that belong unto them, then pull them by their negligence
from God, for whom they are accomptable.

The 6. meditation.
The house of Iehovah] This is a great honor, which the Lord vouchsafes unto
such places, as are dedicated to his worship, that they are the Lords houses
and dwelling places: that though heaven and earth cannot contain that infinite
majesty, yet he is present among the faithful assembled together in his house.

1. Thus the Lord says by his Prophet, Heaven is my seat, earth is my
footestoole: where is that house that ye will build for me? To whom will I
look, to him that is poor and of a contrite heart, and trembles at my words,
Isa. 66. 1, 2. So our Savior Christ promises, Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst among them, Math. 18. 20.

2. Jacob hereof had experience, when in his dream he saw that comfortable
vision of the ladder, and awaking called it Gods house, and the gate of heaven,
Genesis 28. 17. Solomon by his holy prayer at the dedication of the temple,
obtained that God would be there present, and hear the supplications of the
people that should pray in that place. 2. King. 8. 30.

3. Like as then the curtains of the Temple was pictured with Cherubs faces,
Exodus 36. 8. so are the Angels of God present as ministering spirits for the
Elect sake, when the people of God are assembled in prayer: and as the
tabernacle of Moses was shadowed with a cloud, an evident sign of Gods
presence, Number. 9. 22. so the Lord does ouershadowe by the work of his spirit
the hearts of the faithful assembled in his house to hear his word.

4. God therefore is present in his house because of his promise: for there the
Lord will be seen, as Abraham said; In the mountain will God be seen, Genesis
22. 14. so will the Lord show himself in his sanctuary, promising there to
hear the prayers of his people. And again, where else should the Lord be
thought to be present, then where he bestows his gifts: as it is said in the
parable of the prodigal child; In my fathers house is bread enough, luke 15.
Therefore because the store of this spiritual bread, which is the word of God
preached, is dealt in the Church assemblies, that there is surely our fathers
house.

5. First, here all superstitious persons must be met withal, Holiness not
(...) be ascribed to the place it self*
which tie Gods presence to the walls and stones of the church, as though it
were in it self a more holy place: such were the Israelites, that thought the
very presence of the Arc would deliver them from the Philistims, when as God
was not present, whom they had chased away with their sins, 1. Sam 4. And
they had nothing in their mouth, but the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, Ierem. 7. 4. foolishly imagining, that what sins so ever they had
committed, if they did but once come within the walls of the temple they were
delivered, Ier. 7. 10. Such is the superstition which the Papists have of their
hallowed Churches, ascribing great virtue to the place it self: whereas the
Lord for his worship makes no difference of places, but every where he is
accepted, which worshippeth in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 23, 24. Churches
indeed are holy places, but not in respect of any inherent holiness, but
because of the holy use, namely the holy prayers and exercises of holy
assemblies: which point is very well touched by Bernard, Habent sanctitatem,
sed propter corpora vestra, etc. Your Churches are holy because of your bodies,
De d^dicat. eccles. sermon. 1.
as your souls are holy because of the spirit that dwells in you, your
bodies holy because of your souls, so this house is holy because of your
bodies.

Secondly, all profanation of Gods house is forbidden, Houses of prayer not to
be profaned*
or turning of it to any secular uses. Our Savior would not suffer them to
carry a vessel through the Temple, nor to buie and sell, but overthrew the
tables of the money changers, Math. 11. 15, 16. Hereof it is that diverse
abuses of places consecrate to religious uses, have been by diverse wholesome
Canons restrained: that law-daies should not be kept in Churches, Council.
Aretalens. sub. Carol. c. 22. that feasts be not made there, Trullan. c. 74.
that no man bring in beasts, or cattle, ibid. c. 88. that no dancing there be
used, songs, or enterludes, Bracarens. 3. c. 2. All which, and such like
corrupt vsages, are great profanations of Gods house, which is appointed for
prayer, and other holy exercises.

Thirdly, if the Church be Gods house, it ought even in respect of outward
comelines and decency, to be reverently kept. Men should not be curious in
adorning their own houses, and dissolute in maintaining the house of God. This
was the reproof of the Israelites in Haggai his time, because they themselves
dwelled in sieled houses, and suffered the temple to lie wast, Hagg. 1. 4. And
verily where people are slothful in this business to beautify and repair the
public places of religion, it shows that they much regard not the exercises
of that holy habitation.

Lastly, as it is Gods house, so we should come reverently to it, as into Gods
presence; as Jacob resolves himself: How f^arefull is this place? this is
none other but Gods house, Genesis 28. 17. Gods palace is much unlike Ahashuerosh
court: Mordecai could not enter there, because he was clothed with sackcloath,
a mourning garment, Esth. 4. 2. but he is soonest admitted into Gods court,
that comes with true sorrow and contrition. Men use to come trembling unto
the princes Majesty, and with reverence enter into the court: Gods house in
like manner is his palace: Arelatens. sub Carol. c. 22.
and therefore in time past we shall find, that the Church was called (...), a
basilike or princes house. Laodican. 28.
It is the mansion of the great King, and therefore we should not come with
secure hearts, and profane affections, as the manner of some is, but with
reverence and fear, as into the presence of the highest Majesty. And herein
we have the example of our princely Ecclesiastes, that both in practice and
precept goes before us in this duty of reverence toward God, thus moving and
aduising his princely son: (...).
But in your prayer to God speak with all reverence: for if a subject will not
speak but reverently to a king, much less should any flesh presume to talk
with God as a companion. How much are we bound unto God, that in his mercy
has sent us a king truly touched with the devout sense of religion? The 6.
benefit, the example of a godly king.
who, what he prescribes to others, does first practice in his royal person,
and as the Prophet says, is as an he-goate before the flock, Iere. 50. 8.
that is, most forward of the rest. To conclude this place, Bernard well says:
Terribilis plane locus quem fideles viri inhabitant, quem angeli sancti
frequentant, quem sua quoque praesentia dominus ipse dignatur, worthy of all
reverence, which faithful men inhabit, angels frequent, where God himself is
present. The presence of Christ's Church requires reverence, but of angels
more, of God himself most of all.

The 7. meditation.
v. 2. Our feet shall stand in thy gates.] That is, whereas the Arc before
was flitting from one place to another, not only in the wilderness under Moses,
where the Arc was removed, as the camp pitched their tents; but afterward
also it often changed place: 1. Sam. 5. v. 1. 8. 10.
from Shiloh to Ebenezer, from Ebenezer to Ashdod, 1. Sam. 6. 14.
from thence to Gath, 1. Sam 7. 1.
from Gath to Ekron, 2. Sam. 6* 10. and 12.
from thence to the house of Obed^Edom, and so to Jerusalem: now the Church of
God rejoices that the Arc was settled and brought to his resting place. This
then is the joy of the Church when religion is settled and established, and
brought to perfection: when the people are resolved in their conscience of the
truth, and stand confidently with their feet in Gods house.

1. Thus the Lord promised concerning Sion: The Lord has chosen Sion, and
loved to dwell in it: this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein, Psalm. 132. 13. Now in David's time, and not before, the place
was elected and appointed, where the solemn exercise of religion should be
practiced.

2. Thus Solomon builded God an house, whereas he dwelt in tents before, that
the Arc should be no more transported out of his place: and herein Solomon was
a figure of Christ, in whom the promises of God are Yea, and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.
20. Who has given us an everlasting testament, a kingdom, which cannot be
shaken. Hebr. 12. 28. who is the true Messiah, neither are we to look for any
other. Math. 11. 3.

3. Like as then when Samuel went to anoint David, The fi^th of Christ not
flitting or changeable.
first Eliab, then Abinadab, then Shammah, and the rest of the brethren came in
order before Samuel, but none of them was chosen: at the last David was sent
for, and he was the man, 1. Sam. 16. So after many prophets, and many
professions in the world, at the length comes Christ, and he is anointed
king for ever. And as when Elias was in the cave, a mighty wind was sent of
God, 1. King. 19.
then an earthquake, then a fire, but God was in none of them: but at the last
he spoke in a soft and still voice: So Christ came not, though many signs and
wonders went before, till he himself spoke with a soft and still voice in the
form and shape of a man.

4. For the Apostle says, Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, and the same for
ever, Heb. 13. 8. therefore as Christ is always the same, so the faith and
religion of Christ is constant and immutable. And as the Apostle infers
hereupon in the same place, Be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines, v. 9. so should we be resolved and settled in religion.

5. Wherefore, every man may consider, how much bound we are to praise God,
which has in his mercy raised us up a David after Samuel, to bring home the
ark of God, and to establish and settle religion, The 7. benefit the settling
of religion.
which was feared of many, and wished of some, to be flitting at the next
change. The Pope and his adherents would draw the English people, as Jeroboam
called the Israelites to Dan and Bethel, to the Roman religion: but I trust
our feet shall stand still at home in the gates of Jerusalem. Let men
therefore be constant in faith, not be carried away with every wind of
doctrine, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 14. nor halt between two opinions, as
some, like Ianus bifrons, looking both ways, have of late in the Church of
England, set a foot some popish doctrines, mingling the sweet lump of the
gospel, with sour leaven of their own. Such teachers I trust will hereafter
be better advised, and fill their hands with better seed, that no more cockle
and darnell be scattered in good ground. God grant a general consent in
judgment and concord in heart, both in teachers and hearers, that we may go
up together to Gods house, and that our feet may stand steadfastly in
Jerusalem: that as Ambrose well alludeth, Sicut rotam intra rotam vidit
propheta currentem; Lib 1. de spirit. cap. 2^.
ita teres vita sanctorum est, and ita sibi concinens, vt superioribus
posteriora respondeant: as the Prophet saw one wheel run within another, so
the life of the Saints should be round and current, and so consorted together,
as one part may answer to another.

The 8. meditation.
In thy gates O Jerusalem.] This city God made especial choice of: as it is
in the pslame, God loves the gates of Sion above all the habitations of Jacob,
psalm. 87. 2. It was called the city of God, v. 3. the city of the great king.
math. 5. 35. the holy city, mat. 4. 5. there Abraham was bid to sacrifice his
son, Genesis 22. of this city was Melchisedeck founder, and king. Genesis 14. yet
notwithstanding all these privileges, this city was often for their sins
besieged, by Pharao Necho, 2. king. 22. 23. by Nabuchadnezzer, 2. king. 24. 11.
destroyed by the king of Babylon, 2. king. 25. and at the last utterly ruinated
and made desolate by the Romans. Whereby we learn, that there is no city or
country, though endued with never so great privileges, but if they continue
in sin, may be in Gods justice cast off.

1. The Prophet says, He turns a fruitful land into barrennes for the
wickedness of the people, Ruin of cities for sin.
that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 34. God is able both to change cities and
countries, to bring them to perpetual ruin and desolation, because of the
sins of the inhabitants.

2. Thus the Lord dealt with Samaria, 2. king. 21. 13. and with Shiloh, where
three hundred years the ark of God rested: Go unto my place, which was at
Shiloh where I set my name at the beginning, and behold what I did unto it, for
the wickedness of my people Israel, Ier. 7. 12. What is become now of Babylon
the chief city of the Chaldeans, of Niniue of the Assyrians, of Reuatane the
great city of the Medes, Susis of the Persians? there is no monument of them
left, Epist. 91.
but as Seneca says, Ipsa fundamenta consumpta sunt, nec quicquam extat, quo
appareat illas saltem fuisse: the very foundations are worn out, and it does
not appear that there were any such cities.

3. As God has dealt with these cities, so he can offer the same occasion to
others: I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of
the house of Achab, and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a man wipeth a dish, which he
wipeth, and turns it vpside down, 2. King. 21. 13. It is no whitte harder
for God to bring destruction upon cities, then for the mason to lift up his
line and plummet over his work, or then it is to wipe a dish when it is foul.

4. The cause why the Lord judges countries and cities is expressed in the
case of Israel; because they sinned against the Lord their God, etc. and walked
according to the fashion of the heathen, etc. and had made them images, etc.
therefore the Lord, was exceeding wroth with Israel, and put them out of his
sight, 2. King. 7. 8, 10, 18. The like sins in any city never so famous or
honorable in the world, must needs procure the same judgments.

5. First in that Jerusalem that famous city is now forsaken of her
inhabitants, and made an habitation of devils, of pagans and infidels, we
learn, that Gods church and the true religion is not limited to any certain
place: and seeing God has showed such indignation toward that country and
nation, which put Christ to death, what reason had the Roman bishops in time
past, to incite Christian Princes to move such deadly wars for the recovery
of the holy land, as they called it? After God had polluted his own city and
temple, and Christ neglected the very place of his birth for the sins of the
people, Of the wars for recovering the holy land so superstitiously called.
what cause had Christians so superstitiously to be addicted to that place,
which was rejected of God? Their oversight herein well appeared by the event,
for we shall not read of any wars that continued longer, with greater
bloodshed, and less happy success, then these maintained by Christians
against the Saracens for the possession of the holy land. Hereupon Princes lead
with a superstitious conceit, take upon them the cross, to go fight for
Jerusalem, as Henry the 2. Richard the 1. king John, with diverse other, who
thought simply as Naaman, that no earth was so holy as that about Jordan, 2.
King. 5. 17. But our Savior has given us a rule for this: The hour comes,
when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the father,
John. 4. 23. The true worship of God is not tied to Jerusalem, as Hierome well
expounds those words of the Psalm; God loves the gates of Sion more then
all the habitations of Jacob. Nunquid istas portas diligit Deus, Deterr.
promis^.
quas videmus in cineres and favillas conuersas? etc. Do you think that God
loved these gates, which are turned to dust and ashes? no man is so foolish to
think so, etc. And again he says, Ne quicquam fidei tuae deesse putes, Ad
Paulin.
quia Hierosolymam non vidisti, etc. Think not any thing therefore wanting to
your faith, because you have not seen Jerusalem, nor us therefore better,
because we have there our habitation.

Secondly, the like fantasy the Papists have of Rome, which the Jews had of
Jerusalem; they imagine that Gods Church cannot possibly fail there: as though
they ever had the like promise for Rome, as the Jews had for Sion* That God
would dwell there for ever, Psalm. 132. 14. How would the Papists triumph if
they could find any such text for Rome, This is my rest for ever? yet if they
did, such promises are but conditional; for God no longer binds himself not
to forsake a nation, Rom^ never had such promises as Jerusalem.
then while they do not forsake him. Let proud Rome therefore know, that
seeing she is fallen away from the faith of Christ by most gross idolatry,
and other apostasies, that she cannot long escape unpunished: Jerusalem was
deerer in gods sight then ever Rome was, it was longer protected by him,
greater miracles had God wrought for them, more holy men and Prophets there
preached, then ever Rome had. And Hierome speaking of poor Bethlem says, Puto
sanctior locus est rupe Tarpeia, Hier. ad Eustach.
quae de caelo saepius fulminata ostendit, quod deo displiceat: I take it to be
a more holy place, then the Tarpeian rock at Rome, which being so often
smitten with lightening, shows that God was angry with it. If Bethlem was
not spared, where Christ was borne, much less Rome is privileged, by whose
authority Christ died: If God spared not the natural branches, take heed
least he spare not thee, says S. Paul to the Romans. Romans 11. 21. The Jews
then were the true natural branches, the Romans strange and adopted branches:
therefore if the first were plucked off for their rebellion, the second must not
think to stand in their superstition. A foolish conceit therefore and
imagination it is, that Rome should be the mother Church, and nurserie of all
the world. Hierome well says: Non audeo Dei omnipotentiam angusto fine
concludere, Ad Paulinum.
and coarctare paruo terrae loco, quem non capit c^lum. I dare not conclude
Gods omnipotency with a small bounds, and to thrust him into a small room,
whom the heavens cannot hold.

Thirdly, this example of Jerusalem does admonish all cities, not to presume of
their temporal and external happiness, but to learn thankefully to embrace
the truth, least for their unthankfulness they be deprived both of the virtue,
and the handmaid thereof prosperity. Let Jerusalem of England the city of
London be warned by her sister, the Jewish Jerusalem, that she take heed of
her sins, that she taste not of her sause. Let the calamity of other
neighbor cities admonish her: it is some while since Lions in France was in
one night consumed stick and stone with fire: whereof Seneca makes this
lamentable mention, Epist. 92.
Vna tantum nox interfuit inter civitatem maximam and nullam, denique diutius
tibi, illam perijsse, quam perijt, narro. There was but the distance of one
night between a great city, and none at all, and I have been longer in
telling you of the destruction thereof, then it was in destroying. Verolamium
here in England situate not far from S. Albons, Cambden de commit. He^tford.
was a famous and great city, now not so much as the name thereof remains.
What great calamities befell most famous cities in Hieroms time he himself
reports: how all France was wasted of the Barbarians, ad Gerontiam.
the city of Ments taken, and many thousands slain in the Church: Ipsa
Hispania iam peritura contremiscit: Spain trembles, as if it were now ready
to perish. And what has happened in other countries and cities round about us in
our time, who can be ignorant? The massacre of Paris, the desolation of
Antwerpe, the sacking of Calice, surprising of many towns in the low
countries. All these examples should warn noble cities and corporations of
England to beware of those sins, for the which the other have been chastised.
As Hierome well says, Orbis terrarum ruit, in nobis peccata non ruant, Hieron
ibid.
vrbs inclyta and Romani imperij caput, vno hausta est incendio: The famous
city and chief of the Roman city at once consumed with fire, the world
falls to ruin, and yet within there is no ruin of our sins.

The 9. meditation.
Jerusalem is built as a city.] Here is expressed one principal fruit of
David's prosperous, good, and peaceable government, that the city was beutified
and enlarged with many goodly houses and buildings: which shows that it is
not the least temporal blessing, when a city or nation enjoys peace, that
they may build them houses and plant their grounds.

1. Thus the Lord says by his Prophet, I will bring again the captivity of
lacobs tents, and have compassion on his dwelling places, and the city shall
be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner
thereof. Ierem. 30. 18. The Lord promises this as a singular blessing, that
Jerusalem which was before destroyed and laid wast, should be reedified
again, and recover the pristine beauty.

2. Thus the Psalmist does celebrate this as a great favor of God to
Jerusalem, that when the city was besieged, as it should seem of Senacherib
in the days of Hezekiah, the Lord so protected it, that no part thereof was
defaced: Compass about Sion, go round about it, and tell the towers thereof,
mark well the wall thereof, behold the towers, that you may tell your
posterity. Psalm. 48. 13. 14. There was not so much as one tower, or any part
of the wall defaced. So David when he had taken the sort of Sion, he built
round about it, and called it the city of David (to which building this verse
has special relation) and the reason thereof is given, David prospered and
grew, for the Lord of hosts was with him. 2. Sam. 5. 9, 10.

3. Like as the nest is to the birds, so is a man's house as Job resembles it:
I shall die in my nest, 29. 18. Even as when the silly birds are suffered to
build their nestes quietly, where to lay their young; so is it with citizens,
when they safely and securely dwell in their houses. They are as men's bowers,
wherein they solace and refresh themselves from the heat and cold, as Jonas
rejoiced in the gourd that shadowed him from the sun, Ion. 4. so a joy it is
when men may sit quietly under their own bowers. Unto this outward flourishing
in comely and decent buildings, the Lord compares the spiritual increasing of
his Church: If she be a wall, we will build upon her a silver palace, if she
be a door, we will keep her in with doors of cedar.

4. The preacher shows what is the cause of this blessing, Cant. 8. 9.
that a man sits quietly in his own house, and inlargeth his dwelling
place, and prospers in his affairs: It is of the hand of God, and Gods gift,
for a man to take pleasure in his labors. Eccles. 2. 24. c. 5. 17.

5. Wherefore much is this nation of England, The 8. benefit, enlarging of
cities and buildings.
and especially the goodly cities and towns thereof to rejoice and give
thanks to God, and the city of London most of all, for this long time of
peace, whereby men do enjoy the labors of their own hands. We have not built
houses for others to dwell in, nor planted vineyards, and others eat the fruit
thereof, as the Lord threatened the Israelites, 2. Deuteronomy. 28. 30. And as other
cities have had woeful experience: their houses have been beaten down over
their heads, and the goodly sumptuous buildings made low with the ground.
Sometime cities and famous buildings have been ouerthrown with water, as in
Noah's deluge: sometime consumed with fire, as Sodom and Gomorrha: sometime
devoured and swallowed up of the earth, as the tents and houses of Cote,
Dathan, and Abiram: beaten down with winds, as Jobs house. We read in
foreign stories of great calamities which have fallen upon cities: Calamities
upon cities by winds and earthquakes Socrat. l. 1. 7.
at Antioch there was an earthquake which continued a whole year together. At
Nicomedia many houses were shaken down with an earthquake, Zozomen, lib. ^.
cap. 15.
and diverse people slain with the fall of the houses, and among the rest,
Cecropius and Arsacius: at Constantinople under Leo the Emperor, such a raging
fire took the city, Euagr. l. 2. c. 1^.
that it continued four days, and the houses were burnt the length of 14.
furlongs. The like calamities Seneca reports to have been in his time:
Senec. epist. 91.
Quoties Asia, quoties Achaia vobes vno tremore ceciderunt? quot oppida in
Syria, quot in Macedonia diruta sunt? How often have the cities of Asia and
Achaia fallen down by earthquakes* how many cities in Syria and Macedonia have
been swallowed up of the earth, in Cyprus likewise and Paphus? The city of
London has not been free in time past from such losses: ann. 1091. Stowe.
in the 4. year of William Rufus, 600 houses were blown down by tempest in
London: ann. 1232. in the 16. of Henry the third, great hurt was done in the
city by thunder and lightning Wherefore, much are we all bound to thank god
that has preserved us, our cities, our houses, from these fearful
calamities: that we are not surprised in our houses, and sitting at our tables
of our enemies, as Balthazar was in the midst of his feast. Dan. 5. and as
many have been in other places: and how much are we to praise God, that has
so wrought for this Church and common wealth, providing a nourcing father for
us, under whose shadow we trust to be defended still in peace and true
religion, that I hope we may say as David here does, of our cities and towns:
Jerusalem is a city well built, etc.

Further, because mention is here made of building, it shall not be amiss
briefly to observe, what rules are to be kept in the rearing of edifices among
Christians, ^^^esto be observed in building of houses.
which may briefly be reduced to these three, that they be made without
oppression or cruelty, not with ostentation and vanity, nor yet without
compassion and charity.

For the first, the Prophet says, Woe unto him that builds his chambers with
unrighteousness, and his chambers without equity, Ierem. 22. 13. So do they,
which oppress the poor, and ouer-reach upon their grounds to enlarge their
own dwellings, as Ahab did upon Naboth, 1. King. 21. For the next, the prophet
reprooueth those, that build them houses, etc. and call their lands by their
names: Such was Nabuchadnezzar, that said in the pride of his heart, is not
this Babel, which I have built for the majesty of mine honor? Dan. 4. 17. A
vain thing is it for men to set their heart upon their gay houses, and to
swell in pride because of their sumptuous edifices, seeing they must one day
leave their lightsome and glorious houses, and lie in darkness. Thirdly, men
must not set their minds so to build their houses of timber and stone, as that
they forget to relieve the living stones, the poor members of Christ, whereof
the spiritual building of the Church consists: which Job notes as a fault
in the rich men of his time, that did build in solitary places, Job. 3. 14.
that they might dwell alone, and not be troubled with the cry of the poor at
their gate. Such are those builders in these days, that delight to build fair
to the eye, but the poor there finds nothing to fill his hu^grie belly:
they make many chimneies, but keep few fires: their chambers are lightsome
with fair windows, and their stairs lofty with high towers, but their gates
not adorned with troops of the poor. Their palaces are seen a far off, but
not smelt near hand: their lodgings are hung with green, and grass grows
at the doors. Ambrose says well of such, Clamat ante domum tuam nudus and
negligis, and tu sollicitus es quibus marmoribus pavimenta vestias: The poor
naked cries at thy door not regarded, and yet thou art careful with what
marble the floor should be paued. Wherefore if any will build sure, that their
habitation may remain, and that Jerusalem may still be as a city well built:
let them lay the foundation in equity. Houses built with usury, extortion,
wrong judgment, briberie, deceit, as I am afraid the houses of many in the
country are, but more in the city, cannot long continue, nor the owners long
enjoy them, but as Jeremy says, ^o their posterity shall soon say,
Habitacula nostra proiecerunt nos, our habitations have cast us out. Ier. 9. 19.

The 10. meditation.
That is compact together in it selfe] The word in the original is chabar,
which signifies to join together. The Septuagint translate, (...), which does
participate or communicate together. Before the city was divided, part thereof
being possessed of the Iebusites, which were of a contrary religion. This
then was a singular benefit, that the city which was before disioyned in
religion, and civil dissension, is now reduced to unity and conjoined in one.
A happy thing therefore it is, when a nation, city, or people do consent and
agree together and live as brethren.

1. Behold (says the Prophet David) how comely and good a thing it is,
brethren, to dwell together, Psalm. 134. 1. So the Prophet says, The hatred of
Ephraim shall depart, etc. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex
Ephraim, Isa. 11. 23. that is, they which before lived at variance, shall be
reconciled.

2. Thus Abraham appeased the stri^e that was between his servants and Lots,
Genesis 13. Isaak made an atonement with Abimelech, whose servants before had
contended with Isaaks servants for certain wells of water. Genesis 26. Moses would
have pacified the two Ebrewes that strove together. Exodus 2. 13.

3. For discord in a city, or among neighbors is like a raging fire: as
Iotham prophesied, that a fire should come from Abimelech, and consume Sechem,
and a fire likewise from Sechem to consume Abimelech, The danger of discord.
Iud. 9. 20. Which fire was that civil dissension, whereby they were one
destroyed of another. And as Abimelech when he had destroyed the city, did
sow it with salt, to make it for ever unfruitful, ibid. v. 45. so is
dissension among neighbors and citizens, like to the sowing of salt. And
contrariwise, unity and concord is a comely and pleasant thing, like to the
sweet ointment of Aaron, that gave a pleasant perfume round about: and like as
they could not roll away the stone upon the wells mouth to water the sheep,
till all the shepherds came together, and joined their strength to do it,
Genesis 29. 8. so by concord and unity, great matters are compassed which by
division are hindered.

4. Concord and peace is an evident sign of Gods presence, who is the author
of peace, and not of confusion, 1. Cor. 14. 33. And the Prophet David having
set forth the singular benefit of concord among brethren, comparing it to the
dew that falls upon the hills: he thus concludes, there the Lord appointed
the life and blessing for ever, Psalm. 134. 3. showing that all blessings are
expected, where brotherly love is kept and nourished.

5. First then, herein appears a wonderful work of God at this present
among us in this realm of England: who has made this nation as a city well
compact in it self, that all, as one man, have consented together to bring the
Lords anointed to Jerusalem: as all the tribes of Israel came unto David and
said, we are thy bones and thy flesh: and with one consent anointed him king.
The 9. benefit the general consent and desire of all in receiving his Majesty.
2. Sam. 8. 1. And as Israel and Judah did contend, which should be most forward
in restoring David, 2. Sam. 19. 43. So men of all sorts have striued, who might
show most joy, and greatest duty to our Sovereign. What troubles have men
feared at the next change, who can be ignorant? many wishing they might not
live to see those days, some looking as it were a squint two ways, to be
ready for all accidents; some as it has been credibly reported, disposing
their lands to feoffes, to the use of their heirs, fearing the troubles of
these days. But God has put away all fear, and turned all to good, and
wrought men's hearts as wax, to a loyal agreement, that never any prince
entered more quietly in this land, then our now Sovereign Lord, whose happy
years and godly reign, God in his mercy long continue: This is the Lords
doing, as the Prophet says, and it is marvelous in our eyes, Psalm. 128. 23.

Secondly, let us acknowledge another great benefit, that the Lord has now
bestowed upon this famous Island of Brittannie: never could it be said, as at
this time, that we are now indeed this whole Island compact together into one
kingdom: sometime England only was divided into an heptarchie, Fox. p. 101.
p. 135.
that is, into seven kingdoms, for the space of 300. years together and
more, from ann. 456. to the reign of king Egbright. ann. 802. Then England
being reduced to one Monarchy, yet the country of Wales remained a several
kingdom until Edward the 1. ann. 1279. who subdued Lewline king of Wales,
Fox. p. 3^5.
and made his eldest son Edward prince of that country. But all this while
England and Scotland remained two distinct kingdoms, which a long time, one
offended another with most cruel and fierce wars: now are they by Gods
providence conjoined and made one kingdom. This according of these two
kingdoms was diverse times attempted before: the which better to effect, diverse
kings of England gave their daughters in marriage to the kings of Scots, as
King John his daughter Elianor; Edward the 2. Ioane his daughter; Stowe.
Henry the 7. Margaret his eldest daughter, of whom is lawefully descended
our dread Sovereign king James the true and lawful possessor of both
kingdoms: after this king Henry intended a marriage between his son prince
Edward, Lanquet. The 10. benefit, the wonderful conioyning of both kingdoms.
and Marie queen of Scots. But none of these devises took place, that this
work might not seem by man's counsel to be compassed, but by gods providence
only to be effected: So that we may now say of this Isle, as David here of
Jerusalem, it is a kingdom compacted together in it self.

Thirdly, let us all learn now to love as brethren, that neighbors should
live peaceably and lovingly together; not one to be ready to offend and grieve
another: but as we see in great cities, the houses to be one joined to
another, and to be compacted together, so that there might be as near a
conjunction in men's hearts and affections. While men are in wrath and at
variance, their prayers are hindered, their mind disquieted, Gods worship
neglected, some are wronged, others provoked. How should the child look upon
his father, when he hates his brother? how should we think to be forgiven of
God, when we seek revenge one against another? how can any man in wrath or
envy say the Lords prayer? as Hierome says, animo discrepante cum verbis,
oratione dissidente cum, factis, Our mind dissenting from our words, and our
words varying from our deeds.

The 11. meditation.
Whereunto the tribes, even the tribes of the Lord go up.] King David's
especial care was to reduce the people of God to one uniform worship, that
every man should not be permitted to devise a religion to himself, but that
all should go up to Jerusalem to worship God there. So this care does
principally belong unto Princes, to see all false worshippes abolished, and the
true service of God established.

1. This then is rendered as a reason, how it came to pass, that Micah set up
Seraphim in his house, and consecrated a new kind of priesthood: There was in
those days no king in Israel, but every man did that which was good in his
own ei^s, Judge. 17. 6. A virtuous king then is a most excellent means, to
draw the people distracted in opinions and sects, to one true worship of God:
they that live in one kingdom, should have one Christendom, be all of one
faith and religion: as they obey one king in earth, so they should adore one
God in heaven: and as they are subject to one law for civil administration,
so they should walk after one rule, concerning their Christian profession: as
Moses says. One law shall be to him that is borne in the land, and to the
stranger that dwells among you. Exodus 12. 49.

2. As David expelled the Iebusites, which hindered the peace of Jerusalem,
having there inhabited above 300. years, since the first conquest of Canaan,
Iud. 1. 21. and took away their blind and lame idols, 2. Sam. 5. 8. So Caleb
had long before driven the Anakims cruel and profane giants out of Hebron,
Joshua. 14. 12 Ezra also caused the strange women to be put away, which were
married to diverse of Israel, and corrupted both their faith and language, Ezra.
10. 18. Nehem. 13. 24. Nehemiah likewise banished the irreligious merchants of
Tyrus, that would have uttered their wares upon the Lords day, Nehem. 13. 21.

3. This may seem to be the meaning of that law, whereby the Israelites were
forbidden to sow their vineyard with diverse seeds, or to plowe with an ox
and an ass together, Deuteronomy. 22. 9, 10. So the mixture of diverse religions, and
the cohabiting of diverse worshippers cannot be good. As Zerubbabel and Joshua
would not suffer the enemies of the people of God to build the temple with
them, who thereunto offered their sacrifice deceitfully: it is not for you, but
for us (say they) to build an house to the Lord. Ezra, 4. 3. So it is not fit,
that a contrary religion should be admitted.

4. The Lord says by his prophet, my glory will I not give to another, Isay,
42. 8. The Lord will not divide stakes, he will be God alone, as Eliah says,
If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal be he, go after him, 1. King. 18.
21. But where diverse different professions are admitted, God must be
dishonored, who can not by contrary sects be truly served.

5. First then we may acknowledge an other great mercy toward our nation, The
11. benefit, sincerity in religion.
that whereas in other countries, diverse professions of religion are suffered;
some run to Dan, some to Bethel, some to Shiloh, some one way, some another.
All the tribes of Israel with us are called up to Jerusalem; the holy
profession of the gospel of Christ has these many years flourished in these
two famous kingdoms of England and Scotland, and by Gods mercy is like to
flourish still: that we may say with the Prophet, God is known in Judah, his
name is great in Israel, Psalm. 76. 1. No other God is worshipped in the Church
of England but the Lord; no other religion acknowledged but the gospel of Jesus
Christ: and our Prince and his people do say with one joint voice unto God,
Thou art my Lord, etc, the sorrows of them that offer to another God shall be
multiplied, their offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of
their names within my lips, Psalm. 16. 54.

Secondly, if all the tribes of the Lord go up to Jerusalem to the
Tabernacle, then certes, they which refuse to go up, are not the tribes of the
Lord: An admonition to recusants.
here then is an admonition to all Recusants popish and others, that they would
now at the length lay aside their froward spirits, and humble themselves to
come up to Jerusalem with the rest of Gods people. They are not of the tribes
of the Lord, that will not go up to the place of his worship. Let not the
Romist deceive himself, and expect a toleration of his superstitious (I would
it were not also an idolatrous) profession. Certainly, where God's ark is,
Dagon cannot stand: 1. Sam. 4* 4.
but shall also loose in the end both his head and hands: their Dagon of Rome
was cast down to to the ground, when first the papal authority and cells of
superstition were destroyed in England: he lost his head and his hands; when
afterward papal religion was expelled: if yet any stumpe of his body remain,
we doubt not but by Gods grace it shall sooner be cast out, then his former
wounds be recovered. Let them not think that Hezekiah will suffer the high
places and images to stand, 2. king. 18. 4. or Josias the Chemarims to
continue, 2. king. 23. 4. Wherefore stand not out wilfully as the Ephramites,
that refused to join with Iephtah against Ammon, Iud. 12. 4. neither despise
with the tribe of Manasses the message of Hezekiah, that called them up to the
Passover, 2. Chron. 30. 10.

Now as for them, which stand apart, and separate themselves from us, swelling
with an opinion of their own greater holiness, Advise given to schismatikes.
if they will be counted among the tribes of the Lord, let them also come up to
Jerusalem: if any thing has grieved them in our Church, let them not fear if
their offering be just, but God will put it into the heart of Hezekiah in good
time to remove even Moses brazen serpent, if any such abuse were. 2. king. 8.
4. I wish therefore and exhort them to assemble themselves with the host of
Israel, and to gather Manna with the rest of Gods people, least if they go out
to gather it alone, as some of the Israelites did upon the seventh day, they
loose their labor, and find none, Exodus 16. 26. And as much have these
brethren of the separation found, since they first went out from us. I say unto
them with Ambrose upon these words of the Lord to Moses, The place where thou
stand is holy ground, Epist. 82.
Ecclesia locus sanctus est, sta ergo in Ecclesia, sta vbi tibi apparui, ibi
ego tecum sum, etc. The Church is the holy place, stand therefore in the
Church, stand where I appeared unto thee, for there I am with thee. If ever God
appeared then unto them, when they heard the word, and made their prayers in
our Church assemblies, why do they forsake that place, where God has
manifested himself?

The 12. meditation.
To the testimony of Israel] That is, at Jerusalem was the arc, which was
called the testimony of God, because in them were kept the two tables of
stone, which were testimonies of Gods presence, Exodus 25. 16. 22. Beside before
the Arc was placed the pot of Manna, Exodus 16. 34. and some good while after,
Aarons rod that budded, was also put before the testimony, Number. 17. 10. So
then these three monuments of Gods presence were with the Arc, the tabernacle
of the testament, the golden pot of Manna, and Aarons rod that budded,
Hebr. 9. 4. The Arc thus furnished is called the testimony, whereby God did
testify his presence to his Church. The testimony and cognizance of the old
church of Israel.
The same also are the sure signs and marks of the Church of God now: the
word of God represented by the tables of the law, the sacraments signified by
the pot of Manna, and discipline by Aarons rod. But all these are not of
the like necessity: for as the tables only were within the arc, the other
before it, Exodus 25. 16. but the pot of Manna was there first placed, and last
of all Aarons rod: so the most essential note of the Church, is the word of
God, the next the sacraments, the third is discipline, which so much concerns
not the being, as the well being, not the essence, but the magnificence, not
the making, but the beautifying of the Church. Now that these are testimonies
to the Church, the word and sacraments, as the arc was to Israel, it thus
appears:

1. Saint Paul shows, that this was the preferment of the Jews; to them were
committed the oracles or words of God, romans 3. 2. hereby were they known to be
the people of God. Likewise else where he thus describes the Church: Christ
does cleanse it by the washing of water through the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. These two
the^, the word, and the sacraments, are the only means whereby the Church is
cleansed, and so made a fit habitation for God.

2. Thus S. Paul reasons for his cou^trimen, proouing them to be the
Israelites, that is, the church of God, because to the^ belonged the covenants,
Romans 9. 4.
and the giving of the law, and the service of God, (...), which comprehends
the ceremonies and sacraments of religion.

Thus the Apostle proves himself a member of the Church, because he was
circumcised, etc. and as touching righteousness, which was by the law, he was
unreprovable, Philip. 3. 6. He was both imitated by the sacraments and
instituted in the doctrine of the law.

3. Like as the Lord threatens to remove his candlestick from the Church of
Ephesus, Revel. 2. 5. that is the ministry of the word: for as when the
candle and candlestick are taken away there is nothing but darkness in the
house: The word and sacraments essential notes of the Church.
so is it, when any place is deprived of the light of Gods word: These two
then, the word of God rightly preached, and the sacraments duly administered,
are as the breasts of the Church; and where these are not, there are not
breasts, as the Church speaks of the Gentiles not yet called: We have a
little sister, and she has no breasts, Cant. 8. 8. But the Church says of
her self, my breasts are like towers, v. 10. that is, where the word of God
and sacraments are found in integrity, that Church has goodly breasts indeed.

4. The reason is, because it is most like that God will bestow his best gifts
upon his beloved Church: he will plant the vinyard with the best plants, Isa.
5. 2. But a more excellent gift can there not be, then to have the word, the
statutes and ordinances of Gods, as Moses says: What nation is so great, that
has ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law which I set before you
this day? Deuteronomy. 4. 8.

5. First then, where are they, whether papists, or other whatsoever, that say,
there is no Church in England? have we not the word of God, and the Sacraments?
these are sufficient testimonies and evidences of Gods presence. To say, that
these are not sufficient notes of Gods church, as the Papists affirm, is to
speak ignorantly and falsely, for whereby was the ancient Church of Israel
discerned, but by the law and statutes of God, and the true service of his
name? and to deny that the Church of England has either word or sacraments,
as some schismatickes do, is to speak absurdly, and contrary to their own
knowledge: for if that be Gods word which is contained in the old and new
testaments, and these the sacraments which Christ has instituted; then has
the Church of England both, professing the first, and celebrating the second.
We teach no doctrine but concluded out of the Scriptures, we receive no
sacraments, but those instituted by our Savior.

Concerning discipline, Of the discipline o^ the Church.
neither is the Church of England destitute of it altogether: for where the
word of God and the sacraments are, it is not possible that all discipline
should be exiled: I grant, that the discipline of the English Church may be
much amended, and I trust in time shall: many defects and wants are amongst us.
We do not conceal our imperfections, nor justify what is amiss; In the
commination.
as is extant in the book of common prayer in these words: until the said
discipline may be restored (which thing is much to be wished.) But it follows
not, that where discipline is wanting, the Church is fading, and that the
infirmity of the one makes a nullity of the other: The Church of the Jews
thus says of the Church of the Gentiles: If she be a wall, we will build upon
her a silver palace, if she be a door we will keep her in with bonds of
cedar, Can. 8. 9. She calls her sister, because she had a wall, though not
of silver, and a door, though not of cedar. And England, thanks be to God, is
a famous and beutifull sister to all reformed Churches, though she may have
some spots in external matters. The 12. benefit, reformation of things amiss.
But our trust is, that if it yet be not, her wall shall be made more costly,
and siluerlike, and her door of Cedar, when God will: In the mean time, what
great thanks should we give unto God, that has not removed the arc of his
testimony from us, as he did from Israel, when it was taken of the Philistims?
1. Sam. 4. nor taken away the candlestick from us, as from Ephesus, Revel. 2.
5. Yet by our sins we had deserved it, as much as either: but has in his
mercy raised up a David unto his church, to keep and defend the arc in
Jerusalem still.

Lastly, as these are testimonies and evidences to the whole Church, the word
and Sacraments, so ought they to be to every true member of the Church, that
every one also by his faithful hearing of the word, and fruitful receiving of
the Sacraments, may judge himself a lively member of Christ's body, and grow
up thereby to the assurance of his calling: for as our Savior says, My sheep
hear my voice, Ioh. 10. 16. He that hears and believes the voice of Christ
our great sheapheard, is certainly one of his sheep. By the fruit and effect
of the word a man may discern of himself, whether he be good or badde ground:
for if the word fructify in him, he is of the good kind, but if he bring
forth thorns and briars, he is a reproved ground, near unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned, as the Apostle says, Heb. 6. 8. So Augustine to the same
purpose: Quicquid loquimur in nomine Domini Dei imber est; videte qualis terrae
sitis, In Psalm. 98. in fine
qui peior est factus, ignem speres, pluviam non accuset, qui melior factus,
^orreum speret pluuiam lauds: Whatsoever we say unto you in the name of the
Lord, is the Lords rain, see you, what manner of ground ye be: if thereby ye
become worse and bring forth thorns and brambles, fear the flames, blame not
the showers. If ye are made better, and bring forth good fruit, hope for the
^arne, and praise the rain.

The 13. meditation.
To praise the name of the Lord.] The Prophet shows, what is the chief end
of going up to the Lords house, namely to praise God, and call upon his name.

1. So the Lord says by his prophet, My house shall be called an house of
prayer to all nations, Isa. 56. 7. And Jeremy says, prophesying of the Church
of God, They shall come and rejoice in the height of Sion, chap. 31. 12.

2. Thus Anna prayed in the temple, when she asked a son of God: Churches
appointed for prayer.
She was troubled in her mind, and prayed to the Lord, and wept sore, 1. Sam.
1. 10. And after she had obtained her desire, she in the same place gave
thanks unto God, And Anna prayed, and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord, 1.
Sam. 2. 1. To this spiritual use of prayer, Solomon consecrated the Temple:
Hear thou the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which
pray in this place, and hear thou in the place of thine habitation, even in
heaven, and when thou hear, have mercy, 1. king. 8. 30.

3. The prophet compares the thanks of the heart given unto God, unto fresh
springs: all my springs are in thee, Psalm. 87. 7. And the prophet Jeremy
speaking of those, that rejoice before the Lord, says, their soul is as a
watered garden, chap. 31. 12. He the^ which gives not thanks unto God in his
temple, is as a barren ground without springs: but he which praises the name
of God, is as a well watered ground refreshed with sweet springs. What
becomes the temple better then incense, and where should it be rather offered
then there? now the odours and incense of the Saints are their prayers, Revel.
8. 3. and their fat calves are the fruit of their lips, as the prophet
says, We will render the calves of our lips. Hosh. 14. 3.

4. For we should present the Lord with our best gifts, if any thing be better
then another, that should be the Lords part: but the sacrifice of contrition,
of praise and thanksgiving, are the most principal: as the Prophet says, Thou
desire not sacrifice, etc. the sacrifice of God is a contrite heart, Psalm.
51. 16, 17. And the Apostle says, Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise
always unto God, that is, the fruit of our lips, etc. with such sacrifice
God is pleased, Heb. 13. 15, 16.

5. First then, if the house of God be principally ordained for prayer,
preaching, and praising of God, as Moses was read and preached in the
synagogue, Act. 15. 21. and the prophet says, In his temple does every man
speak of his glory, Psalm. 29. 9. Then is that a superstitious opinion, and
erroneous doctrine of the Papists, who hold, B^llar lib. ^^. de ^uk. sanct. c.
4.
that the Churches of Christians, are chiefly ordained for the sacrifice of
the Mass, not only or chiefly for prayer or preaching, and administration of
the sacraments. And as they teach, so they practice: for there is no true
prayer at all, Churches not ordained n^w for sacrifice.
in popish Churches, all being in an unknown tongue, and so is the reading of
scripture, being both without edifying and understanding: there is no singing
of psalms, but the bellowing of the voice, and rumbling of organes, only to
delight the ear. In stead of praying and preaching, there is creeping to the
cross, Abuses in popish service.
kneeling to images, kissing of the pax, knocking of beads: and whereas all
should be done to the praise of God, they sing psalms endited to the praise
and honor of Saints, whereas the Lord says in the scripture, Mine honor will
I not give to another, Isa. 42. 8. So the popish assemblies offend two ways,
that worship, which they in their Church celebrate, they do not ascribe only
to God: neither is it their principal intendement to come together to praise
God. But the ancient Church thought otherwise. Decr. par. 1. did. 42. c. 7.
Augustine thus says, as he is by themselves alleged, In oratorio praeter
orandi and psallendi cultum nihil agatur, etc. Let nothing be done in the
oratorie or place of prayer, beside praying and praising God. And a certain
Council calls Churches, Orationis, Synod. Mog^^. c. 40.
divini cultus and sacramentorum officinas, the shoppes of prayer, divine
worship and the sacraments.

Secondly, let it be remembered, how much the people of England are bound unto
God, The 13. benefit, public and private intercourse of religion.
that this holy intercourse of religion is not interrupted, but that they may
both publicly in their Churches, and privately in their houses sing psalms to
the praise of God. O how happy are we, and blessed be the name of God, that
has wrought us this happiness, that the voice of joy and deliverance is still
heard in the habitation of the righteous! Psalm. 118. 15. Many may yet remember,
how uncomfortable those times were, when popery was for a while revived in
this land: their Church service was dumb, their coming thither fruitless,
their staying there idle, their return from thence, as they first came: beside
gazing with the eyes, tickling with the ears, warbling of the fingers,
smacking with their lips upon the pax; sweeping the ground with their
creeping, scraping with their feet, stretching out their necks at the
elevation time: there was nothing else beside these outward, vain, and
superstitious gestures, that was done or said to the edifying of the
understanding, and sanctifying of the affections: as we have cause to praise
God, for the first happy change under Queen ELIZABETH: so also for the
continuance under our kings Majesty, of our comfortable and Christian Church
assemblies, where the minister prays, and the people pray with him, he
preaches and they understand him, they sing unto themselves also in hymns and
spiritual songs: blessed be the name of God, which has performed that
joyful prophecy of Jeremy: Thus says the Lord, again there shall be heard
in this place, etc. the voice of them, which shall say, praise the Lord of
hosts, because the Lord is good, because his mercy endures for ever, and of
the^ that offer the sacrifice of praise in the house of the Lord, Ierem. 33.
10. Have we not just cause to say with the Prophet David, for the sweet
comforts that we find, by the preaching, praying, and praising of God in our
Churches: O Lord of Hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles? psalm. 84. 1. When
sometime by the sweet Saints of the Church, Lib. confess. 10. c. 33.
as Augustine says, animi nostri in flammam pietatis mouentur, Our minds are
inflamed with godly piety and zeal: Sometime tears fall from our eyes, as he
again says, Cum reminiscor lachrymas meas, quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae,
etc. When I remember my tears, which I shed in the Church songs: sometime
the mind is instructed and edified, as the same father also says: Gratias deo
meo, (...).
pulsatori aurium mearum, illustratori cordis mei: Praise be to God that
beats upon mine years, and bends my heart.

Thirdly, seeing Churches are appointed for prayer, No man must come empty
into Gods house.
and the praise of God, no man should come thither, as in the law empty
handed, so now under the Gospel empty hearted; as the Prophet says, bring an
offering, and enter into his courts, Psalm. 96. 8. If thy offering be not
ready, press not into Gods presence: and what kind of offering it must be,
the Prophet also shows, Come before him with praise. Psalm. 100. 2. Wherefore
their coming unto the Church is in vain, that prepare not themselves to offer
unto God some spiritual gift: as the Apostle says, What is to be done then
brethren, when ye come together, as every one of you has a psalm, or
doctrine, or a tongue, or revelation, or interpretation, let all things be done
to edifying, 1. Cor. 14. 26. Some must come with doctrine to teach others, some
with revelation, that God may reveal his will unto the^, others with a psalm
to praise God: let no man be dumb or silent, or be as a cipher in the Church,
but all things must be done to edifying: he that prays, or praises God, let
him not do it, as many, only with lip-labor, but from the heart: This is the
praise which waits for God in Sion. Psalm. 65. 1. Upon which words Augustine
thus well infers, Augustine. in Psalm. 65.
Non enim carne canto, sed cord, carnem enim sonantem audiunt ciues Babylon,
c^rdis autem sonum audit conditor Jerusalem: I sing not with my flesh, but with
my heart: the sounding flesh delights the citizens of Babylon (for they said
sing us one of the songs of Sion, Psalm. 137. 3.) but the sounding spirit, the
sounder of Jerusalem.

The 14. meditation.
V. 5. There are thrones set for judgment.] That whereas all things before
were confused, there was no order, no justice, no redress of errors, no
correction of offenders, now David had constituted an exact polity and
government, he appointed thrones of justice, where every man's complaint might
be heard. We see then what an excellent benefit it is, when the Lord gives
unto a nation, a fetled and established government.

1. As the Lord promises by his prophet, that if they did sanctify the
Sabbath, etc. then shall the Kings and the Princes enter in at the gates of
this city, and shall sit upon the throne of David, Ier. 17. 25. The
contrary, the taking away of order and government is threatened as a curse: The
nobles shall call to the king, and there shall be none, all the princes thereof
shall be as nothing. Isa. 34. 12.

2. Thus God gave unto his people, Moses his faithful servant, that sat to
judge the people from morning to night, and by the advice of Hobab his father
in law, he appointed other inferior gouernonrs, both to ease him of some
burden, and for better expedition for the people, Exodus 18. And at Ephesus,
what would have been the issue of that tumultuous vproare, if it had not been
appeased by the authority and wisdom of the towneclarke? who among other wise
speeches said unto them, If Demetrius have a matter against any man, the law is
open, and there are deputies, let them accuse one another, Act. 19. 38. And
what misery is like to befall a commonwealth without government, it is evident
by the history of the Judges, where this is yielded as a reason, of the
oppression of the children of Dan, Iud. 18. 1. and of the horrible adultery
committed by the men of Gibeah, with the Levites wife, Iud. 19. 1. In those
days, there was no king in Israel.

3. For men without a governor, are as the fishes of the sea, that devour one
another, Hab. 1. 14. But the protection of Magistrates and governors, is like
the shadow of a great tree, where the beasts do find shelter, and the birds
build their nests, Dan. 4. 18. And as we see the wall is a proppe to the small
boughs, or Ivy that runs upon it, Genesis 49. 22. so was Joseph to his
brethren, and every good Magistrate to his people.

4. Therefore Judges in Scripture are called Gods, Exodus 21. 6. as Moses was to
Aaron, as a God, Exodus 4. 16. to give him direction. And for this cause the
Lord endueth Magistrates, with necessary graces of discerning, and directing,
of boldness and courage, of protection and deliverance, that they might be
guides and governors of his people, and distribute unto every man his right:
as the Lord said to Joshua, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, be strong
and of a good courage, for unto this people shall thou divide the land for an
inheritance. Ios. 1. 5, 6.

5. This doctrine then gives us occasion herein also to remember the loving
kindness of God toward us, The 14. benefit, ^^^^tion of justice.
that, as the thrones have been set for judgment all the happy and peaceable
reign of Q. Elizabeth: so they do and are like to continue still. Many feared
great confusion to fall upon the land, and some wickedly imagined, and as
treacherously desired, that this famous country might have bin a pray for the
Spanyard: then indeed the thrones of judgment should have been cast down,
and no other justice should have been expected but by the sword: such justice
as Lysander showed, when the Argives, who seemed to have better right,
contended with the Lacedaemonians about their bounds: (...).
he drew his sword and said, He that uses this can best determine of the
bounds and titles of lands. Much that like was the Duke of Medina his speech,
the king of Spaines factor and chief captain for the pretended invasion of
England, ann. 88. that his sword knew not to make any difference between
Papist and Protestant, Repli^. fol. 52. page 1.
if he had prevailed. The same reports also the secular mass priests affirm,
Manifestat. fol. 52. page 1.
that Parsons should thus write concerning the king of Spain, that after the
loss of his Armado, he ran to an altar, and taking a silver candle stick,
swore a monstrous oath, Manifestat. fol. 98. page 1.
that he would wast not only all Spain, but also all his Indies to that
candlestick, but he would be avenged on England. But thanks be to God, these
cruel lords, that would have reigned over us, Deliverance from foreign
dangers.
have lost their hope, and as the Psalmist says, They have slept their sleep,
and all the men of strength have not found their hands: at thy rebuke, O Lord,
both the chariot and the horse are cast asleep. Psalm. 76. 5, 6. Many of those,
which gaped for our destruction are asleep, as Pharao with his host in the
bottom of the sea, so that we may say again with the prophet, Thou have saved
us from our adversaries, and put them to confusion that hate us, Psalm. 44. 7.
Blessed be God, that has not suffered such cruel lords to reign over us, but
has raised up the thrones of justice from among our selves. Long may these
thrones set for judgment continue and be established in peace; which we trust
to see: that as it is in the psalm, we may sing: Mercy and truth shall
meet, justice and peace shall kiss each other, Psalm. 85. 10. Truth and
virtue in religion brings forth mercy and equity in the princely
administration: and the upright sitting in these thrones of justice, is the way
to establish peace, as Augustine well says upon these words of the psalm:
Vultis pacem, in Psalm. 85.
ama and iusticiam, quia duae amicae sunt iustitia and pax, ipsae se
osculantur, si amicam pacis non amaueris, non te amabit pax, nec veniet ad te,
etc. If you will have peace, love justice, because justice and peace are two
friends, they one kiss another: if you love not the friend of peace, peace
will not love thee, nor come at thee. God grant, that both in the
Ecclesiastical and Civil state of this kingdom, justice and peace may so
embrace the other, with verity and truth, that, if it be Gods blessed will,
they may never be parted, nor pulled asunder.

The 15. meditation.
Even the thrones of the house of David.] That is, God had given unto his
people a governor from among themselves: as the Israelites say to David, We
are thy bones and thy flesh, 2. Sam. 4. 1. as also an upright wise and just
prince, that did feed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and
guided them by the discretion of his hands, Psalm. 78. 72. It is then an
unspeakable benefit, when the Lord sets up the thrones of David, that is,
gives unto a people just governors, and the same not strangers but of their
own bone and flesh.

1. For the first, the wise man says: When the righteous are in authority,
the people rejoice, Prou. 28. 2. Great joy there is, when God raises up to his
Church virtuous rulers and governors: as the contrary is a great judgment:
When the wicked bears rule the people sigh, Prou. 28. 2. For the other: the
Lord by Moses gave them this law, From among thy brethren, thou shall make a
king over thee, thou shall not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.

2. Such an one was Solomon, who both was the son of David, borne from among
his brethren the Israelites, as he himself says, Thou have kept for David
this great mercy, and have given him a son to sit upon his throne, as
appears this day: as also he prayed* unto God to give him an understanding
heart, that he might judge the people righteously, 1. king. 3. 5. 9. Such an
one was Zorobabel, of whom the prophet Jeremy thus testifies, Their noble
ruler shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the
midst of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and approach unto me. Ier.
30. 21. The same Zorobabel when as strangers, the adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin offered their service to build the temple, he refused their help,
saying, It is not for you, but for us to build an house unto our God, Ezra 4.
3. This was a double blessing, that both God gave them a ruler of their own
kindred, and such an one, as was zealous to build the Lords house.

3. Such governors the prophet compares to nails whereupon hang the vessels
and other instruments, Isa. 22. 23. and they are as pillars, that bear up the
kingdom, Psalm. 75. 3. and as the staff whereupon a man leans, Ier. 48. 17.
So is a merciful and righteous prince, upon whom the glory and safety of
the kingdom depends.

4. And great cause the people have to joy in a good Prince, because the whole
realm receives a blessing because of him, as the wise man says, By a man of
understanding and wisdom a land endures long, Prou. 28. 2. And a Prince borne
of the kings seed and of the royal blood, must needs be more kind and
natural to his people, then a stranger. Such an one was Eliakim, as a father
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Isa. 22. 21.

5. First then, if the thrones of David must be set for judgment, and all
causes there tried, The Princes power in causes Ecclesiastical.
then it follows that David must not be excluded from the cognizance, and
judgment of causes Ecclesiastical: and so was it practiced in his reign. For
David distributed unto the Levites their offices, and appointed the courses of
the priests the sons of Aaron, 1. Chron. 23. 24. The chief government both
in Ecclesiastical and Civil cause belonged unto David's throne. From whence it
is necessarily inferred, that every king ought to be chief in all causes
within his kingdom, and that what foreign potentate soever entermedleth, he
is to be held an usurper: so that by the word of God the Pope is no more to
meddle with the managing of Ecclesiastical causes within the realm, then the
king of Spain is to deal with temporal. The prince then is both to prescribe
laws according to the word of God, even in matters Ecclesiastical, and to see
them executed, though not in his own person, and to punish transgressions: for
as the Apostle says, He bears not the sword for naught, for he is the
minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Romans 13. 4. It
belongs then to the Prince to correct all sorts of offenders, whether Civil
or Ecclesiastical persons, for the Apostles words are general: none that does
evil, is exempted from the Princes sword.

And that it is gods ordinance to stir up the hearts of princes to reform
religion and Ecclesiastical abuses, and not to leave it wholly to the
disposition of the clergy; it is evident by the experience of al ages:
wherein the greatest reformations have been wrought by kings, not by priests.
As in Judah, the godly kings, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josias, were the
greatest purgers, and reformers of the Church, and most zealous for Gods house:
so were Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, after the return from captivity, the one for
the building of the temple, the other for repairing the city most forward.
Whereas the Priests were often found unfaithful, and very backward in the
Lords work: such was Vriah the high Priest, in the days of Ahaz, that
consented to his idolatry, 2. King. 16. 16. When Ezra returned from Babel, the
priests were the hindmost, for whom he stayed three days, Ezra 8. 15. They
more forward then any, to marry strange wives, contrary to the law. The
negligence and slouthfulnes of priests in the return from captivity.
Ezra. 10. 18. One of the high priests sons was confederate with Samballat,
an enemy to Jerusalem, Nehem. 13. 29. And diverse there were beside of the
priests, that hindered reformation, against whom Nehemiah prays, Remember
them O lord, that defile the priesthood: The whole burden of redressing the
corruptions of the church, as concerning the keeping of the sabbath, the
putting away of strange wives, and such like, lay upon Nehemiah, cap. 13. 19.
23. Likewise in our Savior Christ time, none were greater adversaries to the
gospel, then the high priests, Annas and Caiphas, and Ananias to S. Paul, Act.
23. 1. And of late times, who more hindered reformation in the Church of
England, then the Pope and his papal brood? When had England received the
gospel, if God had not stirred up the heart of the Prince to embrace the
truth? Is it like that the pope and his papal Hierarchy would ever set their
minds to reform the Church abroad, when they suffer such abomination at home?
Paulus the third made some semblance and show of reformation, when he set
certain Cardinals aworke, as Contarenus, Sadoletus, Polus, with others, to
certify him of the abuses of the Church, which they did accordingly, but no
reredresse or amendment followed. But God would have this work to be
undertaken by his anointed to whom it belongs, receiving their direction
from the word of God: as thereto he stirred up the heart of king Henry the 8.
that began; king Edward followed, Queen Elizabeth happily proceeded, and
what is yet wanting either in Church or commonwealth, we trust that by the
hands of our dread Sovereign, that now is, it may* in good time be perfected
and accomplished; that as the Prophet says of Zorobabel, he shall bring forth
the head stone thereof, that is, finish Gods work, that the whole Church of
God with joyful acclamations and shoutings shall cry, Grace, grace unto it,
Zach. 4. 7.

Secondly, here is the great joy and comfort of the English nation, that there
wants not a man of the house of David, The 15. benefit, a prince no stranger,
or forrainer.
to sit upon the throne: that God has given us a king of our own kindred and
nation, of the family of David, of the noble race of the kings of this land*
not a stranger, or forrainer, borne of English blood and parentage, brought up
in the same Island, neither by sea nor mou^tains discrimined, eiusdem labii of
the same speech and language, and which is the chiefest of all, of the same
faith and religion. God grant unto his Majesty David's spirit, that he may be
after Gods own heart, and as the Scripture says of Iehosophat, that he may
walk in the first ways of his father David, 2. Chron. 17. 3. And we trust
that God has sent unto us a David indeed, to whom these princely qualities
of David do agree, Ambr. lib. 2. offic. cap. 7.
as Ambrose well describes: humilis spiritu, sedulus cord, facilis affatu,
etc. fortis in praelio, mansuetus in imperio, etc. merito ergo expetitus est ab
vniuerso populo, vt omnes ad eum venirent dicentes, ecce nos ossa tua, etc.
Humble in spirit, diligent in heart, affable in speech, valiant in battle,
merciful in government: therefore he was worthily desired of all that came
unto him saying, We are thy bones, etc.

The 16. meditation.
Ver. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.] Now begins the second part of
this Psalm, wherein the prophet exhorts the Church of God to pray for the
continuance of these so great benefits before rehearsed: Christians then are
taught in all their prayers to remember to remember the prosperous state of
Christ's church, that their eye should not only be set upon their own private
necessities, but to commend unto God that universal body, whereof they are
members.

1. Thus the Prophet says, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget to play: if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy: Psalm. 137. 5. 6. So
the prophet Isay encourages Gods people to give thanks for the Church of God:
Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her, rejoice for
joy with her, all ye that mourn for her, Isay, 66. 10.

2. Thus did the prophet David remember the whole state of Israel in his
prayers, Deliver Israel O God out all his troubles, Psalm. 25. 26. Thus the
faithful used to pray, O Lord I pray thee save now; I pray thee now give
prosperity, Psalm. 118. 25.

3. Like as then, when Moses by Gods commandment made the tabernacle, every
one brought according to his ability, some jewels of gold, some purple, some
fine linen, some rams skins and badgers skins, etc. Exodus 35. 23. 24. So
should every one help forward the peace and prosperity of the Church: princes
by their authority, ministers by encouraging and exhorting all men by their
hearty prayers and desires. If such be the love of the saints to the Church,
that they delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof,
Psalm. 102. 14. that is, forgot her not in her greatest affliction and
humility: how much greater cause is there to bear affection to her in her
beauty and prosperity?

4. For in praying for the peace of the Church, we do also pray for our
selves, to whom that benefit of peace redoundeth: as it is in the Psalm, All
nations shall bless him, and be blessed in him, Psalm. 72. 17. They which
blessed the Prince in their prayers, did also in so doing procure a blessing to
themselves. By the same reason the prophet moves the people to pray for the
prosperity of Babel: Seek the prosperity of the city, whether I have caused
you to be carried away captive, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace
thereof, shall you have peace. Ier. 29. 7.

5. First then their security is here reproved, that in their prayers, think
to appropriate Gods favor to themselves, only making mention of their own
wants, Against self-love in prayer. Self-love.
not regarding the necessities of the Church. Such was the Pharisees prayer,
that only boasted of his own gifts, and gave thanks for himself: he despised
the poor Publican, whom he saw not far off smiting and knocking upon his
breast: charity might have moved him, by his prayers to have helped, whom he
saw so to be perplexed, Luke 18. This vaineglorious service and self love of
this Pharisie, was nothing pleasing or acceptable unto God, no more is their
prayer, that only seek their own things, and are not touched with compassion
toward the afflicted members of Christ, neither rejoice in the welfare of Gods
Church, but are tickled only with the joy of their own prosperity.

Secondly, if they be worthy of reproof, that are negligent in procuring the
peace of their Church by their prayers, they are much more to be blamed, that
are too diligent to disturb the same by their uncharitable practices. What else
can be thought of those, who have stepped forth, and by their strange
novelties and paradoxes corrupted the doctrine of the Church? and whereas
Protestants were before of one judgment and consent in religion, they have
distracted many, New doctrine a disturbing of the Church.
and persuaded some to like and affect their singular conceits. This have they
adventured to do, not sowing their homely seed only in sermons, but
dispersing the same in their writings, to the great offense of the Church of
Christ. From this fountain have sprung forth these, and such other whirlepit
points, and bubbles of new doctrine, Strange and unsound positions maintained
by some in the Church of England.
that* Christ is not originally God: that the Scriptures are not the only
means, concerning God of all that profitably we know: that they are not alone
complete to everlasting felicity: that the word of God cannot possibly assure
us, that it is the word of God: that man's will is apt naturally without grace,
to take or refuse any particular object whatsoever presented unto it, and so
consequently to believe: that men's natural works, or to do^ that, which
nature tells us (without grace) must needs be acceptable to God: that there
are works of supererrogation, that a man can do now, and God approve more
then he commands: that to be preserved from all sin in this life, is not
impossible: that the Church of Rome (as it now stands) is the family of
Christ: that idolatours, wicked heretics are members of the visible Church:
that there is in orders given an indeleble character: that they have power to
make Christ body, etc. that sacraments do give and confer, grace, and are
instruments of justification: that they are as necessary in their place, and
no less required then belief it self: that the souls of infants dying
without baptism are damned: which must be the meaning of these words, the
Church as much as in her lies, by denying the means, does cast away their
souls. All which positions* with others, are both contrary to the Scriptures,
to the judgment of protestant writers, and the most of them opposite to the
articles of religion in the church of England established, and to the faith of
the Church of Scotland, and of the kings Majesty's preface to the answer of the
Apologicall epistle, as shall hereafter (if God will) elsewhere be more at large
declared: and has been already by some English protestants sufficiently
proved: Yet thus have some men been bold to teach and write, who, as some
schismatikes and headstrong sectaries have disturbed the peace of the Church
one way, in external matters which concerned the discipline of the Church,
they have troubled the Church another way, in opposing themselves by new
quirkes and devises to the soundnes of doctrine among Protestants always
professed. It is high time that our Elisha should cast salt into the springs to
heal the bitter waters: and that our princely shepherd drive us altogether to
green pastures, that none be suffered to straggle by themselves and seek
their meat apart from the rest of the flock: The 16. benefit, consent of
doctrine.
that as the Apostle says, we may proceed by one rule, that we may mind one
thing, Philip. 3. 17. Ambrose very well touches this point, Vinci illi facile
possunt, vel facile vitari, quorum prima propositione omne consilium pectoris
proditur: Ambrose prolog. de fid. orthodox.
at vero hi, quibus multa nobiscum paria sunt, facile possunt innoxias mentes
fraudulenta societate percutere, dum malorum suorum virus per bona nostra
defendunt, etc. They may easily be confuted, or avoided, which at the first
dash, bewray all their counsel: but they, which agree with us in many points,
may easily deceive simple minds by their subtle secrecy, while they bolster
out their poisonfull doctrine by some conformity, etc.

The 17. meditation.
They shall prosper that love thee.] They, which do but bear good will unto
Sion, shall prosper: their loving affection to Gods house, shall not be
forgotten.

1. So the Lord by Isaak says to Jacob; They shall be cursed, that curse thee,
and blessed are they, that bless thee, Genesis 27. 29. Likewise the Prophet David
says, The Lord is with them, that uphold my soul, Psalm. 54. 4. Our Savior
promises, that he which gives but a cup of cold water to any of his little
ones in the name of a disciple should not loose his reward, Math. 10. 42.

2. Thus Laban was prospered for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30. 27. because he succored
and entertained him in his house. The Lord blessed Obed-Edom and all his house
because of the arc, 2. Sam. 6. 11. he received it into his house, and had a
love and respect unto it, therefore the Lord showed him favor again. Thus god
delivered Ebedmelech the Moore, because he relieved and favored the prophet
Jeremy, cap. 39. 18. Ierem. And contrariwse they are accursed, that do hate
the church of God. What gained Ismael by mocking of Isaac? he was cast out of
his fathers house, Genesis 21. 9. 10. Or what did it profit Abimelech to slaie his
brethren, the sons of noble Ierubball? was he not himself slain, his brain
pan broken with a piece of a millstone, and after thrust thorough by his page?
Judge. 9. 52. 53. And Saul had good experience, what it is to persecute the
innocents, and to hate Gods servants: he put the priests to death, and caused
Doeg in one day to kill of them 85. persons, he chased David from place to
place: what was the issue hereof? he himself was overcome in battle, and
desperately died upon his own sword, 1. Sam. 31. 4.

3. Like as then the Prophet says, in thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.
9. as a man by beholding the light, is himself lightened; so they which love
the light of Gods truth shining in his Church, shall themselves find light and
comfort by it. The Lord is said to turn the bed of the merciful man in his
sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. that as the turning and beating of the ficke man's
couch does yield more ease and pleasant rest to the sick and weary bones: so
the Lord does minister spiritual comfort and refreshing to the soul of that
man, that has been a comfort unto others. In this respect it is said in the
Canticles, Thy name is as an ointment poured out, therefore the virgins love
thee, Cant. 1. 2. that like as they which are near unto a precious ointment
powered out, though they were not anointed with it, yet they are filled with
the favor of it. So they which love Christ's Church, where this ointment is
powered out, shall have the pleasant savor and smell thereof in their welfare
and prosperity: they shall prosper that love thee.

4. For the love that is showed to any of Christ's members Christ accepts, as
bestowed upon himself: In as much as he did it to one of the least of these,
ye did it unto me, Math. 25. 45. And therefore Christ will recompense the love
of such, they shall prosper themselves and be blessed in it.

5. First according to this rule, They shall prosper that love thee, The
unhappy end of the haters of Christ's Church.
it were good for us to measure the current of many accidents in the world:
there shall we see the miserable end and unprosperous success of such, as
were enemies to Gods Church, and the happy estate and blessed progress of
such, as were friends and lovers of it. What has been the end of those
treacherous practisers against the Lords anointed our late Sovereign, and of
those haters of religion? I mean Babington, Ballard, Arden, Sommeruile,
Sherwin, Parrie, Lopez, Squire, with the rest: they brought themselves to a
shameful, but well deserved death, and have left behind them a perpetual note
of infamy, howsoever the Pope has canonized the^ for martyrs of his Church.
Fit saints for such a chapel, and worthy inhabitants of the Popes heaven.
But God shall prosper the faithful endeauours of his servants: the tears,
which they shed in their prayers for Gods Church, shall be put into the Lords
bottles, Psalm. 56. 8. They shall eat the bread in the sweat of their brows:
they shall be partakers of the comfort and prosperity of CHRIST'S Church, for
the which they have travailed. And now I trust is the time, that it shall be
said to all that love the Gospel; They shall prosper that love thee. The 17.
benefit, prosperity.
The Gospel has by Gods goodness prospered and flourished above these 40.
years, and now, by Gods goodness, is like to prosper still: God shall bless
both Prince and people, as he has done already in great measure: God has
brought a prosperous king to a prosperous nation. His Majesty the Lord has
abundantly honored: in one day advancing him to the princely regiment of an
honorable nation, to the love and hearty desire of his subjects, to a
country professing religion, to the treasures of a rich prince. God has given
him Salomons portion: honor, wealth, wisdom: God we trust, shall give his
Majesty grace and strength with all his power to honor him again: that we may
say with the prophet, Because the king trusted in the Lord, and in the mercy
of the most high, he shall not slide: thine hand shall find out all thine
enemies, and thy right hand them that hate thee, Psalm. 21. 7, 8. But they that
love him, shall be as the Sun that rises in his might. Iud. 5. 31.

Secondly, seeing they prosper, that love and bear affection to Jerusalem; let
men learn to show good will unto Christ's Church, though as yet they be no
ripe scholars themselves in Christ's school: though they be not grown to
perfection, let them express a good affection. A good will and inclination,
where strength yet fails, is accepted, and a ready disposition is not
rejected: though thou be not yet of the Saints, yet love the Saints. If thou
likest and love that, thou would be, thou may be that hereafter, which
yet thou art not. The little bird before she flies, flittereth with her
wings in the nest: the child creeps before he goes: So religion begins
with affection, and devotion proceeds from desire. A man must first love,
that he would be, before he ca^ be that which he loves. It is a good sign,
The desire and love of virtue a good step to obtain it.
when a man affects that, which he expects: and does favor that, which he
would more fully savor. He that loves Sion, shall prosper: he that loves
virtue, shall increase and prosper in it. The day of small things shall not be
despised, Zachar. 4. 10. neither shall the smoking flax be quenched, Math. 12.
20. but the smoke shall bring forth fire, and fire shall break forth into a
flame. The good desire of the heart shall be recompensed with the increase of
the thing desired: and as it is said of the mariners, God brings them to the
haven, where they would be, Psalm. 107. 30. so the Lord conducteth them to the
haven of spiritual comfort, that long after it. And so as Augustine well
says, Habet proximus aliquam gratiam, Homil. 15.
ama illum and tua est, tu habes aliam, amet te, and sua est. Thy neighbor
has a certain grace love him, and it is thine, thou have an other grace let
him love thee, and it is his also. Thus shall we find that saying of Wisdom
in the Proverbs to be most true: I love them that love me, and they that seek
me early shall find me, Prou. 8. 17. Like as he that earnestly seeks that
which he misseth, shall find it, so whosoever desires the grace of God, shall
not be deceived. And like as amongst men, he that is friendly shall find
friends, Prou. 18. 24. which agrees to that usual saying, Vt ameris, amabilis
esto, show thy self lovely, if thou will be loved again: So is it between us
and God, he loves those that love him, and yet it is most true, that he first
loved us, that we should love him again.

The 18. meditation.
Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnes within thy palaces.] Some do
read, peace be in thy strength, (...); so Hierome and the Septuagint. The word
cheel, signifies both an army, or a wall or fortress: and properly it
signifies the rampart and defense before the wall, which is antemurale, as
Arias translateth, or as Tremellius, praemunitio: and so is it taken Lament. 2.
8. he made the rampart and the wall to lament. In the other part of this verse,
some read, prosperity, or tranquillity: the Septuagint interpret, (...),
abundance, which the original Shalvah, will well bear, and so it is used.
Ezech. 16. 49. the abundance of peace. The faithful then are here taught to
pray that war and trouble may cease, that there need no watching or warding
upon the walls: but that the citizens within the walls, and every man in his
house may be quiet and at peace. It appears then, that this also is not the
least blessing, when God sends peace unto a nation, and intermission of war.

1. As the Lord promises by his prophet: My people shall dwell in tabernacles
of peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe resting places, Isay, 32. 18. They
shall break their swords into mattocks, and their spears into sythes, nation
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any
more, Isay. 2. 4.

2. Thus God blessed the reign of David: Ceasing of wa^^.
The Lord gave him rest, round about from all his enemies, 2. Sam. 7. 1. He
also prophecieth of his son Solomon: that abundance of peace should be as
long as the moon endures, Psalm. 72. 7. who had his name Solomon therefore
given him from the Lord, because he should have rest from all his enemies round
about, 1. Chro. 22. 9. And contrariwise, as God blesses righteous kings with
peace, so he judges wicked governors and people with wars and troubles: as
the Prophet threatens Israel. Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, and they
both shall be against Judah, Isay, 9. 20. Thus was it in the days of Asa in
the world, There was no peace to him, that did go out and in, but great
troubles were to all the inhabitants of the earth; for nation was destroyed of
nation, and city of city, for God troubled them with all adversity. 2.
Chro. 15. 5, 6.

3. The prophet, speaking of the troubles that should befall the people for
their sins, says, They should be as meat to the fire, Isay. 9. 19. War is
as the fire, and it feeds upon and destroys the people, as the fire
consumes straw or wood: or like as an hungry man snatcheth at the right
hand, and at the left, and is not satisfied, Isay, 9. 20. such is the
insatiable and hungry desire of war, there is no measure of satietie of
blood. But like unto a raging storm, that falls upon the wood and forest,
Isay, 32. 19. which comes with great violence and terrible voice, such is the
tumult and violence of battle.

4. Peace therefore and ceasing from war is the fruit and effect of truth
and justice: Justice and truth the causes of p^ace.
as the prophet says for the first* I will reveal unto them the abundance of
peace and truth, Ier. 33. 6. and another prophet also testifies for the
second: the work of justice shall be peace, Isa. 32. 17. Therefore under the
kingdom of Christ, peace and safety is promised; because his kingdom, is a
kingdom of righteousness: I will raise unto David a righteous branch, etc. in
his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, Ierem. 23. 6.
which though it be specially referred to the spiritual peace, yet we do see
also that outward tranquillity does wait upon the Gospel as an handmaid.

5. First then we are taught to acknowledge another singular favor of God
toward us: The 18 benefit, external peace.
that has heard the prayers of his servants, and granted peace unto his
Church. Domestical peace and quietness this land (thanks be to God) has
enjoyed more then these 40. years under the conduct of our worthy Deborah our
late Sovereign Q. Elizabeth. But much foreign business has happened in this
time in Ireland, the low countries, and in other places: much piracie has
been committed upon the sea, diverse assaults and invasions have been intended
against this realm, and one furiously attempted by the Spaniards, ann. 88. But
now we trust that the English nation may have peace abroad, and there is great
hope, that our peaceable Solomon and princely Ecclesiastes, will bring unto
this land a general peace and quietness both at home and abroad: that men may
travail safely at home, merchants traffic without danger abroad, that
artificers may still sing in their shops, husbandmen chearefully follow the
plow, students apply their books: all which things by war are interrupted.
For as Hierome says, Si iuxta inclyt^m oratorem silent inter arma leges, multo
magis studia scripturarum* quae librorum multitudine, silentio and otio
indig^nt, etc. If* as the famous Orator says, laws are silent amidst wars,
how much more the study of scriptures, which require multitude of books,
silence and rest? Further, we see the contrary disposition of the righteous
seed, and the wicked race* for they are not so much given unto peace, as these
are to be contentio^s: as the prophet David says, I seek peace, and when I
speak unto them thereof, they bend themselves to war, Psalm. ^ 20. 7. Like
as it is said of Ismael, that his hand was against every man, and every man's
hand against him, Genesis 16. 12. Such are nations with their governors, that
have not the knowledge and true worship of God. It is easy to ges^e, who are
the Ismaelites of this age, that are ready to offend all their neighbors both
by sea and land, thirsting after the monarchy of many nations, and stretching
out their line beyond their measure. These are the fruits of the Popish
separation, and such is the spirit of that body, breathing out continually
contention and war. It is no rare thing for one country, city, or state,
professing popery to provoke another: witness hereof the great contentions
between the Guelphs in Italy taking part with the Popes, and the Gibelines of
the Emperors part: ann. 132^.
the strifes and wars moved among the Popes themselves, that diverse times
warred one upon another for the triple crown; ann. 1168.
as Alexander the 3. against the Antipopes Octavian, Lanquet.
Guido, Ioannes: the Vrbanists against the Clementines: ann. 1383.
and twenty times beside was that Sea divided. Such were the wars between the
states of Italy; as the Romans and Tuscanes, ann. 1166. between Millane,
Florence, and Mantua, an. 1398. between the Venetians and the city of Pavie,
Lanquet.
and Verone, ann. 1405. Thus France and Spain have been at varia^ce, England
and Scotland, Contentions vs^all between nations professing popery.
til the religion and faith of the Gospel united them. Which unity we trust
now shall for ever hold, being knit together with three most sure bonds
natural, civil, and religious: the first, in that the same continent contains
them; the second, one kingdom and government rules them: the third* one
religion and worship of god instructs them: and therefore, as the preacher
says, a threefold cord cannot easily be broken, Eccles. 4. 11. Long may this
cord hold, and long may his princely Majesty continue among us, that has
twisted this cord: and God grant that both prince and people may walk in his
fear, that as our Christian king is pious and faithful toward God, so we may
be obedient to God and our king. And let us not only pray for peace but
practice it, not wish it only, but work it: that we may desire so to please
God, that he may delight to dwell among us: That according to the angels song,
Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, etc. Luke 2. 14. We may in all
things set forth the glory of God that we may enjoy peace: that God having his
due, we may receive our desire: glory being not given unto God, peace is
denied to men: where God by our sins is provoked, there peace in earth is
like to be interrupted. And therefore he says well, Quanam est causa tanti
furoris* non alia sane, nisi quia displicet mortalibus angelica illa partitio,
etc. What is the cause of so great rage? none other but this, because that
partition of the angel disliketh men whereby glory is given unto God, peace
unto men: Quonam modo stabit pax hominum coram deo, Bernard. epist. 1^7.
si deo apud homines non potest tu^a esse sua gloria? How shall man's peace be
ratified before God, when Gods glory is violated with men?

The 19. meditation.
Verse. 8. For my brethren and neighbors sake I will wish thee now
prosperity.] First the prophet shows, that the love of his country, and
affection to his brethren moved him to wish well unto them, and to desire the
peace thereof: So then religion takes not away natural affection to country,
friends, and parents, but it rather maintains and vpholdeth it.

1. The Apostle reprooueth the Gentiles, because they were (...), Men void of
natural affection, Romans 1. 31. And the Prophet says, Hide not thy self from
thine own flesh: Isay, 58. 6. He which withdraws his affection from his
neighbors and countrymen, is as though he had no pity or compassion upon his
own flesh.

2. Thus nature wrought in faithful Abraham, Religion takes ^ot away natural
affection.
when he armed himself and all his family, and rescued and recovered Lot his
brothers son, which was taken captive, Genesis 14. S. Paul's affection was very
ardent toward his country, when he wished himself to be separated from
Christ, for his brethre^s sake, which were his kinsmen according to the flesh.
But cursed is the memory of cruel and unnatural Abimelech, who destroyed his
own city of Sichem, and sowed it with salt to make it unfruitful and
desolate, and slew the people, whom before he said were his bone and his
flesh. Iud. 9. 2. 45.

3. Like as the dove returned to the Arc, from whence she came forth, Genesis 8.
as the ox and ass know their masters cribbe, where they are used to be fed,
Isa. 1. 3. and love that place before any other: as the rivers go unto the sea
from whence they came, Eccles. 1. 7. so should our love and affection be unto
that place, which has bredde us, and where we had our being. The lions do
couch in their dens, Love to our country natural.
where they are accustomed, and the birds will hardly forsake the place, where
they were hatched: and nature draws affection to our country, which first
gave us breath and life.

4. Nehemiah gives this reason of his affection to Jerusalem, because there
was the city and the house of the sepulchers of his fathers, Nehem. 2. 3.
Therefore a man can not be forgetful of his country, unless he will show
himself unnatural and unthankful to his parents and progenitors, which
there remained while they lived, and and there lie buried now they are dead.
This made Jacob charge his children, to bury him in the cave with his fathers:
There they buried Abraham and Sara his wife, there they buried Isaac and
Rebecca, and there I buried Lea, Genesis 49. 29. 31.

5. By this doctrine then we condemn unnatural and mostrous practices of all
traitorous papists, that have heretofore most cruelly practiced against their
prince and country: Such were Morton, to the Popes bellows to kindle the
rebellion in the North, Saunders in Ireland: such were Ballard, Babington,
Arden, Sommerfield, Parrie, Campion, Sherwin, York, Standley, Squire, with the
rest of that popish broad, who by their treacherous attempts against the life
of their Sovereign, intended nothing else but the havoc and spoil of their
country; and to make it a pray to the enemies teeth. Herein they professing
Christianity, were much inferior to the heathen, Heathen lovers of their
country
who preferred the safety of their country before their own lives, so far
were they from attempting any thing prejudicial to the state and welfare
thereof: So foreign stories make honorable mention of Codrus king of Athens,
Plutarch. Fa^all. ^8.
who warring upon the Thracians, which had promise of victory by an Oracle, so
that Codrus were killed, rushed into the midst of his enemies, and by his
death obtained the victory to the Athenians. The like did the Decij among the
Romans, the father in the wars against the Albanes, the son against the
French, vowed themselves to die for the safety of their country. Therefore it
may be a shame for such as would be counted Christians to seek the spoil of
their country, for the preservation whereof; they ought to spend their life
and blood. Judge then, what manner of religion this is, that nourishes such
disciples, and brings forth such fruits.

Beside there are others, which offend against this rule, who, though they
show not themselves as enemies to their country, as the former, in seeking
the hurt thereof, yet they fail in their duty toward their country, because
they procure not the good thereof: Such are they, which seek to enrich
themselves, though it be to the undoing of a whole country, as inclosers of
commons, engrossers of commodities to raise them to a higher price, Against
enclosures and monopolies.
purchassers of monopolies and privileged sales and advantages: all which do
tend to the private gain of a few, but the hinderance of many, and loss to
the commonwealth: Such the wise man speaks of: He that withdraws corn,
the people shall curse him, etc. Prou. 11. 26. which is true also of all other
commodities; that whosoever shall draw any common profit from the people, be
it in corn, merchandise, commons, or such like, Gods curse and the peoples
shall light upon him. And of this sort, I fear me, there are many in the
world, that respect more their own, then the commonwealth: nay look but into
the state of every town, how few shall you find, that are devoted to the good
of the township, but addicted wholly to themselves? you shall see many, that
are ready to eat up and devour their neighbors, by undermining and
ouertaking them by hard and uncharitable bargains: like to the rain that
sweepeth away their food, Prou. 28. 3. for such sweep away a poor man's crops
and corn, as if it should be lost by raging and unseasonable weather: like as
hasty raines do wash and carry away the tilth of the land; so such
cormorants ouerdripping their poor neighbors, will not suffer them to thrive
or grow by them. It is a great infamy to Christians, that these times will not
affoard such good commonweal men, as were many among the Pagans. It is
written of Pompeius the great, that while Rome suffered a great dearth, he
having provided great store of corn abroad, and shipped the same, while the
mariners were afraid to set forward because of the sudden tempest, he
himself was the first that entered, (...)
using these courageous words: It is necessary for us to sail, but not so
necessary to live: he preferred the releife of many before the saftie of one.

Lastly, how much are we bound to give thanks unto God, The ^9* benefit a
(...).
who has given us a prince to govern us, who may and does say with the
prophet here, for my brethren and neighbors sake, I will wish thee
prosperity. Whose Majesty, though in his regal authority our Sovereign
lord and King, yet in respect of his consanguinitie our brother, borne of
English parentage, and we his loving neighbors before, in country, language,
religion, and now his dutiful subjects. Now England shall be to his Highness as
Scotland, and Scotland as England. Such a prince, as unto whom I am persuaded
the Church and Commonwealth are as dear, as his life: who herein may be
compared to David, who was ready (as Ambrose rehearses) Seipsum pro populo
offerre morti, Lib. 2. de offic. c. 7.
cum ferienti angelo occurrebat, etc. merito ergo expetitus est ab vniuersis,
etc. To offer himself for the people, meeting the Angel in the way that stroke
the people, etc. therefore he was worthily desired of all. And as he again
says, Charitas nunquam cadit, ideo David nunqua^ recidit, quia charus fuit
omnibus, etc. Love never falls away, therefore David could not fall, who was
beloved of and dear unto all. So I trust our virtuous David shall never fall,
being beloved of his people, and much more dear unto God, who grant unto his
Majesty an happy, godly, and peaceable reign over us.

The 20. meditation.
v. 9. Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will procure thy wealth.]
This being the greatest motive that drew from David this great affection, is
reserved for the last place: his natural love unto Israel, as his country and
kindred was very great, but his desire unto it, as Gods Church, and because of
the Lords presence amongst the^, was much more: spiritual love then is to be
preferred before natural, but where there is a concurrence and connection of
both, the flame is increased. There can be then no greater bond then religion,
no greater love, then for Christ's cause.

1. Therefore the prophet David says else where: Joy for the welf^re of Christ's
Church.
He has exalted the borne of his people, which is a praise for all his Saints,
even for the children of Israel, a people near unto him, Psalm. 148. 14. The
righteous do rejoice and praise God, when the Lord exalts his Church, and
prospers it, and strengthens the horn thereof against their enemies. And
this is set down as a sure mark to know a faithful man by: He honors
them, that fear the Lord, Psa. 15. 4. According to this rule the Apostle
says, While we have time let us do good to all men, but specially to them
which are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. That like as God is the Savior
of all me^, specially of those which believe, 1. Tim. 4. 10. so we should make
the same difference preferring those in our love, which are most beloved of god.

2. Thus the prophet David professes his love to the people of God: Mine eyes
shall be to the faithful of the land, Psalm. 101. 6. yea he says, that all his
delight is in the Saints of the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. Such was his zeal to the
house of God, that he would choose rather to be a doore-keeper there, then to
dwell (or to reign as king) among the wicked. Psalm. 84. 10. Thus also the
people of God do testify their affection to the Church; they well prefer
Jerusalem before their chief joy. Psalm. 137. 6.

3. For he that loves God, must needs also love Gods house the place where he
dwells: he cannot but love Gods image, which most of all appears in the
faithful and righteous. For Christ's cause therefore his Church is beloved.
Whatsoever is done unto the members thereof, he does acknowledge it as done to
himself, Mat. ^5. 45. A man cannot be the bridegroomes friend, and hate the
bride, which is new Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 2.
the holy city and Church of god.

4. The love of Christ and his Church should be remembered more then wine, Cant.
1. 3. that is, to be preferred before all other pleasures of love. The
faithful say, I am sick of this love, Cant. 2. 5. This love has no measure,
it exceeds all bounds: this love is as strong as death, Cant. 8. 6. nay it is
stronger then death: for it remains after death; love never falls away:
much water cannot quench this love: affliction^ cannot overcome it: thy
servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof,
namely of Sion. Psalm. 102. 14. Even Gods Church when it is in the greatest
affliction is lovely: though she be black, because the funne of affliction
has looked upon her, yet is she comely: though for the one like the tents of
Kedar, which are mooueable and flitting, as the Church is tossed too and fro
with affliction; yet for the other, she is beautiful and precious as the
curtains of Solomon. Cant. 1. 4.

5. First then unto the natural love of our country, this must be added as a
more worthy affection, that our hearts be toward it, because it is the Church
of God: that every man should procure, as much as in him lies, not only the
temporal welfare thereof, as it is the commonwealth, but to wish the spiritual
health and growth, as it is Gods house. As he is an enemy to his country,
which hinders the external state and condition, so he is no friend to the
Church, that furthereth not the internal perfection. Ministers are to inform,
and Magistrates to reform the Church. The one negligent to instruct, the other
remiss to correct, are not well-wishers to Gods house. This then may be an
admonition to all slothful and idle pastors, that are slack in the Lords
business, Ministers who careless of Christ's church.
and as evil and unfaithful stewards give not meat in due season to their
Lords servants. Such are they, which want ability and cannot teach, or want
will and are idle and do it not, or are covetous and heap many Churches and
dignities, and are careless to teach: feeding themselves rather then the
people of God: how can these say, because of the house of God I will procure
thy wealth? nay they esteem not Gods house, neither duly regard the price of
souls: taking upon them some that, which they cannot at all discharge, some
more then they can compass, Who be the dumb, g^e^ s^eepie dog
some that whereunto they have no desire. The first are dumb^ dogs, that can
not bark, the second greedy dogs, that can never have enough, the third
sleepie dogs, that he and delight in sleeping, as the prophet compares the
watchmen and shepherds of Israel. The first then should be supplied, the
second moderated, the third awaked. All of them are convinced to bear small
love to the Church of Christ. Our Savior says to Peter, If thou love me,
feed my sheep: he therefore that carefully feeds not the flock of Christ,
is found to be cold in his love to Christ. The Pharisees refused no pains, but
compassed sea and land to make one Proselyte of their religion, Math. 23. 15.
in like manner the Pharisaicall brood of popish Iudasites and Seminaries in
these days, do travel by sea and land to seduce simple souls, and pervert
them to their superstition. Then what a shame is it, that the Ministers of the
Gospel should give themselves to a drousie sleep, as though the spirit of
slumber had overtaken them, and not to be as careful to defend Christ's sheep,
as they are to offend them, to reduce them unto God, whom they have seduced,
and to keep them in the way, whom the other seek to drive out of the way?

Further, what a great treasure had Israel of David, that was thus affected to
Gods house, for whose sake he thus heartily prays for peace, and promises to
procure it. I trust that God has raised up another David to his Israel of
England, whose princely heart nothing can more surely knit unto his kingdom,
then because Gods house is amongst us. He comes not to a nation of a diverse
religion in substance, though differing in some ceremonies: (with or without
the which religion neither stands nor falls.) Which diversity of religion
between Prince and people, has at other times and otherwhere, caused great
trouble sometime to the Prince, where the kingdom could not be received,
unless the religion professed were admitted, as of late in France; sometime to
the people, when a religion is by force imposed, which is of few desired, as
well appeared in the change of religion in England at Queen Mary's entrance.
Now both these occasions of trouble and tumult are removed: neither the king
required to change his profession, nor the people enforced to leave their
religion: but as we wish unto the one (which we doubt not of) princely
constancy and perseverance, so to the other Christian loyalty and obedience.
God has sent us a Prince, ^0. Benefit, care of the Church of Christ.
that loves Gods Church; that wishes no longer to live, then he may be a
protector of the faith; who counts it one of his fairest styles to be called
a loving nourish father to his Church, (...). 43. one that frequenteth the
exercises of religion, fostereth the faithful Ministers thereof, affects all
the true professors of it: who misliketh and condemns enmity in nobles,
prophanenes in Courtiers, papal pride in Church governors, negligence in
Pastors, looseness of life in Christians, coldness of religion in Protestants.
How much are we bound unto the Lord, that has raised up such a prince, under
whom religion is like to prosper, and Christ's Church to flourish: who will
hear the complaints of the poor, and not despise the groans of the heavy
hearted, nor defer the desire of the godly: according to the petition of the
Church under David, Let the king hear us, when we call: of whose princely love
and favor every honest and sincere heart may say, as one says: August. Hier^^.
in cuius charitatem facise me totum proijcio, fatigatum scandalis saculi, deu^
quippe illie esse sentio, in quem me s^curus proijcio, and in quo securus
requiesco. Upon whose love I do repose my self, being wearied with the
off^nces of the world, for God is there present, upon whom I wholly rely, and
in him securely rest. God give us grace, that as Samuel says, We may so fear
the Lord and serve him, and not disobey the word of the Lord, that both we and
the king that reigns over us, may follow the Lord our God: that is, he may
remain with us for ever, that God may conduct us in this life in all happiness
and prosperity, and we and our king may follow him to everlasting felicity.
Amen*

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. l. 9. for law, read love.

p. 5. l. 5. for people, read prophet.

p. 6. l. 29. for Retraveling, read Estraveling

p. 10. l. 4. read (...).

p. 10. l. 18. for found, read find.

p. 12. l. 4. next this, read neither.

p. 12. l. 16. for Atamoth, read Alamoth.

p. 16. l. 11. for whole, read while.

p. 20. l. 16. for Gaxe, read Gaye.

p. 29. l. 2. for that there, read there.

p. 31. l. 26. read (...).

p. 37. l. 27. for Revatane, read E^vatane.

p. 61. l. 2. for offering, read offense.

p. 64. l. 4. for imitated, read initiated.

p. 72. l. 18. for with the, read of the.

p. 78. l. 26. for reports, read reporters.

p. 88. l. 1. read, to remember, once.

p. 92. read, in the preface to the answer of the Apologicall epistle: these
words must be placed in the margin, as it was not in the copy, which by great
oversight were set in the book.

p. 109. for, to the, read the.


