CONSPIRACY AGAINST KINGS, HEAVENS SCORN.

A Sermon preached at Westminster-Abbey before the Judges, upon the fifth of
NOVEMBER. 1622.

BY TO: WILLAN, Doctor in Divinity.

Sitotus orbis aduersum me coniuraret, vt quippiam moliar aduersus regiam
Maiestatem, ego tamen Deum timerem, and ordinatum ab eo Regem offendere temere
non auderem.

BERN. Epist. 170. ad Ludouic. Franc. Regem. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND REVEREND FATHER IN God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Keeper of the great Seal.
MY LORD,
A Great part of this Sermon is spent upon a Quare: perhaps a Quare will be put
to the Sermon it self; that in Job, Quare misero data est lux? why does this
poor Labor behold the light? I can answer nothing, but the Reverend Judges,
before whom it was bound to appear upon trial, adjudged it to be pressed.
Appealing to the Chancery, so great union and harmony is between the Courts,
no reuersing of the Doom was to be had there. So Obedience, Gratitude, and
Modesty striving together, the last could not alone make her party good
against two. Obedience pleaded, that authority is dissolved, when sullen
silence possesses such as are commanded to speak, (or print, all is one.)
Gratitude advised me by an Embolisme, or intercalation, to insert my private
thankfulness among the public gratulations of all men, some for redress of
their wrongs, some for the dispatch of their interminable suites, some for
fair denial of their unjust petitions, accounting your Lordship another Cato,
of whom they durst not ask any thing irregular; the good rejoicing to see, as
the Athenians sent out their Salaminian ship, swift and sure, in dangerous
seasons: so this acedious and corrupt Age, incountred with your assiduous and
active integrity, the most curious interpreters of great actions, even those,
who wished not such honor to your profession, deeming it an Egyptian spoil,
(and a mystery disclosed, that a Governor might be chosen out of Rome)
confessing, where many were thought capable of high place, until they attained
it, Imperio proditus inferior; your Lordship by the assistance of His grace,
which will conduct you to the races end, has satisfied, if not exceeded,
expectation. Then Modesty, tho blushing at Unworthiness, yet hoping to shun the
censure of ouer-forwardnesse, never adventuring, but Candidior postquam
tondenti barba cadebat, consented to tender it unto your protection; Nil illum
amplexa verebor. Vouchsafe then from your first Chaplain, these first Fruits,
and capitur minimo thuris honor Deus. When God gave his people an harvest of
fruits, he reserved to himself a sheafe of thanks; such a sheafe for the
harvest of favor and maintenance is this, accompanied with prayers to that
high God, who gives salutem sublimium orationibus humilium, still to multiply
his graces upon you, and give you the true happiness of this and a better life.

Your Lordships humble and thankful servant, TO. WILLIAN.
Gresham Coll. December. 4.
PSALM. 2. 1 Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people meditate a vain thing?

2 The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers took counsel together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed.

3 Let us break their bonds a sunder, and cast their cords from us.

4 He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn; the Lord shall
have them in derision.


THis Text like Ianus looks backward and forward: Back, to revive the memory
of this Day; it was a day of conspiracy, and this is a Text of conspiracy:
Forward, to represent the face of the times present; tumultuarie times, and
this is a tumultuarie Text. Although, blessed be God, and the care of our
Sovereign, we enjoy Halcion days, yet it is not so in other Christian parts
of the world. They have found them (pardon the word) Dogge-dayes; it is
Tertullians Canicula persecutionis. Such is the fury and rage of one against
another, that the fume and smoke thereof prognosticates the fire * of
conslagration, ready to break (...) Naz. ^rat. 3. de (...).
forth to consume all. When the Apostles were forbidden to preach in the
saving Name of Jesus, they took their encouragement out of this Psalm.
Memorable Luther, when all the world was in opposition against him, found his
best comfort in this Psalm. Why should I (says he) be Heraclitus, when God is
Hilarious and Gelasius? or vex my self with discontent, (...). ep. ad (...)
when God vouchsafes to be merry, and laughes at their vain attempts. We our
selves may make a double use of this Psalm: To raise up our thankfulness for
our own happy deliverance past, and our peaceable estate present, while others
struggle against luctantes ventos tempestatesque sonoras, and withal be
affected to compassionate the contrition of Joseph.

And so I come to unfold the words; wishing I had Saint Ambrose his faculty,
In Psalmis Dauidis explicandis eius lyram and plectrum videtur mutuatus
Posseuin. Apparat.
* who in the exposition of David's Psalms, is said to have borrowed David's own
Harp; so properly he expressed his meaning.

The Text may be considered three ways: As a Prophecy, as an History, as an
Emblem. David represents a threefold person, his Saviors, his own, and ours.

David was no sooner designed King over Israel, but the bordering Nations, and
the ten Tribes made head and conspired. What he saw acted against his own
person, he foresaw in the eye of Prophecy should be accomplished upon his
Savior. For so S. Peter upon the forenamed place, applies these words of the
Psalm, to the Passion of our Lord Jesus. As an Emblem it fitteth this day,
wherein the (...), and utter subversion of this flourishing Kingdom was
intended.

The parts of the Text are two: First, David's hard plight and condition.
Secondly, David's sweet comfort and consolation. The first in two particulars:
1. A conspiracy: 2. the cause of it. In the conspiracy, observe the actors,
and the managing. The actors, all sorts of men; the basest, and the choicest
spirits, the Ruler and the vulgar; every one has a hand in it. The managing is
described in four Verbes, Raging, Meditating, Banding, Plotting: so it has
four fearful supporters, Malice, Industry, Power, Policy.

The cause none on David's part, for that is employed in the Prophets Quare: The
motive on his enemies part, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast the
yoke from us: I, there it is; The cause of sedition, is the dislike of
Government; they will not brook either State, or Church, no Law, no Religion.
The second part; David's consolation, and that twofold; within him, without
him. First, the testimony of his own conscience, that no ambition of his
own, made him aspire to a Crown, but God called him, and the Prophet anointed
him. Without, the protection of heaven; God looked upon him with an eye of
favor; upon his enemies with an eye of scorn, He that dwells in the
heavens shall laugh them to scorn. A double description of God; by a
Periphrasis of the place of his abode, He dwells in heaven: By a Prosopopeia,
attributing improperly, but significantly, a splen and laughter unto God. So
the Catastrophe and conclusion of all conspiracy, is the Sarcasmos, and bitter
scorn of God.

Neither is the ingemination of the word a needless tautologie, but an
amplifying Emphasis, repetens iterum iterumque monebat, doubling the admonition
to beware how men fall by rebelling against God his Anointed, into such a
degree of misery, as to be contemned of God.

I begin with the Text as a Prophecy. The old fiction of the Giants war is
here represented in a true action. The petie Potentates of the earth are in
arms against the graund Lord of heaven, who if he thunders, the greatest of
them tremble, and with Tiberius fly for defense, to the poor refuge of a
Laurel wreath. If he makes the earth to shake, What privilege have their
Palaces, above the meanest cottages? will the Angels come at their call, or the
Sun shine at their command? Nay, come lower, in the air beyond a Nimrods
tower they cannot build, which the birds will fly over. In earth is their
dominion; and that limited, circumscribed; their bounds dooled out by him whom
they oppose. The Persian Monarchy did not pass the narrow Hellespont. The
Grecian never had one foot in Africa, nor the Roman beyond Euphrates. Over men
they rule, neither those which are past, nor those which are to have being,
not over one whole man; the body they may destroy, the soul is out of their
reach; they cannot compel the will, nor alter the affection of the meanest.
What Forces then can you bring into the field? weigh your strength. Are you
able to resist his power, from whom your own is derived? no surely, this
rebellion is not directly intended against God, but his Anointed Jesus Christ;
it is a mistake, they cannot be severed. He that does not honor the Son,
does not honor the Father who sent him; it is against both, but especially
against King Jesus: a King indeed, even as a man, by most just title; the
Deity being united to the humanity, gave him right over all things; having
purchased the world by the effusion of his blood, he is absolute Lord over it;
his humiliation promerited this exaltation, and being the natural Son of
God, he obtained it as his patrimony.

Is he a King? what are the Ensigns of his authority? where is his crown?
not like David's which he raught from Hadarezers head: that was of pearl, his
of thorns, which mill puncturis, with a thousand stings pierced his royal
head. Yet S. John sees not only many crowns upon that head, but all crowns
cast at his feet. Is he a King? where is his throne? not like Solomon's of
Iuory; his was of wood, the Cross; Dominus regnauit a ligno. The malicious
Jews rased the last words out of the Text, Justin Mart. Triph. Tertull. aduer.
Mar.
yet by the Title they set up, they acknowledged his souereigntie, and their
own rebellion. Quem Israel crucifixit vt maleficum, Clement Alex.
coronauit vt regem, Whom they crucified as a malefactor, they styled a King.
Is he a King? where is his court? besides that in heaven, in the hearts of his
chosen, there he keeps residence. Is he a King? where lies his Exchequer, and
revenues? not like Augustus, who taxed all the world, and did no more then he
might. Tribute is Princes due, as marks of their power, sinews of their
maintenance, recompenses of their labors. But this King exinaniuit seipsum,
did empty himself to in rich his subjects, and out of the treasury of his
mercy paid all their scores: as Elias gave the widow oil enough to satisfy
her creditors, and to live beside; so this King bestowed upon us his sorrows
and obedience, to cancel the hand writing against us, together with the rich
talents of his grace, which well employed will make us live for ever. The
Tribute he requires, is praise and honor of his holy Name; the rent he calls
for, is faith in his merits; the homage he expects, is obedience to his Laws.
His Laws, what are they? Mandata eius non sunt grauia, His commandments are
not grievous; whatsoever he teaches is truth, what he inioynes is
righteousness, what he promises is happiness; and yet against this King, David
fore-sees this great tumult and opposition. No sooner did this King display his
banners, so Esaias calls it, Esaias 11. 12.
In signum populorum, for a sign to the people, to muster up the world to an
holy war, against the devil and sin, but presently they band to overthrow
his standard, and to tear his colors. Esaias his Signum populorum, becomes Luke
2.
Simeon his Signum contradictionis. It is a Metaphor from Archers, who set up a
mark to shoot at, and strive to stick their shafts in the very center of it:
Such a mark was King Jesus, upon whom both Jews and Gentiles did empty all
their quiuers. Herod the father began the leading shoot with a deadly arrow,
to entrap the life of Christ in his cradle: he caused fourteen thousand
infants to be put to death, but missed his aim. Herod the son shot at him an
arrow of scorn, and mocked him. The Priests and people shot at him an arrow of
accusation, Gens tua and Pontifices tuj accusant te; and Pilate the Roman Judge
shot the vp-shot of condemnation: but as elegantly Ambrose, Absoluit iudicio,
condemnauit mysterio, He absolved him in his judgment, and condemned him in a
mystery; What mystery? this of the Text, the heathen and the people, Jews
and Gentiles, the vulgar and ruler, Herod and Pilate, Annas and Caiaphas
conspired against King Jesus.

Here is the accomplishment of this Prophecy, once fulfilled in Christ our
Head, ever to be fulfilled in the Church, and his members. As long as it
continues upon earth it shall ever be haunted with one of these three Furies;
1. Persecution, 2. Variety of opinions. 3. The unanswerable conversation of
Christians to the rule prescribed. Sometime Tyrants seek to devour the
Church, and to root up the seeds of truth, not only those without her pale,
but in her bosom. Del Rio Adag. Sacru.
The Monk, who ambitious of Martyrdom told the Souldan, that he was come
into his Court, to die for preaching the truth, was answered, (I wish it had
not been true) he needed not have traveled so far for death; For he might
easily find it among his Princes at home: but force never got ground of truth:
all tempters of that kind were enforced to confess with the cruel Queen, Ego
prosum sola nocendo. Heresies indeed have done more mischief by deflouring
pure doctrine; some so foolish, as made Christianity ridiculous to wise men;
some so wretched, as made Christianity rejected by honest men. Oh Christian
Religion, the clear fountain of peace and union, how do thy distractions
turn thee into a puddle of quarrels and contentions! How are thy Wels become
Esek and Sitnah; thy Waters, Meribah, that were Siloe, flowing in a gentle
current! Thy sacred Scripture is made (...); Thy blessed Sacrament, (...) Thy
reverend Name, the mask of war, and veil of sedition; *thy dissensions
portend (...) Nazian. orat. 1. de pace.
thy dissolution. Had not thy Savior inclined the heart of one by his
intercession, as with a Lituus, or Augurall staff and Warder, to stint and
stay the ouer-nimble hands of begun fury, as the Angel did Abraham's, that
monster the sword, whose glistring face flashed forth lightnings of terror,
with blood-shotten eyes wildly staring, his steely hands offering rough
embracements, his wastefull feere wandering about thy pleasant borders,
threatening havoc and desolation, his Whale-like mouth wide open to swallow
thee up, had surfetted of thy flesh, and been drunken with thy blood. To such
a miserable state were thou brought, by renting of Christ's Sacramento vest is
vnitatem Ecclesiae consignauit. Cyprian. (...).
indivisible garment, which the soldiers forbear to tear in sunder. As the
Prophet of Judah, According to the number of thy Cities, are thy gods, O Judah:
so of Europe, so many Countries, so many several opinions.

But above all Rebels against our blessed king Jesus, those for number exceed,
who acknowledge him for their Sovereign, and deny him obedience, who embrace
his Faith, and by their sinful lives, tread the blood of his Covenant under
their feet. Non est vera fides quae verbo credit, and moribus contradicit.
Greg.
It is no true faith, when the life confutes the faith. If we be Subjects, why
do we live, as Outlawes? If his Disciples, why is our conversation contrary
to his Discipline, as though we were trained up under Epicurus, or Mahomet?

I have done with the Text as a Prophecy; only I must put the Quare to it:
And I find among the Expositors, a threefold Quare; 1. of Inquisition. 2. of
Admiration. 3. of Reprehension.

If the Quare be put in general terms, how comes it to pass that there are
such stirs, tumults and garboyles in the world, such and so great, as if God
did not sit at the helm? The question is hard, and pressed too far, may
prove curious. Augustine confesses that this Quare, after it had rackt and
tortured him to find out the cause of evil, turned him into a Manichean
heretic. Solomon tells us that the locks of the Spouse are curled, and his
hair black as a Raven. The secrets of Gods providence are curled and
intortled, we cannot unfold them; his hair black, his ways past finding
out. Though he be in himself (...), to us he is (...); he dwells in light, but
such light as no man can attain unto. The modest and short answer to this
Quare, is that of the School, In particular administrations, a provident
Thomas.
Ruler preuenteth, what in him lies, all inconveniences: but in the universal
government, it seemed best to Divine wisdom to suffer some evil, not for
want of power to hinder it, but out of his abundant goodness. If God did not
suffer some evil, we should want much good; The good of his justice and
mercy, which shine forth in his severe judgments, in his gracious indulgence.
Goodness had not bin so illustrated; her opposite makes it more amiable. And
as out of the salt brackish Sea sweet showers are exhaled: so from evil, the
Almighty his power drew the dewes of grace in our Lord JESUS. And this is as
much as I dare add to the Quare of Inquisition.

2. Quare? why should the good and virtuous be always opposed and exposed to
the fury and malice of cruel men? Indeed this is res mira, strange and
marvelous, but not res noua, any new matter. It was thus from the beginning.
No sooner was God worshipped and served, but hatred Inuidiam s^^tita est
religio. August.
and spite fell to the lotte and portion of Religion. The first man who pleased
God Liuor sacrificij seminarium fratricidij.
was slain; the acceptable sacrifice was the seminary of death. It can be no
otherwise, dissimilitude and distance of manners breed alienation of
affections. There is nothing does so condemn the lives of the wicked, as the
conversation of the godly, the fat kine make the lean seem more
il-fauoured; hence their rage and savage behavior: besides, it is the pleasure
of God thus to try and honor his Saints, and to produce their patience. What
pictures could Apelles draw? did he want a table to work upon? What building
could the Architect rear without stones, timber, and materials? This is enough
to stay the Quare of Admiration.

3. What is it you go about? It is to no purpose; you imagine a vain thing,
vain impossibly, vain unprofitably. No wrestling of man can euacuate the
Diuinum consilium dum deuitatur, impletur, humana sapientia dum reluctatur
comprehenditur Greg.
purpose of God. Whileman struggles, he is caught, and by resisting the will of
God, he does fulfill it. Second causes are susceptible of impediment, as the
burning of fire by the action of water: but there is no evasion to shun the
Decree of heaven. All wretched endeavors against Christ and his chosen, are
like Caligula his enterprises, who never took any thing in hand if there were
hope to effect it; it is vain impossibly.

And what profit can arise? he does a shrewd turn who gains by it. To count
evil for gain, is unjust, but humane: but mischief intended for mischiefs
sake, is Deuilish. The old way of trecheries began at quid proderit nobis? as
in the case of Joseph. But now adays a new sin is Nouum and inaestimabile,
in plurimis malum est, parum alicui est, si ipse sit faelix, nisi alter fuerit
infaelix. Saluianus de Prouid. 5.
hatched and rife with many; they cannot be pleased to live in quiet themselves,
unless they disturb the tranquillity of others. As vipers and the venomous
Cantharides and stinging spiders, are more detestable then bears or wolves,
because they sting folk to death without any benefit; So that is an odious
design which is vain improfitably.

And now I pass from the Sun to the shadow; from the Prophetical conspiracy
against CHRIST our King, to the Historical faction against King David.

The people rage. For people in any estate to grumble against Governors, is no
nouelty: never was any Governor so provident or happy, as to eschew the
furious clamor of some unbridled and impetuous spirits. A King that has a
great multitude to govern, might as safely Tutior esses pastor vrsorum and
Tigridum. Petrarch.
be a keeper of Bears and Tigers. The Lion will kiss his keeper, the Elephant
will be ruled and led about by a little dwarf; but man is an indomable
creature.

If you recount the Fate of kings, more Curtius.
have been endangered by the practices of their own people, then by outward
hostility. As it was said of Seianus; so of the people; They are as weyward,
when pleased, as when opposed.

Among those who conspired against Caesar, there were more whom he had obliged
by benefits, then exasperated by injuries. I, but this is the lot of some
oppressing Princes, whose government make the people sigh. Nay, the best that
ever were, have found enough to do, to keep the people in good order. Meek
Moses, to shun a shower of stones, is glad to take sanctuary, and fly to the
Tabernacle. Good David is not free from rebelling Sheba, reuiling Shimei; and,
as the text tells us, the people rage at him. No King like David; the Scripture
propoundes him as a pattern to Princes. When it honors the good, they are
sicut David: when it blames the degenerated, non sicut David.

The holy Ghost, describing the genealogy of our Savior, from how many Kings
he was descended, vouchsafes none of them the style and title of a King but
Matthew. 1.
David, and him twice in one verse. For a literal and a moral reason; partly,
because he was the first King, settling and establishing the kingdom of
Israel; but principally, for that he was endued with all princely qualities of
justice, wisdom, clemency, courage and devotion. Yet see here the unruly
people rage at him.

And not only the giddie people, but the Rulers. It was a good Emblem of
Farnesius.
the Cardinal, describing the bootelesse attempts of an unguided multitude, a
Beech tree with the top off, the Motto, Ruina reliqui; for as that tree withers
when it is lopped, so multitudes vanish without leaders, and become a burden
unto themselves, and a prey unto others. Therefore the Rulers come in. As the
Planets in these Epicicles or little orbs are carried irregularly against the
heavenly motion: so sometimes petty greatness is prone to stray from their
duty toward their Supreme, if either the rays of favor fall not so directly
upon themselves, or upon others more then they wish. For although Principi^ est
virtus maxima, nosse suos.
Princes can best judge of the fitness, worth, and fidelity of their own
instruments, and, like the Sun, shine more brightly upon a clear smooth
glass, then upon an uneven clod, neither apt to receive nor reflect the
beams: yet as in building, so in States, the turret ouer-looking the bordering
houses, is wished down, and the hand disliked that set it up. If David make
but a feast to Abner, Ioab will expostulate with him. Sometimes men of high
spirit and mean fortunes will distemper David's peace, sowing dissensions among
the Nobles: The contentions of prime men being their Curio nil habuit in censu,
praeter discordiam Principum. Plin.
only revenue. Perhaps they will take pet, if the secret affairs be not
imparted, when their open bosoms full of chinkes are no caskes to contain
them. Antigonus would not reveal, being asked of his own son, what time he
would remove his camp, but said, the sound of the trumpet should give them
notice. It is enough if David vouchsafe to disclose Ardnum nimis est meruisse
secretum Principis, vbi si quid cognoscitur prodi, vel ^b alio, formidatur.
Cassiod. variar. 8. cap. 10.
himself to his faithful Cushais, whatsoever be pretended. Disobedience in a
vulgar man, may admit vulgar apologies: but in a ruler, or man of quality, it
is a decompound sin; the example more spreading and contagious; their
eminency makes it more conspicuous. Observe how fitly the Prophet speaks; he
attributes rage to the vulgar, power and policy to the Rulers. They meditate,
band, and plot: A word of each verb.

They meditate: All sin is painful (...).
and laborious, the Poet was deceived, when he said, Facilis descensus Auerni,
the way thither is of hard access. The covetous make their passage through
stony rocks of hardness and penury. The ambitious clambers up steep hills,
and craggie mountains, to get a place as slipperie and tickle, as the chair
of Eli. The voluptuous tramples in dirt and mire, besprinkling himself with
shame and infamy. The Reuengefull breaks through hedges stuck with thorns,
making him all gore and blood. The Envious walks * Quot bona faelicium, tot
tormenta inuidorum. Seneca.
in dark and shadie places, that he may not see an others happiness. But
especially the sin of Mischief, is a vigilant, painful, indefatigable
sin. Judas will be awake when Peter is asleep: the Tare-sower in the field,
when the Husbandman is in his bed; it is their care, study, meditation.

Again, observe what a cowardly thing sin is. Eve had no sooner offended,
but she sought out a fellow and companion. Upon Caine his cruel designs, how
he trembled and quaked, there being none in the world to fear but his parents
and sisters; yet he thought in every bush an ambush laid for him. All sin is
timorous, but above all, the sin of Conspiracy. The ten Patriarchs durst not
set upon one Joseph, without a venite occidamus. (...). Plut. in vita. Agid.
They who are most strict obseruers of order and government, and fearful to
offend laws, are most valiant and courageous in a just cause. But Conspiracy
is a sin of such ougly shape, and horrid representation, as the party dares
never look upon himself single and alone, but runs as a dear to the herd;
then they troop and band. And because power not directed is but armed folly,
they take counsel together. Counsel, mark their secrecy: together, mark
their unity: Counsel to a design, is as the foundation to a building;
secrecy seals it safely up. Mines, if they be discovered, return upon the
enginer; and coals moulder to ashes, if the sun shine upon them. The
Conspirator learned this Lesson well, who being asked his knowledge, answered,
If I had known Ca^ius apud Senec.
it, you had never known it.

And if unity keep them not together all is marred I he division of Jordan
makes a passage to the Arc; the disbanding of a faction is the overthrow of
it. Cyrus coming to Euphrates, found the swelling river impassable, dividing
it into three hundred streams, it was fordable every where: but David's Rebels
stick close, and take counsel together. By this time you perceive David's hard
case, and indeed the case is very hard.

There be two Pillars of Government; Direction, in the Superior; Obedience, in
the Inferior: the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, God made both, says Solomon.
Pro. 20.
When these meet, the State is succesfull; divorced, nothing right. The
Grecians expressed this well in the Marriage Jupiter made between (...) and
(...), the child brought forth between them was (...). (...). Aeschilus.
When authority is married to obedience, the fruit of that match is
happiness: It was not now so with David, and yet the worst is behind, for I
must put the Quare once again. Wherefore is all this malice, this stir,
combining and plotting? it is for all, pro aris and focis, the safety of his
Person, the security of his State and Kingdom. They will break the bands
asunder, and cast the yoke from them. By bands, all Interpreters understand
good Laws. By Ve^us and 70 Inter.
the yoke, some allude unto Religion, that sweet and easy yoke of Christ; nor
is the Metaphor unfit. A yoke and collar do bow the neck, and Religion tames
the stubburne nature of man, and makes him yield due obedience; It is the
cyment of society, and strongest Pillar of Government.

I begin at the Bands: The Commonwealth is a Tabernacle or Tent; pitched up to
shelter men from wrong and injury, that they may live happily together: Laws
are the cords of it; break the Ier. 10. 20.
cords the Tent falls; My Tabernacle is fallen, my cords are broken. Laws
are Bands, for the wild, to cicure them and humble them, for the weak to
secure and keep them: as in Vines, they are vnder-propped and bound up, to
make them fruitful in vessels, they are hooped to contain liquor: so Laws
are bonds to hold the evil in awe, and the good in safety. They bind all
without exception, I speak not of Princes, Laws were Leges Principinemo
scripsit Plin.
not written for them; Laws do not, like death, equal the Scepter with the
spade: yet as it was said of the blessed Virgin, offering her legal sacrifice
for her Purification, Supra legem fecerat gratia, sub lege humilitas; so of
good Princes, their high Calling makes them above Law, their humility respects
it.

I speak before an Honorable Audience, before Him, cuius dignatur ab ore
Caesar in orb loqui, and those whom our David has made (...), the Guardians,
and Presidents of his Laws. Take care, I beseech you, of the Cords, for
danger of the Tabernacle; Your innocence will pardon my humble boldness
(audacem faciebat amor) do not your selves break David's bands. The Law is
good, says the Apostle, but take it together, if it be used lawfully, (...).
Suffer not the Proverb to be verified, Laws which are virgins Leges in
cala^^^ virgins, in for^ meretric^^.
in the penning, become strumpets in the pleading; and that they do, if either
they be too much prostituted by vendible tongues, or wrested and perverted by
any sinister interpretation. It was the Chilo apud Plut.
wise man's speech; That Common wealth is best, where the Laws are more heard
then the Orators. Let the Law be a Sanctuary to the oppressed, no shambles for
the innocent: A lantern to guide, no labyrinth to wander in: A haven for
harbor, no rock to dash upon. How will you answer it to your David, here;
to the Lord of David, hereafter; if you violate what he has charged you to
maintain?

For the people, Laws are to them a threefold bond, for their lives, their
estates, their conversation.

1. Their lives in the protection of David's Laws. Life is of all natural
things the most excellent. Look into Nature: We see in plants the root, where
life lies, is hidden in the ground to preserve it; in beasts, the Serpent
fenceth his head, in man, the very fabric and constitution of his body
expresses it. Man's heart, the fountain of life, is not only enclosed with a
thick skin or filme, but environed with a strong wall of ribs. And as
Anatomists Pliny.
do observe, the bones about the heart do bear the fashion and representation
of a sword to defend it. Life is such a blessing, as the happy man desires to
continue, and the miserable man is unwilling to forgo it. Imagine then you
hear David's people speaking unto you, as the Captain over fifty to Elias; Let
our lives be precious in your eyes; keep the bond of life, as God did the
tree of life with a flaming sword to guard it.

2. Their estates and liuelihoods. The power over it is in the King, Quicquid
habet locuples, quicquid custodit auarus, Iure quidem nostru^ est, populo,
con^edimus, vsum. Gunterus. Quod haec villa mea est, illa tua, ex iure
Imperatorum est. August. tract. 6. in Iohannem.
the property in his Subjects, the tuition in his Laws, the fruition their
own. Unless Mephibosheth enjoy his lands, and Naboth his ancient patrimony,
every one sits in peace under his own Vine and figtree, the bond for estates
is broken.

3. The bond of morality in conversation. Plena turbis, and turpitudinibus.
Saluianus.
What a field I have now, might I expatiate? It may be said of this Kingdom,
as of Carthage, It is as full of sin as of people. And as the father said of
Lazarus, Quot vlcera, tot ora Austin.
So many sores, so many mouths calling for pity and help. The idleness,
drunkenness, pride, and all manner of dissolute licenciousnesse, are so many
tongues crying out, that the bond of morality is broken.

Now the yoke is Religion, the soul and life of government, without which it
cannot prosper and flourish. It was a vain conceit of the Emperor, who
refusing Bassianu^.
the name of Pius, would be called Faelix, Happy, and not godly. There can be
no felicity but in appearance, where God is not truly served; Godliness has
the promises of this life, and that which is to come. A yoke by the grace and
mercy of God we have cast off, Iugum oneris, a burden neither we nor our
fathers were able to endure. They took our silver, and gave us no bread,
emptied our purses, and starued our souls. A yoke we have embraced, the
Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST purely and frequently taught; put we our feet into
the linkes, and our necks into the chain, bow we down our shoulders unto it
and bear it. Let us Eccl. 6. 23.
never be weary of the bands; at the last we shall find rest in it, and that
shall be turned into our joy.

Never could any King or Governor contain all their people under the yoke of
one and the same Religion. Not Adam in his little Kingdom, great in circuit,
small in number of persons; difference in so few increases the difficulty of
the work. Not Noah in his octonary family. Not Moses invested with
extraordinary power of working miracles, apt to gain credit and belief. The
Israelites in his time followed strange gods, Belphegor and Moloch. What has
not our good David's religious care indeauoured to keep this yoke from being
cast off? By his example; what private man does more frequently tread in the
Courts of the Lord, or visit his Temple? What Prince did ever so teach his
Courtiers to pray? By his writings? What reasonable man sees not the force of
his arguments? Sybilla prophesied of Antichrist (...) that papers should be his
destruction; the prophecy is fulfilled in his MAJESTY'S papers: and of him may
the adversaries of his Religion say, as Charles the fifth of Luther, Vnus homo
nobis scribendo perdiderat rem. As for the objection, that the edge of the Law
seems to be blunted, toward such as embrace not this yoke, it is light; for
many times a contrary wind drives a ship into a safer port then it sailed
unto. Relaxation may do that good, which rigor could not; truce begets Tempus
inane peto, requiem, spatiumque furori, Dum mea me victam doceat fortuna dolere.
peace, respite asswageth rage, and calmes the storms of unquiet minds.
Whenever time discouers favor to encourage the sons of Belial, whether he
be Guelph, or Gibiline, Papist or Puritan, he will find the wheel turned upon
those that seek to turn the wheel of our Church-prosperity. By his last
heavenly directions, which followed well, may place Religion where it is not,
and settle it where it is already entertained. He who is not moved by his
example, nor instructed by his works, nor won by his clemency, nor obseruant
and pliable to his direction, I do not say resists, but argues and makes
doubts, fearing where no fear is, is a plain rebel to CHRIST in heaven, to
David on earth. Intonante Dei praecepto, obediendum, non disputandum. Austin.
For when Gods precept thunders, and that is when the voice of his Deputy
speaks, we must submit and not dispute or else the yoke is cast off.

In the last gasp of allotted time I proceed to the last part of the text,
David's comfort twofold. Within he stands upon his innocence, that he was no
intruder, nor sought the kingdom by any evil arts; the right owner placed
him in it, he was Gods anointed. I pass the word handled already by him, cui
doctior orbis submissis defert fascibus imperium. Only this word held up
David's head in trouble, and may be a sure comfort, not only to David the
supreme, but to every subordinate whom God rayseth up, they must meet with
much difficulty and more envy. But as he never manageth a place happily, who
comes to it indirectly: so when God gives authority, he gives ability to
undergo the first, and a clear conscience will bear out the latter.

His outward comfort is from heaven. He that dwells in the heavens, That is
a cheering word, from thence all blessing descend, from thence delivery out of
all danger. There is the court of Audience for the Ambassadors, which are our
Mittimus preces and Lachrymas ad Deum Legatos. Cypr.
tears and prayers. Saint John sees twelve gates in heaven, al open, and all
day open, to entertain suitors repayring thither.

He that dwells in heaven is a word of terror also. As out of a watch tower
he beholds all secret and close practices, no doors shut, no curtain drawn,
no parapet or wall to shelter, no veil between, no vault to cover; All
things (says the Apostle) are naked and bare before him, the word is (...), a
word taken from Anatomy. As when the skin is flead and the flesh pared away,
all the inner parts are laid to sight, such are our actions to God. Man sins,
as if he had a Dan. 2. 12. Qui ita nos aspicit vt a nobis aspici nequit, eo
magis timendus, quo cuncta videns a nemine videtur. Greg. sup. Job ca. 23.
Giges ring to make him invisible: but when we are in darkness, God is in
light, and by extramission of his own rays makes opacitie visible. As if some
lay hidden to entrap us, but we see him not, our caution is raised, and our
fear doubled: so should our care and circumspection increase, who live in the
presence of All-seeing God.

He that dwells in the Heavens, Is a word of instruction. Earth is but a
turfe for man to trample on, heaven is our home: here we have but boothes,
there are the mansions, In my Fathers House are mansions. No mortal Vitruuius
can make an immortal habitation. The silly Spider may teach us, who upon the
least touch of her copweb; flits and remooues. The world is a copweb-world to
be swept down with the broom of fire; therefore let us so live, as that we
may live and dwell with him who dwells in the heavens. What does he there at
this time? He laughes. That is a hard word at the first view. Are the injuries
of his Saints, the cruelties of their enemies, the wicked enterprises against
his anointed, matter of laughter? Laughter is a diminution of (...). Sopater.
apud Stobaeum.
state, as he told Princes. Severe Cato thought it became not the gravity of
a Roman Consul, and is it attributed to the Majesty of heaven? There is a
threefold Theology or way to discourse of God. 1. Negative, honoring him in
silence, not daring, because not able to express him, as when he is said to
be invisible, incorporeall. These Negatiues do secretly grant a more excellent
knowledge, then can be attained, silence being the best eloquence. 2.
Affirmative, speaks of Diserti multi Austin. 1. confess. cap. 4.
God in few words, and those of perfection; as when he is styled good, wise,
just. The first, like a Statuarie, hewes and hacks out matter; the second, as a
painter, illustrates and sets it forth in colors. The 3. way is Symbolicall,
attributing al things to him which may make way to our understanding, as here
laughter. Not to insist in the point, how affections are said to be in God;
Nazianzen dispatches it in one word, they are in him by Antistrophe or a
conversion. Look how man is affected, (...). Nazian. in Iamb.
when he beholdes some Dwarf buckling to grapple with a Giant: so our shallow
capacity, not able to express him otherwise, describes him, as our selves
would be, in a merry disposition, deriding vain attempts.

Gods laughter importes these 4. particulars. It expresses how easy and facile
it is to the Almighty, even at pleasure with a smile, to overthrow wicked
designs, Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus.

It shows the patience of God in his quiet forbearance, who could in a moment
destroy the^. The Poets fiction has a grave moral. They feign lame Vulcan to
be the Cutler of heaven, and Armourmaker to their gods. The true God is slow to
wrath, and unwilling to punish, proroguing his judgments, expecting
repentance, yet so as by delaying, he brings his own purpose to pass. Some
times he suffers them to devise plots, as Pharaoh imagined that he had found
away by drowning the Israelites males, to root out their name from the earth:
but did not God smile, when at the same time his own daughter, in his own
court gave princely education to Moses their deliverer? Julian supposed by
rearing up the Jewish ceremonies, to supplant the new Isoe. Eccleshist.
religion by the old, and therefore would be at the cost to build the Temple
again: but did not God smile, when from under the foundations, as from
Vesuuius hill, flaming fire brake forth and dissolved all his works?
Sometimes he lets them make some progress in their attempts. The Philistines
surprise his own Arc and carry it away: but did not God smile, when their
idol Dagon tumled down to do it reverence, and themselves so tormented with
sickness, as they were enforced to restore their pilfer with shame enough? When
superstition and idolatry seem to be advanced, the restoration tendes to the
greater ruin. Is Dagon perked up to his place again? short is the wickeds
joy: Gods smile takes off his head and hands, leaves him neither wisdom to
guide, nor power to subsist.

He permitted his Temple to be sacked and rifled, the holy vessels to be
profaned and caroused in; but did not Gods smile make Balthazar to tremble at
the handwriting upon the wall! Oh what are his frowns, if his smiles be so
terrible! We may not judge of Gods works until the fifth act, the case
deplorable and desperate in outward appearance, may with one smile from heaven
find a blessed issue.

3 This laughter argues not so much what God does, as what they suffer by
discovering and frustrating their practices, he exposes them to scorn and
contempt. Above hell there is not a greater punishment, then to become a
Sannio, a subject of scorn. Sampson bare with more patience the boring out of
his eyes, the^ the ludibrious scoffs of the Philistines. Alcibiades did
profess, that neither the proscription of his goods, nor his banishment, nor
the wounds received in his body, were so grievous unto him, as one scornful
word of his enemy Ctesiphon. Good Queen Ester in her prayer to God for her
people does humbly deprecate this height of infelicity, O let them not laugh at
our ruins; and David holds it for a singular token of Gods favor; By this I
know thou have a respect unto me, that mine enemy does not triumph over me.

4 Lastly he laughes, that is he despises their prayers, and stops his ears
when they call upon him. A Surgeon never cures a wound while the iron or
steel remain in it; nor does God hear the suites of those, whose will
continues in sin, whose thoughts are iron, steel and gunpowder. They may
conceive prayers and take the Sacrament; but God highly disdains, that his
dreadful name and holy institution should be so profaned. Prayer is our bil of
exchange, and is allowed in heaven, and returns with what sums of blessing we
desire, if agreeable to his will. But when mischievous intentions appear, God
protests their bills, and proclaims them bankrupts of his grace to all the
world. So then David has found great opposition, but withal a sure
protection; men sought his overthrow, God wrought their confusion. Rebellious
doom is heavens scorn.

One word of this text, as an Emblem to this day, shall give a period to your
patience.

This day, the fifth of November, a fatal inauspicious day, branded in history
with a black coal for mischief. Among the Grecians it was kept with sad
solemnity for the loss of noble Aratus, the often Plutarch. in rita Arati.
Manlij Calendarium.
preserver of his country. Among the Jews famous for the slaughter of
Zacharias the Priest, that day butchered in the temple, between the porch and
the altar, our Savior vpbraiding the murder, many years after the fact. Among
our selves never to be forgotten, a day for which we need no Darius prompter,
Memento Atheniensium; A day, quem semper acerbum, semper honoratum, as he said
of his fathers death day, ever to be thought upon with sadness, and yet ever
to be remembered with joy. For as Lucullus said of a day ominous and fatal, he
would make it luckie and prosperous: so blessed be the change, God has turned
the funeral into a festival. I will not recount the well known story, only I
must put the Quare, why against our gracious Sovereign? Could any complain of
his justice? That is such as it were not best for any greatness to adventure
upon. Or of his mercy? that is such as his enemies never implored in vain. Or
of his unquiet disposition? he is the Nestor of the times; Componere lites
inter Peliden festinat, and inter Atriden. He was ever, ever will be, the Noah
of the age, borne to give men rest from their toiles and labors, the loadstar
of his actions is peace: he has always called to the raging Christians, as
the moderate Roman, Part ciuibus Pompey.
Spare your blood, spend not that prodigally among your selves, which thriftily
employed, might ransom your friends, and ruin your enemies. What cause then
can you allege? yes a color; one fault his Majesty has, which sure he will
never amend; the same fault which was found in Daniel long ago: he was so
faithful as no blame, no occasion found, but only in the worship and service
of his God. That is the true Quare. His Majesty does not open his windows to
the Roman Saints, but toward Jerusalem above, and prays to the God of Heaven.
No roaring of Bulls can make him set up an Idolatrous calfe, as Jeroboam did:
He will not erect Images, as Nabuchadnezzar did; nor, to gratify any
foreign Power, set up an Altar, according to the pattern of Damascus, as
Achas did; nor alter his Profession for Affinity, as Hemor and Sichem did.
This was the Quare of their malice, and withal of Gods mercy toward him. For
as all Kings and Kingdoms are under the wings of Gods protection: yet those
principally, where his Church is fostered, and his saving knowledge spread. It
is his custom, those who promote his service, and take care of his holy
business, he usually prouids for their safety. Do the Israelites go up to
his solemnities, and leave their country unpeopled, to perform his command?
Tho Borderers be prone to take occasion of enlarging their Territory,

Quemque suae rapiunt scelerata ad proelia Luca.
causae;

God will take away that (...) and itching appetite of incroching: no man shall
desire their land, no man dare invade them.

If the Quare be asked for the Parliament: Why raged they against it? The Text
shows, that the breaking of the Bands was their intention; there the Laws
were made which held them in awe.

This Place where we now are, calls for a Quare: Why should this stately
Pile have been demolished, and not one stone left upon another? This is
Abraham's Mach-pelah, the burying Cave of the Patriarks, Hierou. ad Marcel.
David's Mausolaeum, so Hierom called his Sepulcher, whereat he was wont to
pray: This is Solomon's royal Reconditorie, wherein were one and twente
receptacles, or Celles; as if in the spirit of Prophecy he had foreseen, how
many Kings should be interred there, for just so many in number, if you account
from David to Zedechiah: This is Joseph's Garden, a dedicated Cemetery,
containing veterum decora alta parentum, the sacred vrnes, and dear relics
of our famous deceased Princes. Why did the heathen rage? For say the people
were Christian; yet the rage was heathenish, and barbarous above all madness.
The Lunaticke in the Gospel, who lived among the Graves, did not root them up.

I end all: He that dwells in the heavens looked down upon us, let us look
up to him: since by his mercy we live and breath, let us live to breath Praise
and Thanksgiving unto his Name. He has neither zeal to Religion, nor love
to his Country, nor loyalty to his Sovereign, who this day binds not the
Sacrifice with cords to the horns of the Altar; who this day sends not up to
heaven some incense of thanks. The Jews once a year were wont to celebrate a
Feast to sorrow, wherein they went barefoot, and with bitter imprecations they
cursed Titus and Vespasian, for the destruction of their City and Temple. I
speak confidently, fidenter quia fideliter; and I may say it without breach of
any rule of charity: Priests, Jesuits, and all such Romanists, as have evil
will at our Sion, this day do keep a feast to sadness, if not for grief,
that this hopeful Plot miscarried, yet for shame (unless they be past shame)
that it was attempted. Let their sorrow increase our joy; let our joy increase
our Thankfulness. As Caesar said of Phraates, he was prius victus quam visus: so
this Conspiracy against our David, was knetched before it was fully hatched,
undertaken, but overtaken, He that dwells in Heaven laughed it to scorn. To him
therefore, this day and ever, be ascribed all Honor, praise, and glory. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M. DC. XXII.


