An exposition upon the Book of the Canticles, otherwise called Schelomons
Song.

PVBLISHED FOR the edification of the Church of God. By T. VV.

AT LONDON; Printed for Thomas Man. Anno. 1585.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful and his very good friends in Christ, Sir John
Brockette and Sir John Cuttes Knights, and M. Charles Morison Esquire, T. VV.
wishes continuance and increase in that state, which has the promise of
this life and of that that is to come, thorovv Christ.
I Send unto your worships, some few lines and leaves of mine, long ago
written upon the Canticles of Solomon, for the dearest friend that I had
amongst men, whil he was living upon earth: and lately published, for the
profit of Gods people, at the earnest request of some of my very Godly
friends. For mine own part I was utterly purposed, either to have buried the
same (as diverse other things that I have written upon other books of holy
scripture) in perpetual darkness, that they should never have beheld the light
of this sun, or else to have suffered them to perish amongst worms and
moaths, as the common proverb is. Whereunto I was the rather led, not for
want of good will to benefit the church of Christ, (all whose causes and
every one of them, shall through Gods goodness be so dear unto me, as mine own
life) but partly by reason of the great sin and insufficiency, that I find
in my self, to perform that duty in action, whereunto in affection I will
always be ready, and partlye also by reason of the great learning and light,
that God has bestowed upon this last age of the world, but most especially
by reason, of that wonderful waywardnes, and curiousness, that I see the
spirits of sundry men to be possessed withal, whom nothing can please, but
that which they them selves affect. For if a man bring new things, they are
discontented, for that men walk not in former antiquity. And if a man, tread
in the steps of the ancient, their stomachs loath it, and they count it
coleworts twice sodde. And yet these men that are so diversely conceited, hatch
or bring forth nothing of their own, either new or old. For mine own part I
will not deny, but that in this poor work that I now publishe, I have been
greatly helped, by the light of other men's works upon the same book, both
old and new writers I mean: But most of all furthered therein by the writings
of men, though of late, yet of worthy memory, who having received more
knowledge in tongs, and more light in the word, by reading, hearing,
conference, and meditation therein, have more soundlye interpreted the same,
than such as went before them in the flesh. And yet I have not so sworn, into
all their words, but that upon reason, I hope I may both in translation and
sense now and then with their good leave swerve from them. Whatsoever it be let
the church judge, and take it I beseech your worships, into your hands from the
hands of him, that wishes you all and every one of you, al good in Christ. In
the penning whereof I can simplye confess, that I have neither sought gain
nor glory to my self, but in all simplicity and shortness after my manner,
labored to come to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and the observation of
such necessary doctrines, as the Lord made me able to see for the time. The
course that I have taken therein, is plain and profitable if I be not deceived.
First connecting the chap. together, then dividing them into their several
parts and portions, afterward giving the sense of them verse by verse, and
lastly observing such doctrines, as most fitlye agree with the place. If any
man see more or better, I pray him, not only not to contemn this that is, which
is but to publish that which may more edify. And as for your worships, I
beseech you to accept it, as at the hands of one that does unfeignedly both love
and reverence you all in the truth, and for the truth. And since it principallye
intreteth of the church, let it be a whetstone to ad an edge to your care and
love, for the church and the causes thereof: and the rather because of the
practices of the wicked against it, both at home and abroad, that since they do
what they can to undermine it, though it be to their just condemnation, you may
do your uttermost to the upholding of it, since in the peace and flourishing
estate thereof, stands the glory of God, and the good and quiet state of the
whole land, and every particular sound member thereof. Christ Jesus the only
head of the church, encourage your hearts and strengthen your hands, to
mind, speak and do those things that may tend to his glory, and the good of
his people, and be answearable to the places wherein he has put you, in the
co^monwelth, that when the days of your dissolution shall draw nigh, you may
in the testimonye of a good heart, feel to your comforts, the assured and
immovable hope of the heavenly inheritance.

London the 25 of this May. 1585. Your worships alvvayes ready and bounden in
Christ Jesus, T. VV. the Lords unworthy.

CAP. 1. and the sum thereof.
1. The Church being carried away with the desire of the Bridegroom, desires
to be embraced of him. 2. She commends his sweet sauouring name, 3. And
voweth that she will praise it. 4. She purges her self from her unworthiness.
5. 6. And calls upon the bridegroom. 7. Whom the Bridegome instructing, he
beautifieth with deeds and promises. 8. Wherefore rejoicing between themselves,
they commend and praise one the other.

1 A Song of Songs, which is Schelamons.

2 Let him kiss me, with the kisses of his mouth: for thy loves are good
before wine.

3 To smell to, thy oyntmentes are best, thy name spread abroad is as ointment
therefore thy Damselles love thee.

4 Draw me, we will run after thee: when the King him self shall have
brought me into his inner Chambers, we will rejoice and be glad in thee, we
will rehearse thy love before Wine: such as love thee shall speak of
righteous things.

5 Black I may be, yet comely am I, O daughters of Jerusalem: I may be like
to the tents of Kedar, but I am like to them that dwell under Schelomons
tapistry.

6 Look not upon me, because I am somewhat black, because the sun has
beheld me, because the sons of my mother kindled with wrath against me,
have appointed me the keeper of other vineyards, because I have not kept to my
self mine own Vine.

7 Show me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
carest, that the flock may lie down at noone tide: for why should I be, as one
that spreads the tent, among the flocks of thy companions?

8 Seeing thou know not, O thou the fairest of women, go out, follow not the
steps of that flock, and feed thy kiddes, above the Tents of other shepherds.

9 I do compare thee, O my love, to the troop of horses, that are joined to
Pharaohs chariots.

10 Thy cheeks are comely, as it were with rows of stones: thy neck, as it
were with collers.

11 We will make for thee borders of gold, with studdes of silver.

12 In the mean while that the king is at his repast, he sends out his savor
of mard.

13 My beloved is unto me, as a bundle of myrre, remaining between my breasts.

14 My beloved is unto me, as a berry of the Cypres tree, in the Vineyards of
Engedi.

15 Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair: thine eyes be like
the doves eyes.

16 Behold thee, thou art fair, O my beloved, yea thou art pleasant, yea, our
bed is green.

17 The beams of our houses, are of Ceder trees, our walking places are of wood
like Cypres.


An exposition upon the Canticles, otherwise called Schelomons song.
BEfore we come to open this book, something would ve marked touching the
obscurity and hardness thereof, whereof I suppose a duble reason may be
yielded. The one is the sudden change of the number, tense, and person, as
now speaking singularly, then plurally, now in the present time, anon in the
time to come, now in the person of the Bride, and anon in the person of the
Bridegroom, or some other. The other is, for that in parables and dark
speeches, there is expressed unto us, very divine and heavenly matter, the
holy Ghost using this manner of speaking, not only that the eyes of the wicked
might be stopped from beholding spiritual comfort: but also that the good might
know, that whatsoever light they have, they have it from him, (for both which
see, Math. 13, ver. 11. 12. 13. etc) and also that they might employ all the
understanding they have, to the comprehending of these, though dark, yet very
excellent mysteries. Letting pass all necessities, either of the Jewish
Rabbinnes, or of the old expositors, and namelye of Origin, we will content
our selves with a plain and simple sense of this Book, wherein Schelomon being
the holy ghostes instrument, does lively declare, the marter and manner of
marriage, which is betwixt Christ and his Church, sometimes setting out the
speeches that pass between them, making as it were thereby, the betrothment,
otherwhiles declaring, the mutual duties one of them toward an other, but
specially that same great love of the Bridegroom to his spouse, which is never
removed, but always abides constant, how often soever she fall away, and
seem, as a man would say, to forsake her husband. If any think this kind of
dealing, to be ouerlight for so grave, and weighty a matter, let them take heed
that in the height of their own hearts, they do not over prowdly censure God
and his order, who in many places uses this similitude or parable of marriage,
to express his love to his Church by, and the duty of the Church toward
him: one or two places shall serve, as Hoschea. 2. 19. I will mary thee unto me
for ever, yea, I will marry thee unto me in righteousness, etc. Also, 2. Cor.
11. 2. I have prepared you for one husband to prese^nt you, as a pure virgin
to Christ. And that by this means Christ's love is expressed toward his
Church, may appear, Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ
loved the Church. And the obedience of the Church to Christ, is declared in
the same chapter. ver. 22. 23. 24. Concerning the time when this Book should
be written, nothing can be said of certainty out of the scriptures. Wiherfore
leaving coniecturall gesses, let us cleave to the certeinty, Gods spirit has
penned it, and by the providence of our almighty God it has been esteemed in
all times, to the end that we, upon who^ the ends of the world are come, might
reap and receive profit and comfort thereby: and yet see somewhat thereof
hereafter.

1 This first Chapter I do divide into three parts. The first comprehends
the title or inscription of the work, together with the authors name, and this
is in the first verse.

2 The second sets out the wishes of the Church, dersiing effectuallye to
be joined with her head and spouse Christ. And this is from verse 2. to the end
of the 7.

3 And the third contains Christ's ready offering of himself to his church,
with a mutual commendation one of an other: vz. of Christ and his Church, from
ver. 8. to the end of ye chap.

Verse 1. A song of songs) That is to say, a most excellent and notable song.
For by dubbling of the words, the Scripture uses, if it speak of good
things, to understand most excellent things: as Deuteronomy. 10. 17. The Lord your
God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords. That is to say, most high Lord and God.
Whereas if it speak of base things, it does then on the other side by
dubbling, debase them as much, as Genesis 9. 25. It is said of Ham, A servant of
servants shall he be. That is to say, a most vile slave or servant. Which is
Salomons) That is to say, which Solomon made: putting the time present for the
time past. And this is the general title of the whole Book, and contains as
a man would say, not only the writers name, but the very chief matter, it
being a most excellent marriage song, as you would say, beeween Christ and his
church. That Solomon meant, not only to set out his match with Pharoas daughter
if which you may see, Psalm. 45. through out, but also to ascend on high, vz. to
the spiritual marriage, between Christ and his church, I take it to be over
plain, then needeeh to be stood upon.

Verse. 2. Let him kiss me) The Church desires, the unfeigned love and
continual presence of Christ. For kissing in old time was used, as a testimony
of love. see Genes. 31. 28. Genes. 45. 15. Luke. 7. 45. 2. Cor. 13. 12. So that
he puts the sign of the thing for the thing it self. With the kisses of
his mouth.) The church means by kises in the plural number the abundance
am continuance of his love, and by the word his mouth, his presence: even as
it is joyful to parties affiaunced, not only to see one an other, but also
to continue together. And in this part of the verse is contained the churches
wish: in the next part is declared the reason of her wish) for thy loves are
good: By Loves she means favor and liking of her: and she speaks thereof
in the plural number, both to set out the plentifulnesse of the same in
Christ, and to declare also what great comfort she did conceive, by the
abundance thereof: and by good, she means profitable, sweet, pleasant, and
as it were full of salvation unto her: and mark the soudaine change of the
person: for here the Church speaks of Christ in the second person, whereas
before she had spoken of him in the third. Before Wine, that is to say, if
they are better then Wine: if they may be compared therewith: that men had Wine
in great account, and took it as a singular blessing from God, may appear Psa.
4. 7. But by wine here he means, a very fine, sumptuous, and well furnished
feast, a part of the feast, or some of the things used in the feast for the
feast it self: see Hester. 5. 6. Prou, 21. 17. Eccles. 2. 3.

Verse. 3. To smell to thy Oyntmentes are bef*) The Church commends Christ for
the great and wonderful graces in him, declaring that he was in that respect
most sweet and sauo^y, yea, more excellent then all ointments. This is usual
by oyntmentes or annoynting to signify Gods graces, and benefits, they being
signs thereof, put to the thing it self: as, 1. Ioh. 2. 20. Psalm. 133. 2 Thy
name sprade abroad (that is to say, thy fame, glory, and renoun, made know^ in
the world by many means: but cheefely by thy word, is as ointment, that is to
say, precious in respect of it self, and profitable in respect of others, see
Ecclesiastes. 7. ^. For he speaks as I take it, of oyntmentes powered out of
one Vessel into another, or used about men for diverse respects, the profit
and pleasure whereof, comes not unto them selves only, but to other)
Therefore the Damselles love thee.) By Damselles or Virgins, the Church
means her friends and welwillers, such as were and are particular
Congregations: who are also called Damselles, and Virgins, because their
conversation was pure, and their hearts right as those are said to be
Virgins, that were never known of men, as Judges. 21. 12. And in this sense
have ye the word Damsel or Virgin used, Psalm 45. 14. vz. taken for
particular Churches) love thee, that is to say, not only carry an inward and
hearty affection toward thee, but also testify the same by outward approouing
and liking of thee, see Psalm 26. 8.

Verse. 4. Draw me.) These are still the words of the Church, acknowledging
her own weaknesses, and craving, not of desert, but for free good will, that
she may come to her spouse, which without his assistaunce, she cannot perfourm,
as Ioh. 6. 44. also John. 15. 5. We will run after thee.) This may either be
a sudden change of the number, a thing often used in the Scripture, passing
from the singular to the plural: or else the church speaks it in her own
name, and the name of her damsels and virgins: which though they be many in
respect of the several congregations, yet are they but all one, in respect of
ye whole body, and the word of running, notes the willingness and readiness of
the church, in following God and his calling. The instruments that God does use
to draw her by, are his word outwardly, and his spirit inwardly: the ready
running of the church, consists in spiritual and holy affections, and in
care and conscience, even in outward conversation to show themselves ready to
strive to sanctification. Now the church adds a promise of praise and
thanksgiving the^ to be yielded and performed, when the Lord shall in great
plentye power forth his graces upon her, saying: When the King) that is to
say, when Christ the Lord and Savior, the king that God has appointed over
his Church, as Psalm. 2. 6. Shall have brought me) vz. of his mere mercy and
grace, for there was never any thing in the Church, to procure Christ to love
it before he loved it, as Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27. Into his inner chambers) that
is to say, into most sure and safe places, speaking after the manner of men, who
hide their most precious things in most assured places, as where is lock
upon lock: putting also the places, where this kings wonderful treasures
were reserved, for the treasures them selves, that is for the excellent
abundance, and riches of his graces, as of the knowledge of his mysteries and
such like. Neither need we fear to affirm, that the Church means hereby
the bringing of her, as a man would say, into the bride chamber where she
should have familiarity, with her husband and spouse Christ, and should
partake with him of al his graces, according to that in ye Gospel after S.
John: And as of his fulness have we all received, and grace for grace. John 1.
16. We will rejoice, and be glad in thee.) A sudde^ change of the number, as
before in this same verse: We will come after thee, for the exposition
whereof, see before also in the same place: and the dubling of the words,
serves to express their earnestness, q. d. This shall be it that we will take
great pleasure in, yea it shall be the only matter of our mirth to praise and
thank thee. We will rehearse) that is to say, we will both think upon in our
minds, and also speak of with our tongues, so yt both shall go together, in
expressing thy tender affection toward us. Thy loves more then wine.) These
words are expounded in verse 1. of this chapter. Such as love thee shall
speak of righteous things) q. d. I and these that are with me which love
thee, will speak of those things that be just and good, opening by these
words, the allegory, as a man would say, which lay hid under the former
speeches.

Verse. 5. Black I may be.) These are the churches words, but not to her
spouse, as before, but to the particular members of her body, whereby she
preuenteth that, that either her enemies might object against her, or her
friends conceive of her, as that for her blackness she should be unmeet, to
match with so great a king. By black the Church means, yt through her
adversaries dealings, as persecutions, imprisonments, reuilinges, and such
like, she may seem in men's judgments, to be deformed, and therefore not so
great account to be made of her: but she gives them to understand, that how
il favored so ever she be outward, yet inward she is faier, beautiful and
glorious, as Psalm. 45. 13. see also Psalm. 68. 13. Yet comely am I) that is to
say, fair and beautiful, and in that respect to be beloved, q. d. Blackness
shall not turn me away from my spouse: neither yet will he for all that like
the worse of me, for though black I be, yet am I of a comely beautye, and of a
lovely making and knitting, of the parts of my body. O daughters of Jerusalem)
She understands by this speech, the faithful men and women dwelling in
Jerusalem, as our Savior also does by the same words, Luke 23. 28. But yet so,
that under them he comprehends all the rest of the faithful wheresoever
dispersed, and the reason is, because that the law should go forth of Zion,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to other Nations and people, as
Isaiah. 2. 3. I may be like to the tents of Kedar) We may take these words,
either simplye thus, that the Church, by reason of the afflictions that she
endured, should be black and deformed, even as the very tents of the
Arabians were, that by the heat of the sun, by tempests and storms, and the
mutability of the air, were marvelously defaced as it were: or else, that by
the figure Metonomy, he puts the tents, for the people dwelling in the
tents, which I rather incline unto, by reason of that which is written, Psalm.
120. 5. Kedar was the name of one of Ishmaels Sons, as appears Genes. 25.
13. who together with their posterity, as it should seem inhabited some part
of Arabia Petrosa, and called the name of that quarter where they dwelt, Kedar,
by the name of their first Father, see Isaiah. 21. from verse. 13. to the end
of the chapt. But I take it to be here used more generally, that is a part of
the Country for the whole and the name of the Country, for the people
inhabiting the same, as Hieremie. 2. 10. Hiereme. 49. 28. that the people dwelt
in Tents, it appears not only by this place, but by Isaiah. 13. 20: Besides
that they were black, this reason me thinks is sufficient to prove, because
they were given much to travel from place to place, and to sore toil in so
often removing their Tents which they dwelt in, and also by reason of their
nigh bordering to the Ethiopians as apeareth 1. Chron. 21. 16. who were black,
and thereof were called blackmoores. See Hie. 13. 23. but I am like to them that
dwell under Solomon's Tapistry, (that is to say) most fair and comely for
those that dwell in Kings houses, and specially those that are continuallye in
the places of most costly furniture and rich hanging are not only very fair,
as whose beauty the sun or sharp weather does seldom touch, but also are
comely, because of being continually in the Kings presence, from which
purpose our Savior Christ's speech. Math. 11. 8. does not much vary. And no
doubt, but by one part of Solomon's househoulde, as his tapistrie or curteines,
she meant all the glory and furniture of his house, whatsoever, of which you
may read at large 1. Kings. 10. 1, 2. etc.

Verse. 6. Look not upon me.) The church continues her speech, to the
particular members thereof, willing them not to look upon her, that is, not to
be discouraged from joining themselves unto her for all her afflictions, which
make her outwardly as it were deformed, but rather to have their eyes fixed
upon Christ her husband, and those inward beauties and graces that he has
decked her with all. Because I am somewhat black.) She does in this speech
somewhat lessen the word, black, that was used verse. 5. q. d. My blacknes is
not so much as perhaps you take it to be: and therefore be not so much
discouraged as you would seem to be) because the sun has beheld me.) The
Church declares in these and the words following, that that blackenesse was
not her own natural color, as a man would say, but that it came by some
other means: as first, because that through oppression and persecution, she
was as it were by the sun dried up. So that the word sun is taken here, for
the heat of persecution, and so it is, Math. 13. 6. 21. because the sons of
my mother kindled with wrath against me, have appointed me the keeper of other
vineyards) I know this place is diversely expounded. Some give this sense of it:
by sons of the same mother, they understand original sin, and the sin that
dwells in the church: and by being kindled with wrath, they understand sin
increasing and raging as it were: and by appoynting the church to Keep other
vineyardes, they understand the committing of the works of the flesh, and the
deeds of darkness, with which she was as it were holden, so that she could
do nothing else, till the Lord had loosed her out of these chains. Others to
whom I rather incline, expound it thus: The sons of my mother) that is to
say, those that seemed most dear unto me, and were as it were my self, who
also bosted in the name of the church) Kindled with wrath against me) that is
to say, though they pretended good will toward me, yet were they set on
fire with wrath and hatred against me ( Have appointed me the keeper of other
vineyards) that is to say, have made me, to take upon me that, which did not
in deed appertain unto me, and to intermeddlein those things that did
nothing respect me. And this sense me thinks may be warranted, not only
because a man's enemies are they of his own household, and of his dearest
acquaintance. Math. 10. 36. Psalm. 50. 20. Psalm. 55. 12. 13. 14. but also
because we see by experience, how those that would be counted the brethren
and the fathers of the Church, under the name and title thereof, have labored to
thrust into the Church, the execution of Civil causes and offices, which do
not indeed belong to the Church, nor to the ministers thereof, as may appear.
Luke. 12. 13. 14. whereof the Church may and does not without cause complain,
as of a great burden too heavy for her to bear, and this is the second cause
of the Churches blackness, and now follows this cause of her blackness,
continued in these words: Because I would not have kept to my self mine own
vine: That is to say, I have departed from the duty that was prescribed unto
me, though it were never so healthful and profitable for me: wherein also we
see the churches humble confession of her negligence and carelessness in
executing the calling wherein she was placed.

Verse. 7. Show me) The Church turns her speech again to her spouse q. d.
Think not, y^ either by others slanders, or mine own offenses, I am
discouraged to come unto him, no I will call upon him in your presence, and you
shall hear him aunswearing me. By the word showing, the Church desires
instruction and knowledge, so have you the same word used, Job. 10. 2. O thou
whom my soul loves) That is to say, thou whom I love from my heart. For this
Periphrasis no doubt has greater force, then if the church had said, O my
beloved, or O my dear spouse: as the contrary speech Isaiah. 1. 14. notes
wonderful disliking. Where thou feedest) vz. thy flocks. For she compares
Christ to a good shepherd, that prepares meet and convenient food for his
flock. see Psalm. 23. 1. etc. John. 10. 14. Where thou carest that thy flock
may lie down at noone tide) The church here expresses, the great care and
love that Christ has over his people, which he calls by the name of flock.
as Luke. 12. 32. Acts. 20. 28: and also in what a quiet state and condition
they are in which follow Christ. True it is, that he expresses this under a
parable, of the flocks taking their rest at noone time in the heat of the
day, but by such manner of earthlye speeches, it pleases the Lord many times
in his word to set out spiritual and heavenly matters. For why should I be, as
one that spreads the tent, amongst the flocks of thy companions.) The
church notes in this speech two things: the one is if she find not the
spouse, she is in danger of falling into manifest and manifold corruptions.
The other is that it greeueth her to be conversant, though it were never so
small a while, with counterfeit hipocrites, and ungodly persons. q. d. what
honor shall come unto thee, or profit to me, by hiding thy self from me, and
I by falling thereby into society and familiarity with others? For the church
uses spreading or pitching of tents, for familiaritye and fellowship, speaking
according to the people of Arabia, who as is said before, dwelt in tents. And
when she says, Thy companions, she speaks thus, not as though she made
these strange sheepheardes, good shepherds, or any way comparable with her
spouse. but rather according to that that they them selves, gave out of them
selves, and as in name and outward show they would seem to be, when as they
had nothing in deed and truth. See 2. Cor. 11. 14. 15. In a word this me
thinks is the sense, the church being as it were in danger wandering up and
down to seek her spouse, fears, least if she should not have the place
showed her, where she might find him, she should run astray, and join her
self to other congregations, that do boast them selves to be Christ's
companio^s and friends, and rejoice in the name of the church, and yet are
neither so nor so.

Verse. 8. Seeing thou know not.) This is Christ's aunsweare to the church,
showing that he is nigh to them that seek him, as Psalm, 145. 18. and it
consists of two parts, first he aunsweareth her, and instructs her, and
then he testifies his good will and kindness toward her. Seeing thou
know not) vz. so fully as thou should, but in part only, (as all the
knowledge of the church in this life, is no other. 1. Cor. 13. 12. And
therefore desire further instruction, I will teach thee. O thou the fairest
of women.) Christ adorneth his church with this title, whereby we may see that
the church is not as men account of her, but as she is esteemed by her spouse.
Go out.) vz. from that company of counterfeit sheepheardes and sheep, as may
appear by that which he adds, follow now the steps of that flock, for
their feet tread not in the right path to life, but lead the way to eternal
destruction. And by that word, go out, he notes, not only the speedy
departure from them, but that the church should not communicate, with them nor
with any thing that was theirs. See Isaiah 52. 11. which also he notes by that
phrase, follow not the steps of that flock. And feed the kiddes) I take this
particle, and here to be put for, but, as in other places of scripture q. d.
this is it that thou must do, not only shun other men's evils and corruptions,
but do those good things that thou art appointed unto. And by kiddes, he
means the flocks of faithful people, and every particular one, noting also
under that manner of speech the tenderness of the Church, and every
particular member thereof. Above the tents of other sheepheardes) That is to
say, with more excellent pasture, both for substance and form, then these
sheepheardes with their tents are conversant in. He means that he would have
the church, by the food of the heavenly doctrine, to lift up the faithful
people, far above the earth, and earthlye things, as 1. Cor. 2. 14. 15. And he
calls them here shepheardes in the same sense that the church called them
verse. 7. Christ's companions.

Verse. 9. I do compare thee.) The spouse, after instruction of the church,
enters into the commendation thereof. verse. 9. 10. 11. And when he says
that he does compare her, the means not only that he does resemble her, no
cause thereof being in her, why she should be resembled, but that he does and
will enable her by his graces even to the best things, for that he means by
horses joined to Pharaohs chariots. This we know that Pharaoh was a name common
to all the kings of Egypt. This we know further, that the horses of Egypt,
were in great regard and estimation, not only in Egypt, but in other
countries also, as 1. King. 10. 28. 29. Neither is it without force that he
speaks of troops, and multitudes, and of chariots, for for all these things
Egypt was very commendable, as Exodus 14. 7. 9. All which laid together
makes much, for the credit, glory and renown, that Christ gives unto his
church, and for the excellency thereof. Verse. 10. Thy cheeks are comely.) The
spouse enters into the commendation of the particular parts of the church,
and he speaks of those that are most to be seen, because if they be
beautiful and fair, inquiry is not made of the beauty and fayrenesse of the
rest. And when he says, that they are comelye, as though they were set with
rows of stones, he alludeth no doubt to the manner of the Eastern princes,
who used to trimm their bridles, and other furniture for the fore part of their
horses, with sundry kinds of ornaments, as gold, pearl, precious stones.
etc. See Judges. 8. 21. meaning that there was no greater glory nor comelines
in these things. then was in the outward parts and members of the church.
And to that same end must that be referred, when he says. Thy neck as it were
with colors.) As may appear, in the places of the Judges before alleged.
Now to enquire either here, or in the other parts of this Book, what should
be signified by the Cheeks, or by ye neck, or other members of the church
specified therein, would be curiosity, because the mind of the holy Ghost, is
not so much to stand upon the parts, as by recital of the several parts to
commend the whole: and yet me thinks something may now and then be said that
way, without any prejudice of the truth: as in this place, to say that the
cheeks, which in shamefastness by means of blushing most commonly
appears, should be put for shamefastness, modestye and chastity of the
church, which never lacks her ornaments and deckinges, and the neck for the
ministers of the word, by whom the word it self is delivered unto the people,
even as the meat by the neck is sent to the stomach, who have also their
glory and beautifying, but of this let every godly and sober christian Reader
judge.

Verse. 11. We will make for thee.) These are still the words of Christ, not
spoken as some think in his own name, and the name of the friends of the
church, such as were some faithful people, but spoken in deed, as having
regard to the mi^^ery of the Godhead and Trinity, such like kind of speeches
see Genes. 1. 26. also Genes. 11. 7. where God speaks of him self in the
plural number also. Borders of gold with studs of silver) vz. set in sundry
places between them. q. d. though thou be excellently well decked up, yet we
will more and more adorn and beautify thee, so that nothing shall be wanting
to make thee comelye and fair, no not Gold and Silver, or any precious thing
what soever.

Verse. 12. In the mean while that the king is at his repast.) These be the
words of the church, spoken as it should seem to her particular members, who
were called before virgins or Damselles, verse 3. and daughters of Jerusalem,
verse. 5, declaring what graces she receaueth from her spouse. For the word
king, see before verse 4. is at his repast, that is at his ease as it were and
pleasure, and that even then when he seems to have little regard of his
church in men's judgment, and the church to be as it were a pilgrim from him.
He sends forth) vz. upon me and mine, His savor of Nard) that is to say,
the most sweet savor of his graces, and this he does by the word preached, and
the mighty working of his spirit in the hearts of his children. Some of the
Rabbis think that Nardus was like to Saffron. Sure it is that there was
diverse sorts of it. One sort is called Nardus celtica, which the French men
call Lawand, and we in a term not far from theirs, call Lawander. An other
sort was called Nardus Assiria, which I take to be that that the Evangelists,
Mark. 14. 3. Ihon. 12. 3. call Spikenard, which was very costly, as may
appear there, and reason it self also leads it, because it grew in India,
or in Assyria, places far distaunt from Judea, and of this I suppose it is,
that the holy Ghost speaks in this place, vsinge a very precious thing
amongst men, to note the most precious gifts of Gods graces and goodnesses
to his church.

Verse. 13.. My beloved.) The church proceeds in the commendation of her
spouse whom she calls here, her beloved, because she did most tenderly love,
like, and seek after him, as verse 2. 7. is unto me.) that is to say, is as
dear, precious, and as sweet smelling to me, As a bundle of mirh) which was no
doubt of a very good savor, as may appear Psalm. 45. 8. Proverb. 7. 17.
Remaining between my breasts.) No doubt he alludeth to the manner of women and
maids, who are wont to wear in their bosoms, nosegaies, as they call them,
made of very odoriferous, and sweetsmelling flowers, of which also they make no
small account, esteeming them many times as a principal part of their
furniture. Whatsoever it is, the church minds to note, has how sweet her
spouse should be unto her, and in what great account she would have him, that
would place him so nigh her, as between her breasts, as it were.

Verse 14. My beloved is unto me.) The church goes on in commending her
spouse, and the graces she receives from him, comparing him to an other sweet
smelling thing, as before she had resembled him to Spikenard, verse 12. and to
mirth, verse. 13. As a berrie of the Cipres tree.) That is to say, sweet,
pleasant, and very well smelling, for the very Cipres it self is a very well
smelling Wood, as by experience, we our selves see at this day. The
interpretors both old and new have much troubled them selves about this tree,
and the fruit thereof, some affirming one thing and some an other, few hitting
the truth. Whatsoever it is the holy Ghost did mind in the mouth of the
church, to express a very adoriferous thing. The church adds in the
vineyards of Engedi) This was the name of a place in the tribe of Judah, as
appears Josh. 15. 62. It should seem to be a city famous for sweet smelling
trees, and that makes the holy Ghost to use it here in this place, meaning
that the Spouse was more dear and precious unto her, (by reason of the
wonderful sweetness that she receives from him) then the^e things.

Verse. 15. Behold thou art fair my love) These are Christ's words,
commending the church for her fayrenesse and beauty: see before verse 8. and he
repeateth the words again, behold thou art fair, not only for the more
truth and certainty of the matter, and to express the excellent beauty of the
church, which can hardly be uttered with any words: but also, to comfort the
church, and the particular members thereof, that neither the whole, nor the
parts of the whole, should be discouraged with their blackenesse. Thine eyes
be like the doves eyes) that is, simple and chaste: so that by this similitude,
he sets out the singlenes and chastity of the church not only in respect
of inward affection, but of outward appearaunce also, so that the church has
no unchaste looks or countenaunces, (of which we read somewhat Psalm. 44. 17.
18. 20.) but contenteth her self with her only husband Christ, and seeks
no other even as the Dove when she has chosen a match, keeps her self unto
him only, and looks not upon an other, (as a man would say) as the
Philosophers write and affirm. And he commends her for her eyes, because if
they be fair they do easily cover the spots and deformities of the rest of
the members of the body. And we may refer this to the Teachers and ministers
of Gods word in his church, who, as eyes watch over the people of their God
Heb. 13. 17.

Verse. 16. Behold thee thou art fair, etc.) These are the words of the
church praising her spouse q. d. Yea rather thou art fair, and whatsoever
beauty I have, I have it from thee, who have not the spirit by measure. Ihon.
3. 34. but in such fullness, that of thy fullness have we all received. Ihon.
1. 16. Thou art pleasant.) vz. not only in thy self, but also to me and all
mine. Our bed is green. By bed the church understands not only the seat
of the church, wheresoever it be, but also those that in the same place, are,
as it were in bed, spirituallye begotten unto the Lord by the Gospel. As 1.
Cor. 4. 15. and by Green she means the prosperous and flourishing estate
thereof, as Psalm. 52. 8. which should appear by the great increase and
multitude, that should be joined thereto.

Verse 17. The beams of our houses.) I take this to be the words of Christ
and his church, speaking both together (after they had spoken one of an other)
and commending not only their house, but their several houses (which also
serves for their great magnificence) for the excellency and wonderful
commodities thereof: as for the strength of them, and the preciousnesse and
pleasures thereof. Their strenght is noted, in that the beams thereof are
said to be of Cedar trees, which wood, as some write, will never rotte* their
excellency and statelynesse is declared, in that their walking places were
builded of Cypres, or of Wood like Cypres, which some take to be Fur:
whatsoever it is, they were a certain kind of Wood, which yields a most
sweet savor: and the pleasure thereof set out, under their walking places
or Galleries. So that I think there is nothing meant thereby, but the
stability, excellency and pleasantness of the church, and every particular
member of it, both before God as the chief, and one of them before, and
toward an other.

Verse. 1. Teaches, that how soever carnal men carnally minded, Doctrine.
can see nothing of weight in these canticles, yet God, who has given it so
glorious a title, can and will open the eyes of the spiritual minded man, that
he shall see wonderful great mysteries contained therein. The want of sight in
the one, is not in the matter, but in the blindness of their own hearts: and
the beholding of these things in the other, is not in them selves, but in God,
who of his mercy only has opened the eyes of their understanding.

Verse. 2. We learn to wish and pray for the continuance of Christ's favor
toward us, because therein only consists all our welfare, either inward or
outward. Some account of one thing, and some of an other: but in truth nothing
is to be regarded, but the goodness of God toward us in Christ.

Verse. 3. The graces that we receive from Christ, are most excellent, the
reason is, because he him self is most excellent, and nothing can come from
him but it must taste of that singular excellency that is in him.

Verse. 4. And these words Draw me. We learn, that we can not come to
Christ, except the father draw us. Ihon. 6. 44. For it is God that works in
us both the will and the deed. Phil. 2. 13. and that of his own good
pleasure, such is the strength and power of our freewill, whatsoever we have
been taught or learned to the contrary, And in these words, When the king him
self, etc. We learn that Gods mysteries are to dark for us to attain to,
with all the wit and understanding we have, till God by his spirit reveal
them to us. 1. Cor. 2. 10. 14. Also in these words, We will rehearse thy
loves, etc. That this is, and ought to be the matter of our joy, to think
upon and speak of Gods goodnesses toward us both generallye and
particularly: the remembrance whereof will not only be profitable to stir
us up to thankfulness, but in all causes continually to trust in him, who has
so many ways showed him self merciful toward us.

Verse. 5. And these words, Yet comely am I. We learn: that we may praise
Gods gifts and graces in our selves, keeping always a just measure and
proportion in that commendation. We learn further in the same verse, that the
blackness, that is, the afflictions and trialles of the church, should not
hinder us from joining our selves thereto. For all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3. 12. See also Act. 14. 22.

Verse. 6. And these words, because the sons of my mother, etc. We learn
that none are greater enemies to the church, then those that most brag of her.
This we see to be true by experience in the papacy, who have nothing in their
mouths, but the church, the church, as the people and Priests in Ieremies
time did, the Temple of the Lord, etc. See Jeremy. 7. 4. and yet for all that
both of them were the spoilers of the Temple and Church: Also in these words,
the keeper of other vineyardes: We learn, that it behooves every one to
keep him within the compass of that vocation yt God has committed to him,
according to the counsel of the holy ghost Let every man abide in the same
vocation, wherein he was called. 1. Cor. 7. 10. Also Romans 12. 7. He that has an
office let him wait on the office. The Church might have as much to say for
her self, as some in these days have, it is given me, but that would not
stand in steed before the Lord: the reason is, because evil and unlawful
things many times are given, which in deed ought not to be received: and one
must not only look to the gift, but to the thing given, whether it be lawful
or no: and to the giver also, whether he give it according to the good will of
God the giver of all good gifts. James. 1. 17. Lastly, in these words, I have
not kept, etc. We learn humble and unfeigned confession of our sins, the
fruits whereof are described Psalm. 32. 5. 1. Ihon. 1. 6.

Verse 7. Show me, etc. This teaches first, that we should be much moved
with the absence of Christ: secondly that we should seek by all the lawful
means we can to find him, and to know the place of his abode, of which see an
example. Ihon. 1. 38. and in these words, Where the flock may lie down at
noone, both the great care and love of our Savior toward his people, of
which see Mat. 9. 36. 37. 38. and the good estate that they are in which follow
him. See Psalm. 23. 1. Mat. 6. 33. Also Math. 14. ver. 15. 16. etc. Also in
these words. For why should I be etc. We learn, that though the absence of
our savior should be grievous unto us, yet it should not utterly make us to
fall away from him to others, but the more earnestlye to seek after him.

Verse. 8. Sets out Christ's readiness and willingness to instruct those
that of a good mind come unto him. Also these words, Follow not that flock,
Teach the Church to fly as far from infection of evil as may be, and not
to come too nigh the persons, least touching pitch they be defiled therewith.
See Proverb. 6. 27. 28.

Verse. 9. Seweth that the church is so glorious as Christ her spouse esteems
of her. It teaches also the excellency of the Church, and the increase of the
particular members thereof (because she is compared to the Horses of Egypt,
and to the troops thereof) of which see Psalm. 45. from verse 10. to the end
of the Psalm. Also Act 2. 41. with other places.

Verse. 10. Sets out the comeliness and beuty of the church, which should
also cause us with all care and reverence to join our selves thereto.

Verse. 11. Declares the assured favor of the holy Trinitye, and the
unspeakable love thereof toward the church, with the glorious decking and
adorning of the same.

Verse. 12. Teaches: that Christ never forgets his church, but is always
present with them by his grace and holy spirit, Mat. 28. 20. Ihon. 14. 16.

Verse. 13. Teaches us in what great account we should have our savior
Christ, howsoever most reject him. See Math. 8. 34. Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 21. 42.

Verse. 14. Instructs us, with humbleness and love, to acknowledge the
manifold blessings of God in others, as the church does it in her spouse. I say
with humbleness in respect of our selves, because when we see that God has
endued others with greater gifts then our selves, he labors by that means
to beat down the pride of our nature, which is always clyming: and I say in
love, in respect of our brethren, because it is very hard to flesh and blood,
not to envy one that is his better any way.

Verse. 15. Sets out the love of Christ toward his church, and the great
account and regard he has her in. And these words* Thine eyes be like, doves
eyes, teach the church to strive to inward and outward chastity, and to Abstain
from all appearance of evil. as 1. These. 5. 22. And to hate even the garment
which is spotted by the flesh. Jude. 23.

Verse. 16. Teaches us to acknowledge, that all the good things we have, we
have from above, as James 1. 17. And these words, Our bed is green, notes
the flourishing of the church and the increase thereof, of which see before
verse 9.

Verse. 17. Sets out the firmity and staydnes of the church, which thing also
our savior means when he says, that The gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. Math. 16. 18. And in an other place, that if it were possible the
very elect should be deceived. Math. 24. 24. To this purpose also it is called
the pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3. 15.

CHAP. the second and the sum thereof.
The Bridegroom sets out his own dignity and the Brides. 1. 2. She again
answearing praises him, and sets out the duties that he has done for her
under a banquet, and her exceeding love toward him, by fainting or swonning.
3. 4. 5. 6. Afterward, she declares the coming of the Bridegroom unto her,
her calling and most large promises made unto her. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13,
etc. And therefore she not only rejoices that she shall have his company, but
desires his presence until the fulfilling of his promises be performed,
which shall be in his second coming. 14. 15. 16. 17.

1 I Am the Rose of Sharon, the Lilie of the valleys between the hills.

2 As a lilie among Thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

3 As an Apple tree among the trees of the forest, so is my well beloved among
the sons. I do very greatly desire to sit in his shadow, for his fruit is
sweet to the roof of my mouth.

4 He brought me into the place of wine: and his banner toward me was love.

5 Proppe me up with these flagons: bear me up with these apples: for I am
sick with love.

6 His left hand is under mine head: and his right hand does embrace me.

7 I charge you, and that by an oath, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, tarry ye
abroad with the roes, or with the hindes of the field: stir not up, neither
wake this love, until he will him self.

8 It is the voice of my well beloved, behold him, he comes leaping upon
these mountains skipping upon these hills.

9 My well beloved is like a roe or a hindes calfe: behold him standing
behind our wall, looking forth of the windows, springing out of the gates.

10 My well beloved speaking said unto me: arise my love, my fair one, and
come.

11 For lo winter is past: the rain is past, it is gone away.

12 Flourishing things are seen in the earth, the time of the singing of
birds is come: and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land.

13 The fig tree it self has brought forth her very young figs, and the
vines them selves, even in the first grape, do yield a savor. Arise my love my
fair one, and come.

14 My Dove living in these cleftes of the rock, in a den all to broken,
show me thy countenances: Make me to hear thy voice, for thy voice is
sweet, and thy countenance comely.

15 Take for us the foxes, yea the little foxes, corrupting the vines, whilst
our vines bring forth the first grape.

16 My well-beloved is mine, and I am his that feeds among the Lilies.

17 Until that day shall come, and these shadows shall fly away: return,
belike, O my well beloved to a Roe, or as a Hindes calfe running on mountains,
one of them sundred from another.


IN the last end of the first chapter, Con.
Christ and his church had with an harmonicall conclusion praised their
houses, for the excellencye, continuance, and commodiousnesse thereof: that
being dispatched, the Brydegrome begins again particularlye to praise him
self and his spouse, and likewise the spouse to praise him, and to set forth
her great love toward him.

1 The chapter has two special parts. Diuis.
In the first part the bridegroom commends him self and his spouse, and this
is contained in the two first verses of this chapter.

2 And in the other the bride praises the bridegroom, recites his benefits
toward her, and earnestly calls upon him for his continual presence and
favor, and this reaches from verse the 3. to the end of the chapter.

Verse. 1. I am the rose of Sharon.) I take these to be the words of the
spouse, Sense.
commending him self, for his most excellent sweet virtue, testified to all,
but specially to his church, by communicating his spirit unto it. If any man
marvel that the Bryde and the Brydegrome, do commend them selves both here
and in other places, let him know, that in old time this was not unseemly, as
it is now accounted. Secondly, they did not flatter them selves in their
praises, neither extolled them selves more then was meet. Thirdly, that the
Brydegrome in this behalf could not offend, because there was never any sin
found in him, as 1. Pet. 2. 22. That Sharon was a plentiful place, may
appear. 1, Chr. 27. 29. Also Isaiah. 53. 2. One reason of the fertility thereof
may be given, ye moderate warmnes of the sun in that place, in which places
also roses do most delight and flourish, and are also by that means, as the
Philosopher supposes, more sweet of savor. So that when Christ resembles him
self to the rose of Sharon, he means nothing else, but that he was well
colored, fruitful and of very good savor, able enough through his sweetness,
and the abundance of his gifts and graces, to allure and draw his Church to
him self. And the same I suppose he means by comparing him self in the
next part of the verse, to the Lilie of the valleys. How glorious and
excellent the Lilie is, our Savior himself bears witness Math. 6. 28. 29.
And when the Lord will assure his people of a great blessing, he promises
them that they shall grow as the Lilie, Hosea. 14. 5. Much more excellent shall
it be, when it grows in a most fertile place, such as the valleys are that
lie between two hills, which in all reason can not choose, but be very
fruitful and plentiful. Christ therefore by this manner of speech, not
only notes his great glory and excellencye, but also sets forth the
abundance of fruit, that these shall yield, which shall be ingrafted into
him, as the true vine. For which see John. 15. 2.

Verse. 2. As a Lilie among Thorns, so is my love among the Daughters. These
are still Christ's words, not commending him self as before, but the Church,
showing hereby, that the Church in dignitye and honor so much excels other
companyes and assemblyes, as the Lilie in beautye and savor surmounteth the
Thorns. He means not that Lilies grow amongst Thorns, but speaks it by
the way of comparison: q. d. there is even as much odds between the Church
and other counterfayt congregations, as is between Lilies and Thorns, or as
we would say, between Gold and Dross. What he means by the term Love,
is plain by that which is Chapter 1. verse 9. And by Daughters he means all
those that were and are out of the bosom of the Church: and I think it
should not be amiss, for the more plain sense of the place, to join to the
word Daughters, these words, of men. As Genes. 6. 2.

Verse. 3. As an Apple tree. Here begins the second part of this Chapter,
which as I take it, contains three especial points. The first is a
declaration of the excellency of the Spouse, and of the great desire that the
Church has toward him, and that is comprehended in this third verse. The
second is a declaration of the duties of mutual love between them, and that
reaches from verse 4. to the end of the 15. And lastly, she desires of her
Spouse, a perpetual feeling of the fruit of this love, and that is in the two
last verses. Now, in that she resembles her Spouse to an Apple tree, she
myndeth thereby to set out his pleasantness to the sight, his goodness to
the taste, and his profitablenes to other in respect of his fruit. Now when
she adds, Among the trees of the Forest, she means either Trees
altogether barren, or else such, as, though they yield fruit, yet is it not
good for men. And when she says: So is my well-beloved among the sonns, you
may ad for more plain sense, of men, as Psalm. 45. 2 yea though they be never
so good and well accepted of in the Church, meaning that he is most fruitful
and sweet, both in shadow and in fruit, as the words following in this
verse, do plainly expound it. True it is, that he is not so esteemed of among
worldlings, by reason of his baseness: but yet his own have him ever in that
account and regard, how base and contemptible soever he be in the world. Read
Isaiah, 53 thoroughout. It follows: I do very greatly desire to sit in his
shadow. Here the Church expresses, the earnest affection that she has to be
kept under Christ's providence, from the heat of persecution, affliction,
sin, etc. for so I take the word Shadow, to be used here, as Psalm. 91. ver.
1. or else as she her self speaks it verses 16 17. of this chapter, that she
might he his, and he hers for ever, or else as our savior himself says, Ioh.
7. I in them, and them in me, that they may be made perfect in me, and that
they may be there, even where I am. ver. 23. 24. And by sitting, she means
continual abode and residence: His fruit, that is, that that is to be received
from him and his word. For as Shadow and fruit and apples are acceptable to
the faint and wearied, Job. 7. so all things that come from Christ, are to
his most sweet and comfortable, if they stay upon him and cleave only to
his word, yea his very yoke and burden shall be easy and light to them, as
Math. 11. 28. 29. 30. 1. John. 5. 3 is sweet to the roof of my mouth. He
puts one part of the man, for the whole, and namely that part which is most
apt for tasting, understanding thereby, not only how delightful Christ was to
the outward man, but specially and cheefely to the inward, under y^ outward
part also comprehe^ding the inward.

Verse. 4. He brought me unto the place of wine: These are still the churches
words, celebrating the abundant kindness and love of his spouse. By place of
Wine, she means the places of delicate fare and feasting, as before, chap. 1.
2 but all this must be spiritually understood, to wit that our Savior
brought the church to life and salvation, by the exercises of the word and
sacraments, Whereunto the parable of the marriage. Math. 22. does in some sort
appertain And his banner toward me was love, (that is, he had love toward me
instead of a ba^ner) Those that are skilled in war know, that by banners and
Ensigns the soldiers are called together, and kept in awe under their own
capitaines, Whereunto it should seem that the church alludeth, meaning, that
the husband of his only love toward the church, did by his favor, as it
were by a banner set before her eyes, draw her as it were unto him. Or else it
may be thus. Sundry people, and namely the Turk, when he besieges any place,
does the first day set up a banner al of white, signifiyng favor if they will
accept it: the next time a red banner, betokening the execution of the
cheifest: and the last time a black one, signifying all one and other must to
the sword and fire. But Christ the spouse always sets up a banner of
love, grace, and favor, howsoever we little deserve the same at his hands. The
first seems to me to be the more plain sense.

Verse. 5. Prop me up with these Flagons, These are the words of the Church,
spoken unto her Damsels or virgins, of whom see before chap. 1. 3. and she
seems to be so inflamed with the love of Christ, that she is ready even in
the midst of the banquet, to sinck down, or to swoone, as you would say for
love. But she has two aides and comfortes in this her weakness: one expressed
in this verse: the other in the next verse following. That in this verse is,
that those that attend upon her by the Bridegromes appointment, that is, the
Prophets, Apostles and servants of God (See for this purpose Ephesians. 4. from
verse 11. to the end of the 16) do minister unto her at her request, the
spiritual Treasures and good things of her Husband, which I take to be noted,
and that very forcible and plainly by these words: Proppe me up with these
flagons: bear me up with these apples, as it were appointing some certain
aides, which if they were neglected, all the rest that could be used, were
worth nothing. And by Flagons, no doubt she means, by the figure Metonimie,
the thing containing, for the thing contained, that is, the sweet. Water and
drink of life, of which see Isaaih, 55. 1. which Treasure also we have in
earthen Vessels, or Flagonnes, as 2. Corinthians 4. 7. and is indeed nothing
else but the sweet promises of Christ unto everlasting life. And though by
Apples laid under her as it were, she mean the self same thing: yet there
is another order of it. For he alludeth to the custom of men, who, when other
are swooning or faynting, are wont to put strong smelling, things unto their
Nostrelles: so the Church means, that for her comfort and refreshing, and
reclayming her again as it were from death to life, she would have well
smelling Apples, fette out of Christ's Treasure, both held and applied to her,
that by that means she may be, as it were recovered: For I am sick with
love: q. d. I shall never cease, nor be in quiet, till I perfectly enjoy my
Husbands company, feeling in this life, the assured Testimonye of his
continual favor, and possessing the same eternally in the heavenly glory. See
2. Corin. 5. 1. 2. etc. Philip. 1. 23.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace
me) These are still the words of the church, containing as I said before, the
second comfort in her fainting: and that is, that she had her spouse, not
only present with her (who alone is able effectuallye to heal the church) but
showing singular love and kindness cowardes her: staying her up with the one
hand that she fall not down, and comforting her with the other by lauing
embracing her. I know that some put the right hand for length of days, and the
left hand for glory and riches, as Proverb. 3. 16. But this is the more
simple, and agrees better with the circumstaunce of place and person, to wit
that Christ by using the gestures of those that do embrace their friends, and
comfort and ease them in their infirmities, does express thereby, the singular
love he has to his church, and his tender care over her in comforting her.

Verse. 7. I charge you and that by an oath.) These are still as I take the^,
the words of the church, and not of Christ (as some suppose) resting in the
imbrasing of her spouse, of which we heard immediatlye before verse 6.
straightlye charging those to whom she speaks, that no manner of way they
be troublesome or disquietous to her spouse, that rests him self and takes
pleasure in the imbracinges of her. And there is a double reason that leads
me to think, that these are the churches words rather then Christ's. First,
because that she by reason of the authority she had, might command, as she
does verse 15. of this Chapter. Secondly, because all the words that follow
till you come to verse. 15 are the Churches words. When she says that she
charge them by an oath, she means that she does very hardly and straightly
charge them, and as it were in conscience bind them. For the words, Daughters
of Jerusalem, see chapter 1:5. she means no doubt such, as wished well to the
church, and had somewhat to do therein. Tarry ye abroad with theroes, or with
the hindes of the field. That is, get you abroad for a while, take your
pleasure, and do what you will, only disquiet not, neither vex my spouse. And
all this is spoken by the church, as though the feast had been kept abroad in
some country town or Village abroad: also it is uttered after the manner of
men and their wives, who when they will talk of secret matters, or take their
rest and sleep quietly together, will bid their children and servant avoid,
and get them abroad to recreate them selves whether they will for a while.
Stir not up, neither make, That is, disquiet him not any manner of way. And
this the church speaks both of her hearty love that she bears toward her
spouse: and also of good will that she carries toward her self, who earnestly
wishes and destreth to enjoy the continual presence, and company of her
spouse. This love, vz. of mine, meaning him, whom she most dearly and tenderly
loved: which thing is also forcible and playnlie expressed by the article,
this. Until he will himself. The Church refers all, to the good will and
pleasure of her spouse, only this she takes care for, that he may not be
provoked or disturbed by her, or any of hers, by any occasion or offense
though never so small, but shows herself loving and obedient to him in all
things. See Ephesians. 5. 24.

Verse 8. It is the voice of my Well-beloved. The Church in the verses before
going, and namely verse 4. 5. 6. had set out one notable duty of our savior
toward her, and that was of life and salvation which he brought her, figured
under the shadow of a banquet and healing. Now she recokneth up another
kindness showed, to wit, the giving of her pleasure, peace and all good
things necessary for her: and this he sets out under the figure of the
spring time, and of all green and flourishinge things, offering them selves
as it were to the sight and service of the church, and this reaches from this
verse to the end of the 15. And this speech may be divided into two parts. One
is, that Christ offers all good things to the church, and refreshes her,
being delivered from the winterly tempests of sin: and this reaches unto
verse 14. The other is, that he puts back from her, al evil and hurtful
things, and this is comprised in ver. 15, both which graces Christ performs
to his church, by his word and the ministers thereof, who are his servants
appointed to y^ purpose: as 2. Cor. 4. 5. But let us come to the words as they
lie. It is the voice of my well-beloved. These words are spoken, as though while
the bride slept, the bridegroom had gone abroad some whither, and as though she
had been suddenly waked, and made meruellous glad, by the voice of her spouse
returning back again, q. d. Certainly it is my spouses voice, wherein I much
rejoice, all this while I did but dream it, or imagine it so to be: as when
strange things and unlooked for come to pass, we can hardly be persuaded at
the first that they are so, as Psalm. 126, 1, But now I perceive of a truth,
it is not his voice indeed. Behold him. q. d. I would have you that are my
friends and welwillers, to be persuaded of this, as well as I: for I take
that she speaks these words to them. He comes leaping upon these
mountains, skipping upon these hills. These words of leaping and skipping,
do not only note his great speed and hair, to succor and comfort his
church, which is also set out in the next Verse, by the similitude of Roes
and Hindes: but the other words also of Mountains and Hills, do meruelously
express his singular love, as though the Church should say: the danger of
the iorneye, the hardness of the way, neither any thing else as man's power,
aids and such like, can hinder him from coming to me, to comfort me in my
distresses. And that mountains and hills are so used, may appear. Isa. 40. 3.

Verse 9 My beloved is like a Roe, or a hindes calfe.. The Church means by
these words, to declare how swift and speedy Christ is to comfort and succor
her. We our selves know by experience that Roes and hindes be very swift
footed: but besides our own knowledge, we have the warrant of the word: as
Psalm. 18. 33* beholding him standing behind our wall. As though the church
should say. It is a wonderful thing, be stands by me, and is present with
me sooner then I can speak. And when she says, standing behind our wall, I
think by Wall, she means Gods goodness, and the promises and comfortes of
his word, with which the church in the time of the cross and trial, armeth
and defends her self: behind which, Christ may be said to stand, when the
perfourmance thereof, is not plainly seen to his children, and yet he is
always nigh unto them in the truth thereeof always to help them, as she
afterward adds. For the word Wall, see Isaiah. 26. 1. Looking forth of the
windows. I take, that by all these speeches, the church means nothing else,
but Christ's favor toward her. This speech may be borrowed from great
personages and states: as kings, Queens and such like, who do many times show
themselves at windows to be seen of their people: which thing also the people
take as a testimony of great favor, specially when out of the windows, they
show them pleasant and delightful countenaunces. Springing out of the gates.
This speech is somewhat dark, and yet so it is in the Hebrew text: and is a
Metaphore taken from flourishing trees and flowers, to which Christ was
resembled before verses. 1. 3. The church means nothing by this manner of
speech, but to set out, the most flourishing and pleasant countenance, that
her spouse gave her. In sum, all comes to this: that the churches words do
by certain steps, as it were, set out the wonderful work of Christ
toward her: as first, she hears his voice, verse 8. Next she sees him
coming, verse 8. also. And lastly, she does presently behold him present.
verse 9.

Verse. 10. My well-beloved speaking fair unto me) In this verse, the church
takes upon her the person of her spouse as it were, declaring what words he
used to her, who as yet calls her, not to the full and absolute enjoying of
those good things that are laid up for her in heaven, but to the most assured
seals and pledges, of those good things that are to come, which Christ would
have communicated unto his Church, both in word and deed by his eternal
spirit. Arise my love, my fair one, and come. When our savior calls the
church his love, he shows in what great regard he has her, and how tenderly
he favors her: and when he calls her, his fair one, he shows how much
he does account of her. For so much is the church in deed, and the particular
members thereof, as it pleases the spouse to esteem of them. And when he says
arise and come, he means that he would have her come out of the ignorance,
darkness, and sin, wherein she was, to the pleasantnes of righteousness and
holy conversation, wherein he takes delight, and so you shall find the word
arise used Romans 13. 11. and the word come. Math. 11. 28.

Verse. 11. For lo winter is past: the rain is past, it is gone away. This is
a reason that the spouse yields, why the church should arise and come unto
him, and it is taken (joining this 11. 12. and 13. verse. following together)
from a comparing of the time before her calling, with the time after her
calling. The former time was winterlike and stormye altogether, and then was
the Church strange from the common wealth of God, and wallowing in sin: but
the time since her calling, is altogether green, flourishing, pleasant,
sweet fruitful, and such as should most plentifully replenish her heart and all
her senses, and this I take to be the meaning of these three verses 11. 12. 13.
together, to wit that by Winter, rain, etc. he means sin, error,
ignorance and all crosses either inward or outward laid upon the church, as
persecution, reproach, etc: and by flourishing things, singing of birds, the
voice of Turtles, the fig tree and her young ones: The Vine and her first
grape, etc. which are all evident tokens of spring time and Summer, he means
assured testimonies of Gods grace: as forgiveness of sins, knowledge, and
light of the truth, and all outward blessings of the Lord, as peace,
plentye, prosperity, etc. And that by Winter and rain, should be signified
sin and ignorance, it is not without proportion. For as in the winter
season, all is stormy* turbulent, and dark: so sin bearing swaye, there is
nothing but disorder and ignorance. Now, let us more particularlye, consider
the words of the 12. and 13. verses, which I take to be so excellent a
description of the spring time, and so forward, as none either has been, or
can be more lively given. For in the spring time flourishing things, that is,
flowers show them selves, and Birds sing, to the great comfort of men, and
the fig does send forth her green figs, and the Vine her tender grape,
whereas other trees for the most part, do show them in flowers first, and
afterward in fruit. For the better understanding of this place, see that
which our savior says, Mat. 24. 32. of the fig tree. And when he says The
Fig tree it self, and likewise adds the Vines them selves, he speaks
this as a sure proof that the spring is come. For the fig tree and the vine,
be two of the last, trees (as we know by experience) that make show of their
fruit, q. d. If you will not believe, by beholding the flowers on earth, by
hearing the birds and turtles sing (all which are evident signs of the spring
time): Yet believe it, because the figg tree and the vine which are more late
then other trees, have also yielded out their fruit. And when he says, Even in
the first grape, he means not that the vine yields fruit twice a year, as
one grape first, and an other after: but that this was the first appearance of
the grape, and that yet notwithstanding the vine it self did yield, a sweet
smelling savor, both in the leaves and fruit. As for that which follows in
this 13. verse, Arise my love, my fair one and come, is expounded before verse
10. of this chapter.

Verse. 14. My dove, etc. The church still repeateth the words of her spouse,
begun before ver. 10. And in that he calls her dove, he means not only
thereby her beautye and fayrenes, because Doves be commonly white: but also
he means her chastity, as before chap. 1. 15: Also her simplicitye and
vprightnes, together with freedom from bitterness. See Math. 10. 16. also
Psalm. 74. 19. Writers also affirm, that the dove has no gall. He alludeth
also further to the nature of a dove in the next words, when as he says,
Living in these cliftes of the rock in a den all to broken. For they that
write of the nature of creatures, affirm, that the doves do specially
delight to be seen in rocks, and to lie hid in the Holes and cleftes: but by
these things he means as I take it, the modestye or shamefastness of the
church, who sometimes through the feeling of her sins, sometimes for the
grieuousnes of persecutions, is glad to get her into the rocks, which are
taken to be places of sure defense, and therefore he adds particularly in
these clefies of the rock, In which respect the faithful many times call
their Lord their rock, as Psalm. 18. 2* and sometimes to be content with places
of less assurance as dens all to broken, to the end that for a while she may
hide her self there from the rage and cruelty of the enemy, Show me thy
countenaunces, that is, show thy self in my presence and come unto me. Neither
lacks it some force that he speaks in the plural number, as that he would
have her to leave none of her particular congregations or members behind her.
Make me to hear thy voice, that is to say, speak to me, walk continuallye
with me, and be conuersaunt with me. O singular love of Christ to his church,
that does thus earnestly seek for and desire the presence and company thereof:
and O wonderful ingratitude of the church, if she should contemn it. For thy
voice is sweet, and thy countenance comelye. All this he speaks of the
church, not that she is so of her self, but it pleases her spouse so to
accept of her. For therefore has he given him self for the church, that he
might make it glorious unto him self, etc. as Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27. And these
words contain also a reason, why Christ so much destreth the presence and
company of his spouse.

Verse 15. Take for us the foxes.) I take these words still to be spoken by
the church, in the person of Christ, as though that he spoke unto his
friends, not only willing but commanding them earnestly to endeavor the
remoouing of all things great and little, that might hinder the grows of his
church, which is a peculier inheritance unto him self, whether it were in
unsound doctrine, or in corrupt conversation. See Tit. 2. 14* And when he
says, Take for us, he shows that he has as great love to the church as to
him self, which if it be spoiled or hurt, it redoundeth also to him self. By
foxes, he means not only evil men, as heretics, dissolute persons, etc.
that would hinder the grows of the church: but all other things whatsoever,
how great or how little soever they be: which also he signifies by the next
speech, in that he calls them little foxes. And when he adds, corrupting
the vines, he means marring and destroying, yea bringing as it were to utter
corruption and destruction the churches of God. That Gods church or the
particular churches, are resembled to vynes, may appear by sundry places of
Scripture, as Isaiah. 5. 1, etc. Psalm. 80. 8. 14. Math. 21. 33, etc. And that
foxes are hurtful to vines, our very proouerb shows, the fox will eat no
grapes. Whilst our vines bring forth the first grape, that is, while they are
tender and young, as before verse 13. For eue^ then when the church is beginning
to grow, would it be looked unto specially: which they that have care of,
ought heedely to mark, and to take heed, that it be not devoured by grievous
Wolves, and by men that shall rise up from among them selves. As Acts. 20. 29.
30. 1. John. 2. 19. and other places.

Verse. 16. My well-beloved is mine.) These are the words of the church, spoken
in her own person, and is the conclusion of the former discourse made in this
chapter by her: wherein she first rejoices for the most excellent fellowship
that she had with Christ: and next she wishes as it were, his continual
presence all the days of her life, promising to remain his, until she be
perfectlye joined with him in heaven. Now when she says, My well-beloved is
mine, and I am his, It is as much, as if she should say: he will have no
other for his wife but me, neither will I acknowledge any other for my Spouse
but him: we will either of us delight one in an other, and be contented to
take and love one an other only. It follows. That feeds among the Lilies.

I know these words are diversely interpreted, and I think it arises,
because the Hebrew word may be taken either passiuely or actiuely. Some expound
it thus, that feeds among the lilies, that is, that is most sweet, and by the
good smell of his sauors, that is by his goodness, and the sweetness of his
promises calls and allureth me unto him. I will speak what I think, I had
rather expound it thus: that feeds) vz. his flocks* as chap. 1. 7. among the
lilies, that is, in sweet pleasant, soft and well smelling pasture. q. d. He
that plentifullye, pleasantly and sweetlye handles and entreats those that
are his. And to this sense seems to agree, Psalm. 23. 1. 2.

Verse. 17. Until that day shall come, and these shadows shall fly away.
These are still the words of the church, and must be joined to the latter
end of the other verse, wherein she promises that she will remain to him
for ever and ever. For though the word until, do most commonly note but a
piece of time, yet here it is used for a perpetuity and euerlastingnes of
time, as it is also in other places: as 2. Sam. 6. 23. Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 5.
26. Mat. 28. 20 Which may also appear in that she says so forcibly, Until
that day shall come, by which he means that same great and last day of
judgment, which is usually pointed out, by that manner of speech, both in the
old and new Testament: as Joel. 2. 31. 2. Tim. 2. 18. And these shadows shall
fly away. By shadows he means both ye troubles of this life, and al vanities
whatsoever, that are set between her and her spouse, while she lives in this
world: or else we may understand by shadows, all those things that may shadow
out unto us, the hope of eternal life and glory: which may be called
shadows, not that they are so of them selves, but being compared with others,
that do lead us unto those, and when she says, shall fly away, he notes the
sudden vanishing of the same. Return. The church speaks this, as though
her Spouse were departed, and as though she could not endure and abide his
absence, though it were never so small awhile. Belike (O my beloved) to a roe,
or to a hindes calfe, that is, make most haste and speed to come unto me, as
before in this chapter verse 9. And depart not any whit at al from me, running
on mountains, when one of them are sundred from an other. He means no doubt
the mountains of Gilead, which the river of Jorden did separate from the rest
of Judea. See 2. Sam. 2. 29. Now, he rather remembers these mountains then
others of the country of Judea, because they were notable and commodious for
hunting, and well stored with game, and therefore much haunted. For at what time
Solomon wrote these things, as it should appear, Hamath was not greatly
occupied, neither was the house builded in the forest of Libanus. see 2. Chro.
8. 2. 3. etc. 1. Kin. 7. 1. 2. etc.

Ver. 1. Teaches us, that if we will have pleasant, sweet, and good things, we
must look for the^ in Christ only, for it pleased the Father, that in him
alone should all fulness dwell. Col. 1. 19.

Verse. 2. Sets out the excellency and beauty of the Church, instructing us
to join our selves to that holy fellowship, which the Lord him self
accounts the pillar of truth, and his own house. 1. Tim. 3. 15.

Verse. 3. Does not only show, that our Savior Christ has in him the
fullness of all goodness. John. 1. 16. But also these words, I do greatly
desire to sit, do teach us what a holy hunger and thirst we ought to have after
him. For which see Psalm. 42. 1. 2. Psalm. 84. 2. and that not for a small
while, but continually, for he that continues to the end shall be saved. Mat.
24. 13.

Verse. 4. Teaches, first that all the good things we have, we have from God.
James. 1. 17. by the mean of our savior Christ, which is always taught in
these words, Grace be with you and peace from God our Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 7. Secondly, that all these things, whether they be
bodily, or spiritual, or both, are bestowed upon us for Christ's sake, and
that therefore the Lord is to be continually praised. as Ephesians. 1, 3. 4. 5. 6.
1. Pet. 1. 3.

Verse. 5. Teaches us, first that we should comfort and strengthen one an other
in our faintinges. Heb. 3. 12. 13. Heb. 13. 1. 3. Romans 12. 9. 10. 11. 13. 15.
16. Secondly, how earnest and hearty our love should be to Christ, who has
loved us so tenderly, that he has given himself for us. Romans 5. 6. 7. 1. John.
3. 16. 1. John. 4. 9. 10. 11.

Verse. 6. Teaches, that the presence of Christ to his church, by his
spiritual power and grace, is marvelous comfortable: which made our savior
also to promise it, as appears. Mat. 28. 20*

Verse. 7. Teaches us, that not only those yt are without the church, but those
that are lincked and joined to that holy body, have need sundry times not only
to be admonished, but also straightly charged, that they do not any thing that
may grieve or disquiet Jesus Christ the head thereof. Ephesians. 5. 23. For if they
do but never so little provoke him, Psa. 2. 12*
then blessed are all those that trust in him.

Verse. 8. Sets out the great speed and have as it were, that Christ makes
to help and succor his church in her griefs and distresses. For proof
whereof, see Luke 18. 8. True it is, that men many times think the time very
long, as Psalm. 13. 1. But we must learn in patience to possess our own
souls, Luke 21. 19. and to tarry the lords leisure, Psalm. 27. 14. Psalm. 37. 34.

Verse. 9* Teaches, that it is marvelous comfortable to the distressed oues of
God, to be persuaded, or to see by the eye of faith, testimonies and assured
tokens of Christ's favor, presence and help.

Verse 10. Does not only teach Christ's love toward his church, calling her
from: the vanities and delights of this life, to the hope of a far better
state: but also teaches her to yield obedience to that call, and that while it
is to day. Heb. 3. 7. 15. least otherwise we hear that terrible judgment
pronounced and practiced against Jerusalem Math. 23. 37. 38.

Verse. 11. Shows, that our savior graciously remooueth all lettes and
impedimentes that might hinder us from coming to him, and namely our sins,
as Isaiah 1. 18. Iere. 3. 35. Psalm. 103. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. So that if there
be any defect or want, it is not in him, but in our selves, who many times
through the corruption of our own nature, do cast stumbling blocks in our
own ways, to hinder and let us in the course and raze of godliness.

Verse. 12. 13. Teach us further, that God does not only remove stoppes and
lets, but also gives unto us abundance of his mercyes as continual spurs
in our sides, to provoke us to well doing and obedience. Joseph made his
masters favor an effectual instrument, to keep him back from committing
vilany with his mistres. Genes. 39. 8. See Deutr. 8. through out, but specially
from verse 10. to the end of the chapter.

Verse 14. Teaches us, that the church sometimes by one mean, and sometimes
by another, is brought into wonderful distresses. Which thing is lively
expressed Isaiah. 5. 1. 2. 3, etc. Also Math. 21. 33. 34, etc. under the
parable of the vineyard. Which also rightly considered serves well to stop
those men's mouths, that stand so much upon the outward show, and multitude of
the church. See Michaiah 7. 1. Romans 11. 1. 2. 3-4. 5, etc. Isaiah. 1 ver. 9.

Verse. 15. Teaches us that all things what soever, though they be never so
great or little (and therefore these speeches they are small things, are of no
force, hindering ye growth of the church) ought to be removed, and that
specially even in the beginning of the planting of Churches, and while the
churches themselves, be as it were tender and young. This order of reformation,
the good kings observed: as Iehosaphat. 2. Chr. through out 17. Hezekiah, also
2. Chr. 29. etc. Josias likewise 2. Chro. 34. through out, and namely verse 3.
from which our savior Christ him self was not far off in example and
practice. Ioh. 2. 14. 15. etc.

Verse. 16. 17. Set out, the assured and continual affection, that ought to be
in the church, to her spouse and head Christ, so that in purpose and strength
of Gods spirit, she may always say: Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril or sword? No, for I am persuaded, that neither life nor death nor angels
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our lord, as it is written. Romans 8. 35.
36. 37. 38. 39.

CHAP. the third and the sum thereof.
The Church declares the most earnest desire that she had every day more
then other, to take hold of, and to obtain her spouse, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Afterward being fully assured of the glory of her spouse, she shows that it
is much better and profitable for her, not to stay her spouse here, but to
follow him, ascending into his heavenly brydechamber. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

1 IN my bed sundry nights I seeking him, that my soul loves, I seeking him
(I say) when I had not found him, I said,

2 I will now rise up, and I will go about the city: by the streets and by
the open places will I seek him, whom my soul loves: but seeking him I have
not found him.

3 I said unto the watchmen that go about the City, they finding me, have you
seen him whom my soul loves?

4 I had but a little passed by from them, when I found him whom my soul
loves: I took hold of him, neither will I suffer him to depart, till I shall
have brought him into my mothers house, and into the inner chamber of her that
conceived me.

5 I charge you by an oath, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, tarrye abroad with
the Roes, or with the hindes of the field, stir not up, neither awake this
love till he will himself.

6 Who is she that would come up out of the wilderness, as it were perfumed with
the liftinges up of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and incense, better then all
the fine powder of the Apothecary?

7 Behold his bed, which is better then that, that is Solomon's, (about which
stand threescore mighty men, of the mighty men of Israel,

8 All taking hold of the sword, are expert in war: every one is gyrded with
his swoorde upon his thigh, for fear every night.)

9 Yea better then the bed, which king Solomon prepared for him self, of the
trees of Lebanon:

10 Whose pillars be made of silver, and that that was laid upon it of gold:
whose covering was purple colored, the inwardes whereof were as i^ were, paued
with love, by the Damsels of Jerusalem.

11 O ye damsels of Sion, come forth and behold king Solomon, with the
crown, which his mother provided for him, in the day of his betrothinges, and
in the day of the gladness of his heart.


THough in this song it may be, Con.
that all the chapters thereof, do not hang and depend one upon an other, by
reason that some things were said and done at one time, and in one place, and
some at an other time, and in an other place: yet for the knitting of this with
the former, this me thinks may be noted, that having before declared, what
passed in the day season, or else when the day was very nigh, and that while
they were together in the country as it were; the church does now declare the
matters and speeches, had in the night, and in the city, as may plainly
appear by the two first verses.

1 The chapter I take it, Diuis.
may be divided into two parts. In the first the church sets out the great
desire that she has to take hold of Christ, and to possess him, which
appears in this, that by day and by night, at home and abroad, in the
country and in the city, she is wonderfully inflamed with his love, and this
reaches from verse 1. to the end of the 5.

2 In the other she does as it were correct her self, desiring rather that he
should take hold of her, and that she might abide with him, than he with her,
where upon she enters into a commendation of his glory, sweetness, etc. not
only comparing it with Solomon's, but preferring it before it, and that by
many degrees, and this reaches from verse 6. unto the end of the chapter.

Verse 1. In my bed) These are the churches words, testifiyng her hunger and
thirst after her spouse, that in these places, and at these times, wherein
men give them selves to their pleasures and rest, her soul was tossed and
troubled with seeking, yea and longing after him, whom his soul loved. And it
would be marked, that she says not only one night, but sundry nights:
testifiyng her continuance and earnellnesse, in this holy hunger, and most
assured love: to which also appertains the dubbling of the word seeking him,
expressing thereby her earneste affection. These words, whom my soul loves,
are expounded before, chapter 1. 7. In sum, the church using this Periphrasis
instead of a proper name, does nothing else but express the force of his love,
and the earnestnes thereof. Now where she adds, when I had found him, that
is, when I did not sufficiently perceive him, to be present with me according
to my hearts desire (for else Christ is never absent from his church, but
continually present therewith, as appears Math. 28. 20.) True it is that in
our understanding, and to the judgment of the Church, Christ seems either to
be altogether absent, or else not very nigh: but howsoever it be, this is the
truth, that He that keeps Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.
4. But ye Godly are most grieved with this assault in the time of
persecutions, trialls, troubles, sorrows, etc. Which also may be signified by
the word night in this place, as it seems to be taken. Job. 17. 12. It
follows I said, (vz. to my self) for all these are the words of the Church,
speaking unto herself, and as it were declaring the consultations which she had
with her self, and resolving what she were best to do.

Verse. 2. I will now rise up. q. d. I will delay it no longer, now I am
resolved diligently and carefully to seek him, yea leaving my bed and
natural rest, to the end I may find him. And I will go about the City, vz.
to seek him. q. d. I will leave no place unsought, which also may appear by
the particulers following of streets and open places. I will seek him. vz.
with great diligence and earnestneses whom my soul loves, (see verse. 7. of
the first chapter) but seeking him I have not found him. The spouse expresses
these words sorrowfully, not so much for the pains she took, as that she
could not meet with him, whom she so tenderly loved, and carefully sought. And
when she says, she found him not, she means so sufficiently as she would,
and as her heart desired, as may appear also by ver. 1. of this chapter, for
the better understanding of these words in this place, read the notes there,
for they serve also fitly for the purpose.

Verse 3. I said unto the watchmen. The church means by this manner of
speech, that she neither dissembled her love toward Christ, nor feared to
demand every one that she meets, no though they were public rulers or
preachers (for that it is as I think, she means by watch men: Ezech. 33. 2.)
concerning Christ her husband, but that she did openly declare her unfeigned
love toward him, for which see, chap. 2. 5. that go about the city, she
speaks this according to the custom of men, or towns of war, who besides
that they have standing or set watches, for every corner or quarter of their
city, have also certain chief men appointed for their authority and
faithfulness, continually to go from one place to another, to oueruew the
rest, and to see that they are faithful in the charges committed unto them.
They finding me, that is, when they had found me, going about the city by the
streets and open places thereof, as verse. 2. Have you seen him. She speaks
to such as perhaps knew him not, neither by name nor by face, though indeed
they should have been well acquainted with him: but such is the force of
earnest love, that it many times makes men believe, that others know them,
whom they like of, though they do not. Whom my soul loves. See this
expounded, chap. 1. 7.

Verse. 4. I had but a little passed by from them. The Church declares not
what comfort or counsel she had at the watch-mens hands, which perhaps was
little or nothing at all, so rechlesse and unfaithful many times are they
that should be most forward, but proceeds to declare what issue her diligent
searching had, namely that she was scarce gone from them, or passed but a
little way from them. When I found him, whom my soul loves, vz. to the great
joy and contentment of my heart. I took hold of him. As in the former words
she had declared what she did before she found him, so now she shows what
she did after she had found him, vz. laid fast and sure hold of him, as loath
to let him depart, whom she had so painefullye sought, and did so tenderly
love. Neither will I suffer him to depart, vz. at any time or by any means
from me. She shows the holy purpose she had, to detain and keep Christ with
her, for the better performance whereof also she makes a promise, that she
might thereby be the more straightlye bound to the doing of the same. Till I
shall have brought him into my mothers house. For the word till, see before
chapter 2. 17. meaning also by her mothers house, most familiar and
delightful dwelling and continuance with him; by which also, (for the great
love that mothers bear unto their children, for which see Isaiah 49. as also
Isaiah 66. 13.) she notes most comfortable intertainement, and friendlye
continuing together, as it were under one roof. And into the inner chamber,
she means the best place of the house, and most secreat, and if any one were
more secreat and better than an other. See 2. King. 6. 12. Of her that
conceived me. A periphrasis, or description of her mother. See Psalm. 51. 5.

Verse. 5. 1. I charge you by an oath. The church having obtained her husband,
and his holy company or fellowship, enioyneth and that very vehementlye, the
particular members thereof, to do nothing that may be grievous unto him, and
no doubt but she has a special regard to the custom used then, and yet
even at this day in some places used amongst us, namely that songs are sung
before the Bryde chamber, and certain noyses of instruments brought, to wake
the bride and bridegroom from sleep. See all this verse, even word for word as
it is here, expounded before chap. 2. verse 7. which also is an usual thing
in this book, as we see in many marriage songs, and other kind of verses also.

Verse. 1. Who is she, vz. beside my self: q. d. what people is there in the
world besides the church, that would do this and that, that is, those things
which are expressed in this verse? And here begins the other part of the
chap: in which the church, correcting as it were, her former speech, speaks
thus as it were; what should I cause him to remain with me? Nay rather, I
should strive to enter into his palace, who has all things most fair,
best furnished, and exceedingly sweet, and well smelling, yea, whose very
Bed or Bride-chamber, is much more glorious, then all Solomon's roialty, which
afterward she commends in many respects. That would come up out of the
wilderness, that is, forsake the world, and the things that be therein, which
may be aptly compared to a wilderness, because* as it is commonly full of
hurtful and noisome things, so is the world. As it were perfumed, with the
liftings up of smoke, that is, ascending up directly even as pillars of smoke.
She adds, perfumed with myrh and incense. We know that these were sweet and
pleasant things, for the savor and smell of them, see Psalm. 45. 8* Better then
all the fine powder of the Apothecarie. The word that is here turned
Apothecary, signifies such a merchaunt as sells all sorts of sweet
smelling things. Our grossers here amongst us, but specially our
Apothecaries, have their shops most stuffed with such savors, and are most
often in the compounding of such things for smell, and therefore it is not ill
turned Apothecary. Whatsoever it be: the Church minds to declare, that though
she had the vaintiest, and delightfullest things in the world, yet these could
not hinder her from coming to her husband Christ, in whom were hid all the
treasures of God. Col. 1. 19. Also Coll. 2. 3. and as in respect of which, all
the things of the world were to be accounted but loss, dyrt, dung, and
whatsoever is most vile; see Phil. 3. 8.

Verse 7* Behold this bed, which is better then that that is Solomon's. She
amplyfieth the excellency of the bed of Christ and his church, by comparing it
with Solomon's, and first she commends it for the safety that is to be had and
found there, and that in this verse, and verse 8: all which is contained in a
parenthesis as you may see. Secondly for the dear price, and rich furniture of
the same, verse. 9, 10. And she enters into this course of commendation, not
only to set out the great glory of her husband, but thereby also the better to
stir her up to perform her duty toward him, that was of such great state
and magnifice^ce. About which stand threescore mighty men. q. d. The bed is
watched, least any should either by force or frawd, annoy the bridegr^me or his
spouse: neither does this watch consist of weaklings, but of most stout and
courageous men, yea, and that of a great number of them, namely threescore,
and those not heathenish idolaters, or profane professors, but as she says
afterward, of the mighty men of Israel, that is, faithful and godly, having
the knowledge, belief, zeal, and obedience of religion toward the Lord, and
therefore most likely to be found trusty, toward other. All this is spoken
after the manner of earthly princes, who as they have their guard for the day,
so they have their watch for ye night, and yt in and about the bed-chambers, as
a man would say.

Verse. 8. All taking hold of the sword. He amplifieth this guard or defense,
showing that they are not only godly men, but as he said before, men of
valor, and courage, able to handle this weapon both for the defense of them
selves, and their king, and for the annoyaunce and hurt of their enemies. Are
expert in war. As before she had commended them for their strength, so here
she prayseth them for their skill, because one of these without the other are
little available. Every one is girded with his sword upon his thigh. This was
the manner and custom then of that people, as appears Psalm. 45. 3. By which
also she notes their readiness in the use of their weapons. For fear, vz.
least any hurt should befaule ye brydgro^e or ye brid. Every night, she means
yt they use this course of a watchful care and wise defense continually. No
doubt but under all this, the holy Ghost meant to show, in what a safe state,
and condition they are, that are matched with him, who have both infinite
numbers of holy angels to attend upon them, Psalm. 91. 10. and of godly
teachers to fence and guard them, as it were through all the dangers and
distresses of this life whatsoever. See Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. For though he
speak here but of a certain number, yet no doubt but thereby he understands
an infinite number, which is also usual in the holy scriptures.

Verse. 9. Yea better than the bed which king Solomon prepared for him self.
Every word here tends to the magnifiying of the marriage bed of Christ and
his Church. As first in that it was better then a kings bed, who for his state
and riches was commendable thorough the world and wonderful. 1. King. 10. 27.
Thirdly, in that it was better then that, which he had prepared for himself.
We know what good things men make for themselves, specially when they have
wherewithal to do the same. Yea, the very word which is here rendered Bed
tends to the amplifying hereof, because it signifies a fruitful and
flourishing bed, of which see before chap. 1. 16. Yea and the words following
make also to that purpose. When she adds, of the trees of Lebanon, which was
a place far from Jerusalem, the wood also whereof was very excellent and
good, as which for the worthiness of it was employed to the best thing, namely
the building of the Temple, as appears 1. King. 5. 6. So that it was
commendable, because it was chargeable, as being far fet, and also because it
was a notable and famous kind of wood.

Verse. 10. Whose pillars are made of silver. As she had before spoken
generally of it: so now she comes to discribe it by piece meal as it were,
affirming that the pillars were of silver. We know that standing beds have
pillars and posts to uphold the Testers: now whereas other men's were made of
wood, his pillars were of silver, which should not seem strange unto us, seeing
the holy Ghost says, he gave silver in Jerusalem, as plentiful as stones.
1. King. 10. 27. And that that was laid upon it of gold, he means by that
which was laid upon it, the bed it self, as we say, understanding also by
gold, that it was most precious, because nothing we have is commonly more
dear then gold. Whose covering was purple colored. He means that the
covering or couerlet appertayning to that bed, was of a rich and costlye
color. For purple was in those days accounted most dear and precious. See
Proverb. 31. 22. Also chapter 7. 5. of this book, Mark. 15. 17. Luke 16. 19.
The inwardes whereof, he means the parts of the bedding, yt were for the
time out of sight. Were as it were paued with love, that is, were as costly and
rich, as if they had been adorned with things yt men most love and like noting
also by ye word pauing, the varieties of works yt were in the same, as in
pauinges we see some checkered, some diamonded some one way, and some another,
which also are no doubt, cunningly wroght with needle work, a matter much set by
in these dais in every thing. See Psalm. 45. 14. By the damsels of Jerusalem, he
expresses ye persons yt should perform this work, not meaning such as were
brought up in the cuntry, but within the compass of the walls of Jerusalem,
where it was like they had bin trained up, in most curious, cunning, and costly
workmanship.

Verse. 11* O ye damsels of Zion. Those, whom in the other verse he had called
damsels of Jerusalem, he calls here damsels of Zion, putting a part for the
whole. For the hill of Zion was a piece of the city, meaning no doubt by these,
the faithful and sound members of the church, whom yet notwithstanding they
were forward, the church puts in mind of their duties. Come forth, vz.
out of your own private houses, into public places, and behold king
Solomon. The fame and name of Solomon's glory was great, but yet not matchable
with yt of Christ, for behold a greater then Solomon is here, Mat. 12. 42. and
yet because she had none greater to compare him unto, she resembles him to
the greatest. For even as the proper name David, is in scripture attributed to
christ, as Iere. 30. 9. So is Solomon's here in this place. With the crown
which his mother provided for him Now she describes Solomon's glory, yet so
that under the same is meant, the exceeding majesty of Christ. The word crown
is put for the same, as Phil. 4. 1. and by these words which his mother
provided for him, is set out ye excellency thereof: for mothers will provide no
base or mean things for their children, if they be able. In the day of his
betrothings, yt is against the time yt he should be affianced and married also,
for she puts ye beginning as it were of marriage, for ^he whole action of the
same. And in the day of the gladness of his heart, that is, against the day,
wherein his heart was made glad, which was not only when he and his wife,
were affiaunced, but when they were married, and marriage duties performed,
we knowing by experience, that the marriage day is the day of greatest mirth,
specially to the parties married, against which day also the parties
themselves, and the parents and all, do bestow all the cost that possiblye
they can, as we see by daily and continual experience.

Verse 1. Teaches us to be in continual meditation of Christ and heavenly
things, yea and that we should for that purpose, break our sleeps as it were,
to the end that we may be seized with the feeling of the same: and though we
can not, at the first or second time conceive thereof, that yet we should not
for all that leave off, but look for a time, wherein that holy hunger and
thirst that we have of righteousness, shall be plentifully supplied, to Gods
glory and our comfort.

Verse. 2. Teaches us to shake off all impediments that may hinder us from
going to Christ: as whether it be the heaviness of our flesh, or corruption of
nature through sin, etc. For which see Heb. 12. 1. Also that we should seek
good things indeed with diligence and care to attain the same, and that not
in one place only, but in every place where they were likely to be had, or
may be found indeed: and that though we find them not at the first
seeking, yet we should not leave off. For it may be, that we seek them not,
where they are to be had, or search not after them with a right mind, and
therefore good reason why we should want the things we wish and desire; but
stir up our selves still, even as it were by excessive toil and importunity
to prevail at the length.

Verse. 3. Teaches us not to be ashamed or afraid, by demanding to come to
the possessing of those things that we wish and seek after. In laboring to
get worldly things, we will endeavor to shake off both shame and fear, and
whatsoever else might hinder us, in atchieuing our purposes, therefore for as
much as these things are far more excellent, we should labor likewise with
all earnestnes to obtain them. Also it teaches us to be watchful and
painful, in the places wherein God has put us, least otherwise through
negligence, we offend his Majesty, wound our souls, and hurt and hazard them,
whom god has set us over.

Verse 4. Teaches us, that if we be not faint hearted, we shall surely find
in that time that God has appointed with him self, from before all times, the
good things we long for and seek after. See Galath. 6. 9. Also that when we
have found them, we should labor continually to retain them with us, least
otherwise letting them go, or not setting by them, we be made void of excuse,
as in respect of our knowledge, and so our latter end be worse then the
beginning. See Math. 12. 43. 44. Also 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22.

Verse. 5. Teaches every one to have care and conscience, that neither in
persuasion nor practice, they do any thing to grieve or displease the Lord
Christ, and to cause him to depart for a time, either from the whole church,
or the particular members thereof: for besides that it is a grievous
transgression to contemn him, and so great graces as he brings with him: it
carries with it also, the eternal destruction of our souls.

Verse. 6. Teaches us, that Gods children are and should be, always willing
and contented, to depart from all things for the gayning of Christ. For if
they make more account of the things of this life, they are not fit for him,
as he him self plainly tells us. Math. 10. 37. Revel. 14. 26. Secondlye,
that howsoever the things that God gives us in this life, are of them selves
good, yet that they are evil, when they hinder us from approaching to our
savior, and that therefore we should so use the world, as though we used it
not. 1. Cor. 7. 31. and no further then as thereby we may be furthered, in the
assured feeling of Christ and eternal blessedness through him.

Verse. 7. Teaches us to prefer things that be indeed good, yea things that
are the best indeed: and that we should not be deceived with a vain show of
things, appearing to be that which they are not. See Phillip. 4. 8. Secondly,
that strength of body and courage of heart, is a thing not to be despised, but
greatly esteemed rather, as a notable mean, that the Lord has bestowed upon
men, both for the just defense of them selves, and of other oppressed. Provided
always that they do not as Lamech or Nimrod, abuse to pride in them selves,
or tyranny toward other, or to roioyce in the same against the Lord, because
the Lord will not have ye Strong man glory in his strength. Ier. 9. 23. But
let him that gloryeth, glory in this, that he understands and knows the
Lord. Thirdlye, that it is a notable thing for Princes and men of might, to
have godly and faithful men about them for their guarde, because it is
impossible, that any man should ever be soundlye and continually trustye to an
other, that is not unfeignedly seized with the love and reverence of God.

Verse 8. Teaches us this much, yt every one taking any charge upon them,
and therefore particularly such as have the guarde and keeping of other men's
persons, should not only be men of valor and courage, for if they have no
more but that, they may easily run into rage and rashenesse: but also that
they should be well qualified for knowledge and skill, least otherwise they
may through ignorance, indaunger both them selves, and the persons
committed unto them: yea that they should be always ready for fear of
dangerous inconue, niences and afterclaps, continually to stand upon their
watch Tower, for the faithful discharge of their duties, both toward
themselves and others.

Verse. 9. and 10. Teach us, that great and mighty personages, may have and use
very costly and sumptuous things, both because the Lord has therefore ordained
them, and their estate (whereunto likewise the Lord has advanced them) does
require the same. For in as much as preferment comes not from the East, nor
from the West, but that it is the Lord that keeps some low, and aduanceth
othersome whom he will: the Lord by that preferment shows, that it is his
purpose, that mighty men should have the most large and liberal allowaunce
of all his creatures, because he has as it were put them in possession of the
same, and endued them with most excellent means for the atchieuing thereof.
Notwithstanding always they must take heed, that they abuse them not, either
in wastefulnes, for then they shall answer it to ye Lord: or for ostentation,
as Ezechias did. Isaiah 38. for that is against charity, and the Lord that has
set them up, may pull them down, and advance others according to his good
pleasure.

Verse 11. Teaches us, that even those in the church, that seem to be most
forward, had yet notwithstanding need, not only to be told of their
duties, but even to be exhorted and provoked, to embrace the best things.
Whereunto also they should be encouraged, not only by reason of the remainders
of dullness and heaviness, which through corruption of nature, cleave fast unto
them: but also by the excellencye of the good things set before them,
specially Christ him self, and the fulness of all goodness in him, who is as a
treasure of good things that never can be wasted, of whose fullness we have
all received, even grace for grace, who though he give all his church and every
member thereof abundance of blessings, has yet notwithstanding never a whit
the less in him self.

CHAP. 4. and the sum thereof.
Christ the spouse or husband of the church, greatly commends the
perfection thereof, and highly extolleth the pleasantnes of her speeches, and
the sweet savor of her ornaments, faithfulness, duties and fruits: 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Which when the Church hears, and
perceives, she again on the other side, does not only confess, that all
the good things she has, were wrought in her by Christ, but takes also
thereby an occasion more and more to commend him, and to request him,
continually to be present with her, and to do her good, whereunto also Christ
consents. verse. 15. 16. 17.

1 Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair: thine eyes are like
the doves, among thy locks of hair: thine hair is like the flock of goats,
which look down from the mountain of Gilead.

2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, of equal proportion, which go up
from the washing, all which bring out twins, and there is none barren
amongst them.

3 Thy lips are like a thread of skarlet, and thy talk is comely, thy temples
among thy locks, are as a piece of a Pomegranate.

4 Thy neck is as the tower of David, built for defense: a thousand shieldes
hang therein: all the tergates of the mighty men.

5 Thy two breasts are as two young roes, that are twins, feeding amongst
the lilies.

6 Until that day shall come, and these shadows fly away, I will go into the
mountain of mirrh, and into the hill of incense.

7 Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee.

8 O spouse, thou shall come with me from Lebanon, thou shall come with me from
Lebanon: thou shall look from the top of Amanah, from the top of Shenir and
Hermon, from the dens of the Lions, and from the mountains of Leopardes.

9 Thou have wounded mine heart, my sister, my spouse: thou have wounded mine
heart with one of thine eyes, and with one chain of thy neck.

01 How fair are thy loves, my sister, my spouse? How good are thy loves
before wine, and the savor of thine ointments before all spices.

11 Thy lips (O spouse,) drop the honey comb: honey and milk are under thy
tongue: and the savor of thy oyntmentes, is as the smell of Lebanon.

12 Thou art as a Garden enclosed, my sister, my spouse: as a spring shut up,
and as a fountain sealed up.

13 Thy plants are as an orcharde of Pomgranates, with sweet fruits as of the
cipres tree, with nard.

14 Even Nard and Saffron, Calamus and Synamome, with all the trees of incense,
myrrh and aloes; with all the best of the spices. 15 O fountain of the
gardens, O well of living waters, and such as flow from Lebanon.

16 Arise O north, and come O south, blow on my garden, that the spices thereof
may flow out: let my well-beloved come to his garden, and eat the fruit of his
sweetnesses.

17 I am come into my garden my sister my spouse, I gathered my mirrh with my
spice: I did eat mine honey comb, with my honey: I did drinck my wine with my
milk: eat O friends, drink and be filled therewith, O well-beloved.


TO the end that the Church might well perceive and feel, Con.
that her love toward Christ, and her looking for him, was not lost, as also
that she had not commended him in vain, all which things were largely handled
in the other chapter: it pleases Christ the head and spouse of the Church in
this chapter, not only to enter into a singular commendation of the excellency
of the church, as in sundry special parts of the same: but also to declare
his unfeigned love again toward her, and even as it were to assure her of the
same.

1 In my mind this whole chapter does contain two special points. Diuis.
The first is a singular commendation, that Christ gives to the church, which
begins at the first verse, and so holds on to the 14: whereof also there
are three parts: vz. an excellent and singular description (handled
allegorically) of the parts and members of the church, he putting down eight
in number. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Secondly, Christ professes, his great and
wonderful love toward the church, making large promises, and describing
notable duties appertayning thereto. verse. 6. 7. 8. 9. Thirdly, he returns
again to commend the church, and many excellent graces in the same, as the
sweetness, delightfulness and pleasure thereof. verse. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.

2 The second is, a notable speech of the church, with Christ's answer unto the
same verse. 15. 16. 17. In the churches speech, there is first a commendation
of her head and spouse. verse. 15. and a wish that all graces may be conuayed
from him self to her, she confessing that all the good she had, she had it
from him verse. 16. And in Christ's answer, there is contained a promise, of
his gracious acceptance of such fruits, as the church shall yield him. verse.
17.

Verse 1. Behold thou art fair my love. He begins the commendation of the
church, Sense.
and first as you may see, he commends it generally in these words, and
afterward in this verse, and the verses following, he enters into a
particular commendation of the several parts and members thereof. Behold thou
art fair. The dubbling of this saying, serves not only to set forth the
vehemencye of Christ's love toward the church: but also the excellencye of
the church it self, in that Christ can as it were, find no words sufficient to
express the same, her beauty being so great both outward and inward, and
excellent also in both respects. See this expounded also before chapter 1. 15.
Thine eyes are like the doves, vz. eyes. Meaning by this, that they were clear
and simple: no doubt but he understands hereby the Preachers and teachers of
Gods word, who are or should be the same unto the church, that the eye is to
the body, vz. watchful and he^dy, that nothing annoy it: in which respect
also, ye Prophets were called in the old Testament Seers, 1. Sam. 9. 9. See
the same phrase expounded, chap. 1. 15. Among thy locks of hair. This is not
chapter 1. 15. he speaks this according to the manner of women in those days,
who let their small locks, for ornaments, as they took it, hang down upon
there temples, forehead, and faces, under which and from amongst which, as it
were the eyes did very comely show themselves. A man may say, that by this he
means the large assemblyes of the church, in the midst whereof as the eyes
in the head, do the Ministers and Teachers of Gods word, most notablye shine
forth. Thine hair is like the flock of goats.

He means that it was very smoath, clear, and fair, as the wool or
fleeces of a flock of sheep or goats, that are well fed and looked too,
which he does yet more plainly express by the words following. Which look
down. This word being used here, and ver. 4. of the 6. chapter, is diversely
taken of sundry men: some interpret it thus, which rise up from the mountain
of Gilead: some thus: which croppe from the mountain of Gilead: some one way,
and some an other. Whatsoever it be the holy Ghost means nothing hereby but
to note, that even as it was a goodly sight to behold a flock of goats,
looking from the mountain of Gilead, which lying on the further side of
Jorden, was plentiful of pasture, and therefore the cattle fed there, must be
fair and well liking: so was it a pleasant thing, to behold the hair of the
church, that is, the faithful multitude and believing people in the church,
which though there were no other respect, yet even for the infinite number
thereof, might well be resembled thereto, as the hairs of our head are
without count. See for ye proof both of the one, and the other: Psalm 40. 12.
Also Revel. 7. 9. Also 14. 1, etc. And concerning Gilead, and the fruitfulness
thereof. See Numbers. 32. 1. and other places.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock (as it is in the Hebrew of equal ones,
in adding either the word sheep, for the more clear sense, as before: or the
word goats, which is indeed in the Hebrew text of the other verse. Which go up
from the washing, that is are made white and clean, for that commodity also do
sheep or goats get after their washing: namely, that filth and duste by water
is taken away from them. All which bring out twins, that is two, one
resembling an other, and aunswering an other as it were. And there is none
barren amongst them. This seems to be more then needed, because he had said
before, They brought forth twins. But under such abundant speeches, the
holy Ghost minds to note, the most assured certaintye of the things
propounded. See the like John. 1. 20. Romans 9. 1. Now in all this resembling of
the teeth of the church, to sheep of equal proportion, and that are washed
and fruitful, we may see that there is a threefolde commendation of the
teeth, namely a just proportion of them all amongst them selves, as amongst
sheep, and goats, of one breed or stature: cleanness and whitenes of them,
as there is in the flocks that are washed, and a marvelous fruitful
increase, as there is of those, that bring forth twins. And when he says,
that There is none barren amongst them, he means as a man would say, that
there is no tooth wanting in their order and place, but even as sheep yielding
twins have always their young by them, one aunswering another: so has the
Church her teeth. And no doubt but by teeth here, the holy ghost means the
same that before he did by eyes, vz, the ministers and preachers of the word,
who must as it were champe and chawe the same with their teeth, that the people
may the more easily eat it: and all these are equal, not only in that they
are or should be all of one mind, all also preaching and professing one
doctrine, but every man governing by one rule, that part of ye lords flock,
that is committed unto him: and they are all washed in the blood of Christ, and
all made fruitful through the Lords blessing, by gaining a multitude of souls
unto God, through the foolishnes of preaching, as the world accounts it. If
any man think it is not well to resemble one matter to diverse things, let them
take heed how they saucely controull the Lord, who to the end that we might the
better conceive of the things themselves, and he the more effectually express
the excellency of them, has used it often both in the old and new testament.
See Isaiah. 10. 15. Amos. 3. 3. 4. 5. 9. Matthew. 9. 16. 17. 1. Corinthians 9. 7.

Verse. 3. Thy lips are like a third of Scarlet. By resembling them to a third,
he notes the smalnesse or thinness of them, which in all persons, but
especially in womankinde is supposed to be comely: and by saying they are like
a third of Scarlet, he means that they were red and beautiful, a thing also
much tending to the commendation of the lips. Where also we must remember,
that howsoever these things are spoken, in outward show, after the manner of
earthly lovers, that yet we must not think upon any outward love, but refer
all to the inward and spiritual. If any by the smalnesse of the lips, list
to understand, the comeliness of the ministry, and by the color of them,
the feruency and earnestness of the teachers, I mind not to contend. And thy
talk is comely. From the instruments of nature, whereby the voice is framed,
he proceeds to the words expressed thereby, meaning that the speech of the
church, which indeed is the preaching and prayers of the same, is fair, fine,
beautiful, and sweet. Thy Temples among thy locks. He describes another part
of the countenance or face, vz. the Temples of the head, speaking also of
them according to the custom then used, the women suffering their hair to
hang about their temples. See verse 1. of this chapter. Are as a piece of a
Pomegranate. For the understanding of this, we are to note, that a
Pomegranate, when it is broken or cut, is not only of a glorious and ruddye
color, or as we would say, like to goodly roses, but also has many grains
and kernels in it, by both which laid together, it seems unto me, that he
does not only describe the beauty of the particular members of the Church, but
also the fruitfulnes and great increase of the same. If any see more or better,
let him thank God for it, and use it to his glory.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is as the tower of David, yt is, like the tower that he
built, at the end of his own house upon mount Sion for a defense, of which we
may read somewhat. Nehe. 3. 19. 25. etc. Built for defense, vz. of his own
house: and to succor* it against the rage of the enemies, if any should
approach. A thousand shieldes hang therein. First he puts a number certain,
for an uncertain. Secondlye, he proceeds to the commendation of David's
Tower, that thereby the state of Christ's church, and the excellency thereof
might better appear. q. d. It is meruellously well furnished with armor and
munition, yea, with armor that is pollished, and prepared for most necessary
uses: which sense I rest persuaded, both the composition of the hebrew word,
and also the speeches following, will easily bear. All the Tergats of the
mighty, that is, every one of them are meet for mighty and noble men, they are
so good and excellent. q. d. they are no base things, nor belong not to mean
men, but to such as are captains and have authority over the kings armies: of
whom we may read 2. Sam. 23. 8. 9. 10. etc. And Neh. 3. 16. The sense is plain,
yt the neck of ye church, being resembled unto the tower of David etc, he
means thereby, that it was fair and comelye, also that it was forcible and
strong, yea that is was well stored, with innumerable and excellent graces.
True it is, that these and such other similitudes seem somewhat hard, but
lovers affections here must be borne withal, and since it pleases the holy
Ghost to strammer as it were, for our sakes, we must submit our selves to
learn of him. And no doubt, but still he means hereby, the Preachers and
Ministers of the word, which in the church shine above others, as a man would
say, even as Turrets or towers do, above the rest of the walls, that compass
cities, whom the Lord also uses, for the defense of the people: and of whom as
he has good store: so he furnishes them with excellent graces, fit for so
great and holy a purpose.

Verse. 5. Thy two breasts.) He comes from the neck to the breasts or
teates: are as two young roes, that is, fresh and lusty. That are twins that
is of equal bigness and proportion. Feeding among the lilies, that is, in sweet
and smelling pasture, which can not choose but make the cattle there fed, to
thryue and be good. See for this phrase, chapter 2. 16. Many understand by the
two breasts, the two Testamentes, which have mutual respect one to an other,
neither can one of them well easily be understood without an other, where there
are also Lilies, that is, most sweet doctrines, by which men's minds may be
refreshed and recreated. For mine own part I take it, that speaking of
spiritual things after the manner of men, and particularly of lover, he does
deal therein according to their manners. The breasts of women, have bin always
accounted to them selves and their good lovers, not only comely, but means
also to make love and liking. See Proverb. 5. 19. Whatsoever it be, this me
thinks should be plain and certain, that all that hitherto has been
spoken of the comelines and beauty of the church, does generallye show her to
be most absolute and perfect, which also may appear by verse 7. following:
neither need we to doubt, but that the same also may be understood specially by
the way of proportion, even of all the members of the same, even from the
head, if you will, unto the soales of the feet, for as all the members of the
church, and every one of them, have their several functions, so may these
things that be spoken of the several members, be applied to every one
severally: but howsoever in some we have dealt so, because we have the warrant
of the word, and the proportion of faith, as a ground for the same, yet to
stand upon them all, specially where such props fail me, were too too much
curious.

Verse. 6. Until that day shall come, and these shadows shall fly away. For
the words see them expounded before. chapter 2. 17. There being only this
difference, between this and that place, yt there ye church promises to
remayn with Christ for ever, and here Christ promises to abide with it
continually. As Math. 28. 19. Otherwise the sense and meaning is al one. And in
this and the two verses following, there is contained Christ's answer and
promises, unto the petitions that the church made before, chap. 3. where she
wishes and seeks for his presence, and other good graces in him, Christ
promising as before is said, his presence unto the Church, and the particular
members thereof, so long as in this world they wander as pilgrims from the Lord.
2. Cor. 3. 6. and afterward verse. 8. 9. of this chapter. He promises that the
wearisome days of this pilgrimage being finished, he will bring the church,
even into his own house, which is eternal in the heavens. I will go into the
mountain of myrrh, and into the hill of incense. Because the church had before
exhorted him, to go to the pleasant mountains: chap. 17. he says here that he
will perform the same: It is uncertain, whether there were mountains of
myrrh, and hills of incense in yt country yea or no. But whether there were yea
or no, the meaning is spiritual, namely that as in respect of the church
militant he would get him to the most pleasant places, even to the mountayn of
Moriah, upon which it is certain the temple was builded, as appears 2. chro.
3. 1. which might rightly be called the mountain of myrrh, and the hill of
incense, because of the great store, that there was offered up and burnt to the
Lord. Whereof also this may seem some reason, that the word here used for
Incense, differs not much from the name, wherewith that mountain is called:
so in respect of the church triumphant, he would get him to the heavenly
Jerusalem, which is in heaven, where also sundry of his friends are present
with him, and whose duties performed unto him, are most sweet and pleasant
for this and other things, see Revel. 21. 20.

Verse. 7. Thou art all fair my love. Another commendation of the church,
containing also in it a promise, specially of sanctification and holiness to
be bestowed upon it in this life, as in ye next verse following, he promises
unto it eternal blessedness. And there is no spot in thee, This must be referred
specially to ye estate of the church, which shall be in the life to come: or
else to men now raunged into the Church, to whom their sins are forgiven,
and Christ's righteousness is imputed, who has washed us in his blood from
all sin, 1, John. 1. 7. see Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.

Verse. 8. O Spouse, This is the first time that he calls her by this name,
which yet notwithstanding sundry times after, he gives unto her, as Verse.
9, 10, 11, 12, of this Chapter. Also Chapter 5, 1, And the church has this
name given her, both in respect of the betrothement that passes between her
and Christ. Isaiah. 1. 19. 20. As in respect also of that solemn and blessed
day, that the Lord has appointed for our eternal marryage. Thou shall
come. It is a promise as I said before, even of eternal life. With me, to
wit, my self. Christ means by this, not only his continual presence with
the Church, both in this life and in the life to come: but also that he will
so wholly and thoroughly gather it, that none of those that come unto him, shall
either be taken out of his hands, or perish. etc. See John 17. 12, and other
places. From Lebanon. He means hereby a most pleasant and fruitful place,
where there were many sweet, tall, and excellent trees, meaning hereby that
none of those things should let the church from being coupled with her husband
Christ. Of this place we have spoken of before: It was a mountain upon the
borders of the Land of promise, or Judea. Thou shall come with me from
Lebanon. It is doubled, both for the more vehemence of him yt speaks as also
for ye more certaintye of the thing pronounced: q. d. Nothing shall stay thee,
but thou shall indeed come with me, and enjoy my continual presence. Thou
shall look from the top of Amanah. Some think it to be a mountain in that
part of Cilicia, that bordereth upon the land of Israel. Some of the Rabbis
hold it to be a mountain, in the borders of Jury, lying on the north side
thereof. I shame not to say, that for the particular I know not what to
affirm, howbeit this is the meaning, that from all the quarrers of the world,
they shall behold the eternal kingdom of God. From the top of Shenir and
Hermon. The holy ghost Deuteronomy. 3. 9. seems to mean by both these names one
mountain. Wherefore it may be thought strange, that Solomon in this place,
makes them diverse. For the clearing whereof this would be marked, that at the
first one and the self same thing, might be called by many names, as in respect
of diverse people, dwelling nigh unto the same, and the several proprieties of
their tongues, which seems indeed to be the most natural meaning of Deuteronomy.
3. 9. and yet notwithstanding in process of time, and multitudes of people
increasing, some of those names applied to the whole, might be attributed to
some part of it. And this we see both by scripture, examples, and otherwise. In
old time the river Danubius was indifferently named Danubius or Ister, whereas
at this day, it is only called Ister at that place, at which it enters into
the Ocean. So likewise these words Horeb, Synai, Pharan, are most commonly in
the scriptures taken for one and the self same mount, whereas we know that
these words are so used, either because the mount Synai was very large, and so
according to the diverse parts thereof, had diverse names: or else they were
mountains one nigh to an other. The like may we say of Hermon, that part
that lay toward Sydon, being called Shirron, as Moses says, and that part
that the Amorites had gotten, being called Shenir: and that howsoever they
seemed to be confounded in the days of Moses, yet afterward they were
distinguished one from an other, as appears not only by this place, but
also 1. Chro. 5. 23. From the dens of the lions, and from the mountains of the
Leopardes. These places belike, as most commonly mountains and such
solitarye places, abounded with wild, noisome, and hurtful beasts, by which
Christ notes also, that he would set his church free from dangers. This then
is the meaning, that Christ promises to bring the church out of Lebanon, and
to effect this much for her, that from the top of most high mountains, she
shall behold, to her most joyful contentment, who be malicious, cruel and
fierce, subjected unto her. And here we must know, that in all this, he
alludeth to those places of the land of promise, by which the Israelites
first entered into the same, and from whence they might behold that goodly
cuntry. Shenir and Hermon, were very high mountains, on the farther side of
Jorden, from whence they might behold ye land of promise. Lebanon as also
Amanah, as it should seem, was on this side Jorden, but yet in the borders of
the land of Canaan toward the north. Now we must understand, that many times
in the scriptures, under the resemblaunce of these things, that were done
amongst the old people, there are set out unto us such things, as Christ
should do for his, under the new Testament. For as much therefore, as in all
this song, Lebanon is taken for a pleasant and plentiful place, as also in
many other scriptures beside, for which see Deuteronomy. ^. 25. and on the other side
the Amorites and other enemies dwelt in Hermon, and Shenir: the holy Ghost
under these shadows means, that as from Libanus and other mountains
situated on the borders of the land of promise, they did behold the whole
country, and at the last, come into the land of promise: so when they come unto
Christ, they should have a gappe laid open unto many mysteries, and by Christ
at the last be brought unto the knowledge of God, and life everlasting, from
the attaynment whereof neither the pleasures of Lebano^, nor ye dens of Lions
and wild beasts, should hinder them, but yt in the midst of persecutions and
tyrannus oppressions, they should have free access and enteraunce thereto.

Ver. 9. Thou have wounded my heart,) or as the word also may import, Thou have
caught my heart, or taken it from me, meaning by both these terms of love, one
thing, to wit yt Christ was even inwardly ravished as it were, with the love of
the church: and so he begins now to come again to the praises of the church,
speaking notwithstanding as it were a man, burning with most earnest love, for
all these things are set down, to express Christ's singular love to the
church, which when he has declared with a maruailous earnest affection, and
set out with grave and weighty exclamations in this and the next verse
following, he proceeds to praisethe church, for the graces before rehearsed.
My sister my spouse. Christ gives the church both these names, his sister,
because she is the daughter of the heavenly father, and as fellow heir of
eternal glory with christ: and his spouse, because he has betrothed her unto
him self in mercy, truth and righteousness. Hosea. 2. and accounts of her
as a most dearly beloved wife. thou have wounded my heart. He repeateth the
former words, the more still to express the earnestness of his love. With
one of thine eyes, q. d. I need not to behold both, thy beauty is so great in
one, that I am even taken therewith. Thus he speaks of spiritual graces, as
earthly lovers do, of the outward parts of those, whom they affect: meaning
no doubt by this, not only the excellent wisdom, and foresight of the
church, but also the beauty thereof, for even in the eye there is beauty. And
with one chain of thy neck: q. d. not all thine ornaments, but even one of
them alone, has drawn me to love and like thee: by which we may see, what
account the Lord has even of the best of the graces, that he has bestowed on
the church, and here still he speaks, as though the church had been decked
after the manner of costly women, with chains, jewels, and such like ornaments,
for the beautifiyng of her.

Verse. 10. How fair are thy loves, that is, how glorious and excellent, yea
and full of delight, are those sound affections of a good mind, that thou
carryest toward me, by which I am also moved, even to love thee again: and
he speaks of them in the plural number, not only thereby to express the
multitude of the^, but the excellency also. My sister my spouse. These words
are interpreted before verse 9. of this chapter. How good are thy loves before
wine, that is, they are better and more delightful by much, then very good
wine. See chapter 1. 2. where the church speaks the same words of Christ,
that Christ speaks here of her, rendering as it were like for like, which is
an usual manner among lovers, and particularly in their words and speeches one
of them to an other. And the savor of thine ointments, that is, the sweet and
pleasant smell of such graces as thou have received. For it is usual in the
scriptures, by oil, ointment, annoynting, etc. to understand, the graces of
God bestowed upon his children. See Psalm. 89. 20. Also 45. 7. 1. John. 2. 20.
27. And yet no doubt but he means also the pleasantness that is in the
oyntmentes them selves. Of which see Proverb. 27. 9. Psalm. 133. 2. under these
earthlye (...) so the word enclosed, does express her chastitye as before: and
notes also the abundance of fruit in the same, she lying not open as a
pray to be spoiled. The enclosure of the church, is Gods aid and providence,
by which he defends her against all her and his enemies. The church here
compared to a garden enclosed, in Isaiah cap. 5. 1. 2. etc. is resembled to a
vine or Vineyard. See psalm. 8. ver. 8. 12. 13. 14. My sister my Spouse. These
are expounded verse 9. of this chapter. As a spring shut up, vz, thou art like
unto it. He means by this, not only the abundance of waters that the
church has to refresh it self withal, in that he compares it, to a
plentiful spring, able to water all the parts of his ground or Garden, as the
beds and the plants therein, etc. but by saying that it was shut up, he notes
that it did not ly open to the stranger, yea, that no man could come unto it,
but by his sufferaunce and appointment. And as a fountain sealed up, vz. that
no man can come to, or have thereof: and this tends to the same end, that
the former similitude. Al being spoken according to the manner of that country,
wherein water was not only skant, and therefore a good blessing to have water,
but also there was much a do to keep it to them selves: see Genes. 21. 25.
Also Genes. 26, 17. 18. 19 etc.

Verse. 13. Thy plants, that is, all that is planted and set in thee, are as
an Orcharde of Pomegranates, that is, are very dear and precious, yea very
healthful and good, for all these as we know by experience, belong to
pomegranates. With sweet fruits, that is, abounding with other sweet fruits
and profitable things. besides Pomegranates, some particulars whereof he
reckons in this verse, and in the verse following. As of the Cipres tree. See
this expounded before, chapter 1. 14. With Nard. An other particular thing of
good savor and sweet smelling, no doubt but it was very costly also. See Mark,
14 3. Also John. 12. 3. and grows in India, Syria, and other places there
about.

Verse 14. Even nard. This is spoken of already, and saffron, a thing well
known to every one of us, to be profitable and precious. Calamus. There are
of this kind of calamus or reed, diverse sorts, as the Herbaxians do well
enough know. It is most likely, he means it of that which is called Calamus
Aromaticus, or odoratus for the excellent smell it had, and was wont to be
brought out of Arabia Felix, into Judea, and was appointed to be used in the
confection of the holy oil. Exo. 30. 23. And Sinamome, This is a thing well
known to us, to be far fet. and of great price and excellency. With all the
trees of incense, that is, all trees bearing incense. or matter that yields a
sweet smell or savor, whereof also he recites two afterward in this verse.
Myrrh. For this see chap. 1. 13. And Aloes. This is a certain kind of sweet
and precious wood, and smells well, both it and myrrh together, as
appears Psalm 45. 8. and is forcible against putrification, in which respect
they used to annoynte dead bodies with it as appears John. 19. 30. 40. for
Aloes see Number. 24. 6. With all the best of the spices, that is, with all most
costly, sweet and precious things: and all this tends to the commendation of
the Church, after this sort, that as those Gardens be most excellent, and
worthy after a sort to be beloved and esteemed, that have the most rare,
best, and precious things growing in them: so these excellent graces and
fruits of the Church, do commend the same to God and men, and make the Lord
Jesus as a man would say, inamoured with the love thereof. Many men do more
curiously then needs, according to the several proprieties of the matters
mentioned, apply them to the Church. It is enough that generally we know, that
by all these things are meant, the gifts and graces wherewith the Church is
beautyfied and adorned, even as a plentiful and pleasant Garden, with
infinite numbers of rare and pleasant simples, as they call them, or fruits,
whereby she is made comme^dable, spreading her fame far and wide, insomuch yt
thereof Christ her husband is eue^ as it were, ravished with her love, having
yet notwithstanding nothing of her own to move him to that affection, but all
yt she has be stowed upon her from him. See to this end a large discourse.
Ezech. 16. through out almost.

Ver. 15 O fountain of the gardens. Here begins the second part of this
chapter, the Church speaking unto Christ, and singularly commending him in this
verse. q. d. I humbly acknoweledge the things to be in me that thou have said,
howbeit I confess, that they are not of my self, but from thee, who art the
author and giver of all good things: and though that I do perform the duty
of a fountain toward mine, yet thou art he, to whom indeed the name of
fountain and living waters, yea of life it self does only appertain: yea
thou art that only fountain, and I do but water others as from thee. O well
of living waters. The church means by this word continual waters, and such
as cannot be drawn dry, see Genesis 26. 19. meaning yet notwithstanding, under
these earthly waters, heavenly and eternal graces: of which our savior Christ
Ioh 7. 8. says, that out of his belly that believes in him, shall flow rivers
of water of life. And in another place, namely Ioh. 4. 14. He that drinks of
the water that Christ shall give him shall never thirste any more, but that
water shallbe in him a well of water, springing into everlasting life. And such
as flow from Lebanon. She proceeds still in ye co^mendacio^ of the excellency
of her spouse, most pure and clear water came from Lebanon, yea Jorden it self
watering the land of Israel, came after a sort from thence and no doubt but
the water of Lebanon, tasted of that sweetness, that is mentioned before verse
11. of this chapter. Even as we see by experience, that the waters that come
out of the hills of some of ye Islands of Molucca, taste of the Sinamome,
Cloves, etc. that grow there. In sum she commends Christ, for the plentye
of spiritual graces in him, and the conueiyng of them over to other, in that
she calls him the fountain of the gardens. Secondly, for the perpetuity of
the graces, in that she calls him the well of living waters: and thirdly for
the sweetness and pleasantness of the same, in that she resembles him to
the most sweet and pleasant waters, flowing from Lebanon.

Verse. 16. Arise O north. The words of the Church, entreating graces of her
head and husband Christ, to make her fruitful withal. It is a notable turning
of her speech, to the winds and quarters of the world, attributing sense unto
things without life: which also is common to Poets and lovers, specially in
their louesonges. He means first the north quarter, because it is cold and
moist, as being far removed from the sun, and this he speaks as having
regard to the day, and hot country of the land of Judea. And come O south.
This quarter is hot and dry, he joins them together, that so there being
a good mixture made of them both, extreemity of cold, or continuance of heat,
might not work barrenness. And no doubt but under these quarters, and a good
and equal mixture of them both, she means Christ and all the members he has,
and uses to make his church fruitful, who grants the use of such sundry
sorts of air, to make his garden fruitful, and withal many times by the
contrary course of the winds, purges the air, and gives sometimes clear,
and sometimes dropping seasons, as may serve most for the commoditye of his
ground or garden. Blow on my garden, that is, even as it were by blastes or
blowing from sundry quarters, work that which thou see to be good and
profitable for me, For it is a request having a regard to the former comparison
of the winds and Christ together. It is somewhat dark, in that the church
calls the church her garden: but she does it not as having any thing of her
self. For whatsoever ornaments, flowers, plants, etc. she has, she has it
from Christ: but by reason of the nigh conjunction which is betwixt Christ and
his church, she being flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. Ephesians. 5.
30. yea and the titles of the one and the other, being indifferently attributed
to the one and the other. As 1. Cor. 12. 12. where the church is called by ye
name of Christ. That the spices thereof may flow out. By spices she means all
manner of graces: and by flowing out, she means continual abode and increase
in the same, so that we see to what end the Church desires graces for Christ,
vz. that she in her several members, may be yet more and more fruitful.
John. 15. 2. Let my beloved come to his garden. An another petition, containing
the craving of Christ's presence, meaning that she would have him come and
dwell in her, even as he had promised verse. 6. of this chapter. And eat the
fruit of his sweetenesses. The end of the prayer of the church, vz. that
Christ might receive glory and profit, by the graces given unto the same. And
that word sweetenesses in the plural number, serves to two ends, to wit, to
express the abundance of Gods graces, and also to denote and set out the
excellency of the same.

Verse. 17. I am come into my Garden. q. d. Now at ye length I have yielded unto
thy request, to come more favorably and plainly unto thee tha^ before. For no
doubt but he was continually present, though the church either felt it not, or
he himself did not so fully manifest ye same. My sister my spouse. This is
expounded already ver. 9. of this chap. I gathered my myrrh with my spice, yt
is, such pleasant and delightful fruits, as you did yield, and did indeed
belong unto me. I did eat mine honey comb with my honey. He means yt he
received ye fulness of fruit from the church, namely yt as he had the honey, so
likewise he had the honicombe. I did drinck my wine with my milk, that is,
both the wine and the milk yt did belong to me. under these several sorts he
means still, the sweet, pleasant, and profitable fruits that the church did
yield unto him, declaring hereby, that he did most fauourablye accept the
works of his church: and that he was much more delighted therewith, than any
man is or can be in gathering most sweet smelling herbs and spices, or in
eating honey, yea though he eat it so greedely, that he do with all devour the
comb: or in drinking the best wine and purest milk, by which no doubt he
means, the word of God, and the doctrine of the church, (as we have
heretofore noted the same) because that as wine, so it makes the heart merry,
and as sincere milk, it nourishes, yea and strengthens the infirm or
weak. Eat O friends, vz. of mine honey and honey comb. Drink, vz. of my milk
and wine. And be filled therewith O well-beloved, that is, drink plentifully of
the same, by which we see, that he compares the fellowship and conjunction,
that is between him and the church, unto a banquet or feast: q. d. take the
same fruit that I have of the church, and be delighted therein and satisfied
therewith, as it were with most sumptuous banquets, or dainty dishes. So
plentiful and kind hearted is the lord, yt he can not keep his joy with in
himself, but stirs up his friends and companions, to eat and drink, and
rejoice with him, meaning thereby specially the ministers of his word, because
God uses them as his companions, in the advancement of the work of man's
salvation, and generally all the faithful, who shall be fellow heirs with
Christ.

Verse. 1. Teaches us, that as the beauty of the church generallye, should
cause us to love and like the same: so particularly the faithful Pastors,
performing their duty, and the holy multitude of Gods people, they should make
us most to affect and commend the same. For if Christ the head and souse
thereof, be carried away even to the love and liking, yea and to the
commendation thereof also; with the beholding of those graces, who yet
notwithstanding as in respect of him self, needs not them or to regard them:
how much more should we do it, who need not only these things for our own
stay, but by commending the church, or embracing it do greatly provide for our
own good thereby.

Verse. 2. Teaches, what a just composition and order there ought to be
observed in the church, and the holy government thereof, and that to these
two ends especially, namely that Christ might take a singular delight and
pleasure therein, all things being there performed decently and in order,
according to ye general rule of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. 40. and that his
people by the same, might be builded up in all holiness and righteousness
every day more then other: and in all reverend regard of that holy
fellowship, that maintayneth so right and good a course of holy government.

Verse. 3. Teaches us, that there is nothing in the church, that may or ought,
to make us more in love with the same, than the holy exercises used there, and
particularly the exercises of preaching and prayer. For as by the one God
begets us again to him self, through the incorruptible seed of the word. 1.
Pet. 1. 23. which is his effectual instrument, to save all them that believe.
Romans 1. 16: so by the other rightly performed, he provides for his own glory,
while he is called upon in faith. Romans 10. 14. And for our good, giving us the
means and grace to use the same, whereby we are to lay our needs before him,
and to obtain such things as we shall ask, according to his will, in the name
of his son Christ. John. 16. 23.

Verse. 4. Does notably paint out unto us, the great glory and wonderful
strength of the church of God: which we are to set, as on the one side against
all weakness of our own, so against all malice and power of the wicked, our
savior telling us, that The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Math.
16. 18. And the Apostle naming it the pillar and ground of the truth. 1. Timot.
3. 15. what mean weak ones then, for fear or savor, in the days of
persecution to fall away from it? Or the wicked in such rage and fury to set
them selves against it, seeing that al their labor is lost, that they spend
there about?

Verse. 5. Teaches us, that even every thing in the church, may kindle in us
an unfeigned affection to love and like the same. So that he that is not, or can
not be moved therewith, is altogether benumbed and senceles: for if outward
comelines, do work delight in outward things: how much more should inward
beauty, draw affection to spiritual and divine graces. True it is, that we
walk here by faith, and not by sight, and therefore we must have other eyes,
than the eyes of our body, to behold these spiritual matters withal, or
else we shall never thryue thereby, which also we may see by daily experience.
For what is the reason, that so few regard the church, and the graces of God
given to the same, but because they measure it according to the rule or yard
of their own understanding?

Verse. 6. Teaches us two things: first that Christ the head of the church,
graciously grants the petitions of the church made unto him, and yields to
her suit: which as it excellently expresses his wonderful mercy, and great
liberality toward his own people: so is it, yea and it ought to be a notable
encouragement unto the^, by prayer to repair to him, that is continually and
at all times more ready to give, than they are at any time prepared or
disposed to ask. Secondlye, that the continual and perpetual presence of the
Lord with his church, has been, is and ever will be unto his people, both
generallye and particularlye, a notable argument of no small comfort and
encouragement to them. See for this purpose. Exo. 3. 12. Act. 18. 10. For if
Gods people should regard, either the malice of the wicked on the one side: or
their own weakness on the other side, they might easily be cast down; but
when they consider, that he that is with them is stronger then al, they take
courage and be, as it were men restored from death to life, and in him become
more then conquerours.

Verse. 7. Containing an excellent commendation of the holiness of the church,
teaches us to be ravished as it were, with the holy love thereof: for Christ
does not so highly extol the same for his own cause only, but to teach us
both by his words of praise, and example of practice, to do the like.
Secondly, the whole church, and every particular member thereof, learneth
thereby, what strife there should be in them, to attain to an excellent
measure of holiness and righteousness, that might be acceptable to the Lord, who
delights in the same: profitable to our brethren, who thereby may be drawn to
perform the like: and comfortable to our souls whil we see, that by ye
faithful fruits of a sound mind, God has discerned us, from the profane and
wicked of the world.

Verse. 8. Teaches us, that howsoever we may have great joy, and
contentment in that part of the Church, that warre-fareth here upon earth, and
in the great and singular beauty of the same, by reason of the graces that God
grants thereto, as his word, the prayers of his people, and many such
like: yet that we should not always stay our selves here below, but by faith
and patience, be lifted up and prepared, even to the full fruition and
possession of all heavenly joys, specially since that Christ as you see,
draws his church in this place, to the unfeigned beholding thereof, which
thing, if it be rightly planted in our hearts, let us assure our selves of
this, that no lawful either pleasures or profits of this life, nor no
tyrannus persecution of the enemies, shall draw us away, from the obedience
of our God: for why, the love of heaven shall have such hold in our hearts,
that it will make us in regard thereof, to account all things but loss and
donge, so we may gain Christ, and the fruition of his presence. 1. Phillip.
3. 8.

Verse. 9. Propounds unto us Christ's love toward the church, to the end
that all men might by his example, be taught to do the like, that is, in an
unfeigned affection to love and embrace the same. Secondly, that the graces of
the church, how great or small soever they be, are accepted of Christ, even
as sufficient to draw his love toward the same: for if Christ loved us, when
we were his enemies, how much more shall he love the church, that is adorned
not with graces of her own, but with gifts of goodness from him, which seeing
they are his own, he will not refuse, though the glory of them may be
somewhat darkened, through our corruptions.

Verse 10. Teaches us, not slenderly, but in a most large measure, to love the
Lord Christ, that loves his so bountifullye and so tenderlye, forgyuing us
so great a debt, and infinite multitude of transgressions, that so he might
make our love more plentiful, fast and sure unto him. See Luke 7. 47.

Verse. 11. Teaches us to esteem above all things in the church, that
treasure of the word, that God has committed to it: and that not only,
because the word it self is as it were the life and soul of the church, from
which if the word be sundred, it can be no more a Church, than a corpse
without a soul, can be a man: but also because in it is contained food, for
all the periods and points of our life. For if we be infants in Christ's
school, it is milk unto us, and if we be grown to the years of discretion,
it is strong meat to bring us unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the
age of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 13.

Verse. 12. Teaches the church, that since the Lord in the multitude of his
mercies, compasses it about with his favor, and incloseth it as it were, with
the walls and hedges of his continual providence, and all to this end, that
she might remain as a chaste spouse, and pure Virgin unto him self, coupled
unto him in mercy, righteousness and truth, that therefore she should beware,
that she do not either through disobedience, unfaithfully give over her self
unto others, or by negligence suffer her self to be carried from him, but in
all care and conscience to be answerable to that holy chastity, that the
Lord looks for in her, and she in duty owes to him.

Verse. 13. and 14. Teaches us what great delight the Lord takes in the
several fruits of the church. Which should teach the church, and every
particular member of the same these special duties: namelye to be zealous,
yea plentiful and aboundaunt in all good works, and in the several sorts
and variety of the same, and the rather, because this is an argument of
encouragement to them therein, that Christ the head and savior of the whole
body, takes singular pleasure therein.

Verse 15. Teaches us: first that the praises that Christ gives unto the
church, should not make the church, either careless of good works, or proud in
the same; not careless, because they have not as yet attained unto perfection:
nor proud, because they have nothing but that which they have received from
him, but rather to regard Christ's purpose in praising, yr church which is to
provoke her thereby, specially since he takes delight in her goodness, more
and more to proceed in the same: because there is no church so good, but it may
be still bettered, and though they have proceeded well, yet the Lord has
somewhat to say against them, as Revel. 2. 4. 14. etc. Secondly, that the
fullness of all good things are in Christ, and none other, and that therefore
they do the church great injury, (besides that they deface Christ him self,)
that either would utterly spoil the church of him, or mingle others together
with him. Thirdly, that the church should never cease praising and magnifiyng
her head and spouse Christ, in whom she cannot choose but see and confess,
that there dwells the fulness of all heavenly graces, yea the very Godhead it
self bodily. Collos. 2. 9.

Verse. 16. Teaches the church, that howsoever she her self, and her
particular members feel them selves in reasonable good case as we say, as in
respect of spiritual graces, yea and be so esteemed, not only in their own
and other men's minds, but even in the very judgment and sentence of Christ,
that yet for all that they cease not still to entreat the Lord Jesus, not
only to continue, but to increase all the gifts and graces of his holy
spirit in them, and particularly faith and obedience, even until they come to
the finishing of their faith and hope, which is eternal life at the last
through Christ.

Verse. 17. Teaches us, that the prayers of the church made to God in Christ's
name, shall never be frustrate or void, and therefore good cause have we, to be
often, yea after a sort as it were, contiuall in the same.

CAP. 5. and the sum thereof.
The church attributing the departure of christ from her to her own sins,
declares her offense, and the punishments she had deserved therefore. verse.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. She craves the aid of all the godly, with common consent
as it were and aid, to set forth her affection toward him, who in that they
might be the better able to know, she does lively describe him, and notes the
place whither he is gone, and so at the last strengthens her self in faith
and hope verse. 7. 8. etc. to the end of the chapter.

1 I Slept, but mine heart waketh: it is the voice of my well-beloved that
knocks, saying, open unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, my perfect one:
for my head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

2 I answered: I have put off from me my coat, how should I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how should I defile them?

3 My well-beloved put down his hand from the hole, and my bowels were moved
touching him.

4 I rose up to open to my well-beloved, and mine hands did drop down myrrh,
and my fingers myrrh that passed upon the handles of the lock.

5 I opened to my well-beloved, but my well-beloved withdrawing him self passed
by: my soul departed while he was in speaking: I sought him but I could not
find him: I called him, but he answered me not.

6 The watchmen that go about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded
me: the wathmen of the walls, took my veil away from me.

7 I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love.

8 O thou the fairest among women, what has thy well-beloved more then another
well-beloved? what has thy well-beloved more then an other welbeued, that thou
do so charge us?

9 My well-beloved is white and ruddy, even a standerd bearer above ten thousand.

10 His head is excellent gold, yea most pure gold, his locks are curled and
black as a raven.

11 His eyes are like doves eyes, by the rivers of waters washing them selves
in milk, and remaining by fulness.

12 His cheeks are as a bed of spice, and as the flowers of spices, his lips
are as lilies, dropping down pure myrrh.

13 His hands, as ringes of gold, set full of Tarshishe: his bellye like the
whitenes of Iuory, covered with Sapphires.

14 His thies are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

15 The roof of his mouth is sweetnesses, and he himself is wholly delectable:
this is my well-beloved, and this is my lover O Daughters of Jerusalem.

16 O thou the fairest among women, whither is thy well-beloved gone: whither is
thy well-beloved turned a side, that we may seek him witb thee:

17 My well-beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spice, to feed
in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

18 I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine, who feeds among the
Lilies.


Howsoever Christ the Savior and head of the Church, Con.
had showed him self in the last verse of the former chapter, not only
willing to enter into the church, but was indeed already entered into the same,
to receive the fruit thereof, yet the church in this chapter, and
particularlye in the very beginning of it declares, that she was not so
ready to intertayne and receive him, as either he was to offer him self, or
she in duty should have been: which offense of hers she acknowledges
unfeignedly, commending her husband Christ, with a singular praise, both to
aggrauace her own transgression, and also to stir up her self and others
thereby to seek after him, that has such excellency in him, requiring as well
aid of them in this behalf, as tendering after a sort, help from her self to
others, in that case also.

Solomon alluding in this chapter to the manner used in Commodies and
tragedies, in which diverse persons are brought in, some tarrying, and some
departing, does chiefly propounde unto us 2. points. The first is a lamentable
complaint that is betwixt her and Christ her spouse. This matter beginning at
verse 7. and so holding on to the end of the chapter. The questions with the
aunsweres thereto, touch two things: the first concerns the spouse him
self. verse. 8. whereunto there is a large answer. ver. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
15. And the second concerns the place of his abode: the question being
contained ver. 16. and the answer in the two last verses, the occasion both
of the one and of the other was, that vehement charge that the Church gives
her friends in the seventh verse. both concerning the spouse him self, and the
place where they should find him.

Verse. 1. l slept. These are the churches words, declaring what befell her in
the night season while she slept q, d. Sense.
I was very sleepy and heavy, yea my faith seemed through drowsinesse and
sleep, to be as it were oppressed, howbeit yet it was never overcome, or
utterly put out (for indeed it cannot 1. cor. 4. 8. 9. 1. Ioh. 5. 4.) which
also may appear by the words following, in that she adds but mine heart
waketh, meaning thereby, that howsoever she were overtaken in the outward man,
or corruption of nature (as you would say) and the members thereof, yet she
could not but in her heart, and regenerated affection, think upon her head and
spouse, It is the voice of my well-beloved. vz. that I suppose, or I am sure I
hear. She speaks as if it were one that being waked out of sleep, or
slumber, should say, that it was such or such a one, that called or spoke: many
also being so well acquainted with men, that they can certainly as it were
discern them, by their words. That knocks saying: She heard not only a
bare sound, but observed the matter. Open unto me. These things are spoken
after the manner of earthly lovers, who come in the night season sometimes to
visit their friends, and provoke them as it were by fair speeches, to open
unto them when they knock, to which end also tend all these several titles
rmentioned in this verse. Of Christ's knocking, and the church her opening, see
Revel. 3. 20. My Sister. See this expounded chapter, 4. 9. My love, that is,
one whom I do most tenderly love, see cha. 1. 9. My dove, see this expounded
before chap. 2. 14. My perfect one. This title is attributed to the church, not
as though she had perfection in this life, or of her self, but because she
looks for it in the life that shall be revealed, and because her head has
perfection, and there is a most straight conjunction between him and her,
therefore it may after a sort be attributed unto her. Some interpret this word
undefiled, but indeed it does most commonly and most properly signifye
perfect and sound. And the church does most lively express this speech of
Christ's coming unto her, even the more greatly to increase by the recital
thereof, the foulness of her fact and offense committed. q. d, he spoke so
kindly, favorably, and gloriously of me, yea, he did so carefully provoke me
to embrace him and his truth, as if his own business and affairs had been
in hand and not mine. And therefore I cannot choose, but accuse my self the
more, for yt I have not profited by so loving and merciful a calling. It
follows. For my head is full of dew. A reason why he would have the door
opened, and be let in, vz, because he had refused no hurt or inco^modity, but
undertook al for y^ good of the church: ye cold dews of the night, specially
in those hot countries, were neither good nor wholesome for ye people. And my
locks with the drops of the night. A sine description of the dew, he persisting
in the self same metaphore begun, proceeding from the head to ye hair, they
also esteeming very much in those countries, the locks of their hair. But by
both these similituds, Christ notes one thing, namely yt he had stood as a
watchman and yt not one night but many nights, waiting to have entrance, and
cold have none, ye ye he had stood not as in a commanding manner, having his
head armed or covered, but as one yt would entreat her bareheaded to be let in,
and could not yet prevail.

Ver. 2. I answered. As ye church had before set out Christ's great love, to
aggrauate her transgression: so here she describes her own froward dealing, yt
by ye means also her iniquity might become more great and grievous. I have put
of from me my coat, yt is, my garments and apparel is of, and I am ready as it
were, to go to bed. How should I put it on? q. d. There is no reason I should
so do now. I have washed my feet, how should I defile them? q. d. I will
not come upon the foul ground to defile my feet, that I have made so clean:
neither is there any reason, seeing they are clean already, that they should be
defiled again. Both ye similitudes tend to one purpose, vz, to express the
denial of the church in opening to Christ, and to let him in. For even as they
that be undressed are both to put on their clothes again till morning that
they must needs rise: and as they yt have washed their feet, are unwilling to
foul them, and many times allege these things for excuses, yt so they may yt
more safely neglect their duties: even so does the church here. Those yt
understand by putting of her garments, the renouncing of the old man, and by
washing of her feet, ye sanctification of her affections, are greatly deceived:
for the more she had either of ye one or of the other, the nearer she was to
Christ, and the more soon she might have entertained him: but the true and
natural sense is as before. In sum, she means yt she reasoned to and fro in
her heart, and yt her faith did greatly waver, ye yt her own weakness did so far
preuail with her, as not only to think, but to say, yt she could not without
some pain of clothing her self again, or without some hurt by ye cold, if she
came without her apparel, or without some disco^modity by fouling her fair feet
as she thought, rise up and to open the doors, and let Christ in: yea unwise as
she was, she more esteemed so small a discommodity, in doing and executing of
her duty, then the unspeakable pleasures she might have had by Christ, who
willingly for her sake, had taken upon him many inconveniences and hurtes.

Verse. 3. My well-beloved put down his hand from the hole. vz. of the lock of
the door, which he had laid hold of (as it were) thinking indeed to have had
entrance there, but hearing my unkind speech departed: for it is the purpose
of ye church here still to aggrauate her own sin, showing that she gave
Christ no less occasion to go away, then if men should deal discourteously
or unkindly with their best friends, standing at their doors, and knocking to
be let in. And my bowels were moved touching him, vz, after that he was gone,
meaning that then she begun to be moved in her mind, and troubled in her
self, and after a sort to repent her of it, but then it was too late. All
which tends still to amplify her transgression, in that she had no better
grace to regard and receive the acceptable time of her visitation. See Luke.
19. 42.

Verse 4 I rose up to open, vz. the doors, to my well-beloved. The church
speaks this, as though she supposed that Christ had not yet been gone, for
all the just occasions that she had given him of departure from her, but it
was all to late. And my hands, vz, laying hold of the places of the door,
that Christ himself had handled, as verse 3. Did drop down myrrh. What myrrh
is has been showed before. She means that Christ left such a plentiful and
pleasant smell behind him, that even she coming after his departure had such
abundance of it, as if she had had such stoore of myrrh, as would have made
her hands to drop. This also is an other circumstaunce, tending to the
amplyfiying and increasing of the unworthiness and offense of the church, to
wit because Christ did notwithstanding her drowsinesse, leave before the doors
such sweet smelling steps and paths of his comfortable coming, as were fit,
to furnish her with fullness after his departure, which also tended to stir
up the church, being drowsy and dull, as though the church should say, he did
so plentifully perfume my doors with his blessing, and the savor of his
gospel, that I my self but only touching the same, was even therewith
perfumed and made sweet, yea called back and put in mind, to think upon
the unworthy fact committed. And my fingers, vz. dropped down myrrh, yt
passed upon the handles of the lock, that is, thin and pure myrrh, which the
spouse had left behind him, the holy ghost also meaning by this to commend the
excellency of the graces, as he had done before the abundance of them.

Verse. 5. I opened, vz. my doors to my well-beloved, vz, supposing that he had
tarryed there still: but my well-beloved withdrawing him self, secreatly and
quietly, particularly also putting up ye great injury of refusal, that I had
offered him, passed by, vz, my doors and so went his way. My soul departed,
vz, out of my body as it were, meaning that she was in a sown as it were, or
half dead for the time, while he was in speaking, or rather because of his
speech to me, which I had neglected: for howsoever the Hebrew will bear both,
yet I think this latter most agreeable with ye purpose of ye church, which as
we have heard before, is to aggrauate her offense, and in this place to show
also the miseries that she fell into, for so great neglect. I sought him, vz,
after his departure from me, but I could not find him, vz, for all that trauail
and toil that I could take: so it pleases God to punish not only the wicked,
in the contempt of his graces offered, see Amos. 8. 22.
but even his own people, in neglect of the same. I called him, but he
answered me not. She means ye self same thing that before, namely, that
since she neglected his call, he regarded not hers. And in this verse the church
beginnneth to declare, the miseries and calamities that fell upon her, See Pro.
1. 38.
for her negligence and idleness or sloth. And in this ver. she reckons up two
chief ones. The first is, that Christ her head and spouse, did for a time
withdraw himself from her: not ye Christ is at any time absent from his church,
(for Christ is no partaker with nonresidents) but that then he seems to be
so, when he does withdraw the former testimonies of his free and full favor for
a time: which he does not, as though he loved not his church still, but either
thereby to try the faith and patience of his people, or to cause the^ more
reverently to regard his excellent mercies bestowed upon them. The second
misery is, yt the church it self is in great danger even of death, because yt
through her default, she had after a sort provoked ye spouse to depart, which
judgment also she had justly pulled upon her for so great wickedness. Verse. 6.
The watchmen that go about the city found me. It is to be noted yt she says
not simply, watch men, but with an addition, that go about the city, whereby
she notes, as under the word watchmen, their painfulnes, so under ye word
going about, there diligence. see 1. Pet. 5. 8. This also is expounded before
chap. 3. 3. where yt self same thing is put down, saving yt there is no
mention made of their abusing of her, but only of her demand, who thereby could
tell where he was yt her soul loved. They smote me, they wounded me. In that she
speaks so without a particle to ioin the^ (which manner of spech yt Rhetoritians
call Asyndeton) she does it both to show her own vehemence, and the quick
dispatch, yt the enemies made in so ill entreating of her: and in yt she adds
ye word wou^ding after smiting, she does as it were by a gradatio^, paint out
their wickedness, and her misery, because many may faint and be smiten, and
yet not wound or be wounded. The watchmen of the walls. She means those that
had a continual standing allowed them, both to descrye the enemies, and to
repel them also if they can: q. d. neither the running watch, nor the standing
watch favored me, but both sorts cruelly entreated me. Now what it was that
these men performed against her, is declared in the words following. Took my
veil away from me. She says not took it away from her, but as it were for
the time pulled it off her: which they did not only the better to see her, or
with an ungodly eye to behold her, for which see the storye of Susanna verse.
32. but also to bring her thereby the more to the disobedience of her husband:
for vailes, as it does appear by many places of scripture, were given unto
married women, both to express the authority that the husbands had over
them, and also to put them in mind of their obedience and subjection. See
Genes. 20. 16. Also Genes. 24. 65. 1. Cor. 11. 5. 6. 10. Such a like phrase is
that that is used. Ruth. 3. 9. of spreading the winge of his garment over her.
The word that is here turned veil, is in the Hebrew tongue derived from
thinness, and I suppose verelye that it was made of the finest and purest
linen that could be got. What should be meant by it, we are not curiously
to seek. This I suppose may be safelye said, that the church falling in the
absence of her spouse, into the hands of corrupt and false teachers, they
labor to depryue her of that same purity and soundnes of doctrine, that he
has committed unto her, as a mean to hold her in the duty of all holy
obedience and faithfulness toward him. And more then this, I see not. If any
be more quick sighted, I pray them in Gods name to reveal it to the benefit
of the Church. In a word there is in this verse contained, the third calamity
of the Church, vz, that Christ her head, being absent from her, and she
laboring to seek him, she falls into sundry dangers and distresses: yea
all became noisome and hurtful unto her, yea even those who should have kept
and preserved her, from all violence and iniurye, they did bounse and beat her,
yea cruelly wound her, and dealt most vilanouslye with her, as the particulars
show.

Verse 7. I charge you. to writ very staightly as it were by an oath which
form also the church uses, both to testify her unfeigned love, toward her
spouse, and to provoke them, with whom she deals to deal faithfullye in
doing her message: O daughters of Jerusalem. She was il entreated of her
enemies, as appears verse. 6. Therefore now she speaks unto her friends,
looking to find favor and courtesy amongst them. See these words expounded
before. chap. 2. 7. also chap. 3. 5. and at this verse begins the second
part of the chapter, containing as is said before, a dialogue between the
Church, and the damsells or daughters of Jerusalem in her friends. If ye find
my beloved, she means Christ whom she loved, as he likewise yt church, Ephesians.
5. 25. That ye tell him. In hebrew, what should ye tell him? interrogatiuely,
which she speaks shortly, as many times lovers do, and yet the
interrogation contains more vehemence in it, and serves to beautifye the
speech also. q. d. Would you know, what you should tell him? even that which
follows. That I am sick of love, She can not conceal the heat and
vehemence of her love, but even after the manner of Lovers, bewraieth the same,
who the more they are absent one of them from another, the more their love
increases, and the greatlier do they desire to be joined together. The
meaning of the words is, that the church is so far of, from keeping close her
love, that she does not only reveal it to them, but entreats the^ rather
freely to open it, and to declare the same specially to her beloved.

Verse. 8. O thou the fairest amongst women. This is the title that the
faithful attribute unto the church, in whose judgment indeed she is so, not
so much for any beautye in her self, as because she is adorned, with the
singular gifts and excellent graces of God. What has thy well-beloved more then
another well-beloved? They double the Question, for the more vehemence, as also
for the strangeness of the matter. That thou do so charge us: vz. so hardly
and straightly, and even as it were, by the virtue of an oath. q. d. Some thing
there is, that thou laiest so hard a burden, and straight a charge upon us, or
else thou would not do it. And this is the first question moved to the
church, concerning the person of her spouse, they maruelling as it were, what
excellent thing should be in him, that she should so highly esteem him by
occasion of which demand, she enters into a notable description of Christ, in
the verses following, first setting him out generally, verse. 9. and afterward
particlarly, by singular recital of his parts and members, even ten in
number, beginning as you would say, from the highest, and so coming down to
the nethermost: the church perfourming that here for her head and spouse, both
in a general and particular commendation of him and his parts, that he had done
before for her chap. 4, 1. 2. 3. etc Which also is usual amongst earthly
lovers, to requite one kindness with another, whereunto no doubt the church
had special regard, though she could not perfourm any sufficient duty that
way.

Verse. 9 My beloved is white. She begins to answer their demand under
many allegories, commending her spouse: as first in this verse she does
praise him, for the excellent hew and liuelye color: and afterward in the
verses following, she commends his particular parts. And first she me^tioneth
his whiteness or his fayrenesse, which amongst earthly lovers is a thing much
set by, and therefore must be much more glorious, in this spiritual husband.
And ruddie, that is, red and as you would say, of a sanguine complexion, and
this color of ruddines is commended in David. 1. Sam. 16. 12. And note that
the holy Ghost joins both these together, the whiteness making the
ruddynesse more fresh and fair, and the ruddinesse discerning the whitnes
from palenesse of face, or phlegmatic complexion: both which colors if they
concur in an earthlye creature, specially such as be young (for these are
colors belonging to them,) make the same to be liked: how much more then
should they, considered spiritually in Christ, (in respect of whom all the
good things of this life, are not so much as a shadow) not only be excellent
in him, but draw us on unfeignedly to love him also. Even a standerd bearer
above ten thousaand. She uses a metaphor taken from the war, as also puts
a number certain for an uncertain, to express the commendation of her love.
Commonly standerd bearers are most tall and mighty men, and amongst ten
thousand men, a man may find many comely countenaunces, but yet says she
for sound and natural moisture, and for a most temperate and fit color, look
amongst infinite numbers of people, you shall not find one or any, any way
matchable with my beloved: she meaning also by this description of him, that he
is of a most sound and sure health, as those most commonly are, that are of so
good complexions and constitutions: but all this must be understood
spiritually, as before has been said, and no carnal or earthly thought must
be conceived here.

Verse. 10. His head is excellent gold, yea most pure gold, She enters into the
description of the particular parts of her spouse, whose head was not of gold,
as the words may seem to import, but that in a certain proportion, she
resembles it thereto. Gold for the excellency and purity of it, is a metal
highly extolled and regarded amongst men: so the spiritual beautye of Christ,
and his excellent puritye, is to be preferred above all. Neither does she
simply compare him, to every kind of gold, but to that which is most pure and
fine, if any one be better then an other, as in truth we know by experience
there is great difference, and all is done to this end, that under the same
she might set forth the most perfect purity, soundness and excellencye of
her spouse. His locks are curled, or the word also may import thick, both of
these tending to express his might and strength, and not to approve, either
of curling or crisping of hair in men or women which is condemned. 1. Pe. 3.
And black as a raven, that is, comelye and sightlye: for blacknes of it self,
is not an evil or unseemly color specially in men's hayres, and the rather if
we have regard to the people, inhabiting the land of Jury, which is marvelous
hot over ours is: and by these words, As a Raven, she meant that it was a
natural and pure black of it self, which is far more excellent, both in
black and all other colors, than any of these that be made by art.

Verse. 11. His eyes are like doves eyes. She now describes his eyes, by the
sober comelines and beauty of them, they being full of all innocence,
singlenes, and chastity, which he means to express by comparing them to
doves eyes. The church attributes it here unto Christ, which he before
attributed unto her, cha. 1. 15. Also chap. 4. 1. where look for the more full
exposition of the same: neither does ye church, simply compare them to Doves
eyes, that is, to every sort of doves eyes, but to such doves as be most
beautiful and clear, which may appear by the words following. By the rivers
of waters, that is, like the eyes of such doves as haunt and abide by the
rivers of waters, where they have store enough of water, to wash them selves
and their eyes, to make them clear and fresh, we knowing also by experience,
yt every running water is good to fresh and clear the sight. Washing them
selves in milk: q. d. If that be not sufficient to resemble him and his eyes
to Doves, haunting the clear streams, let them be compared to such, as for
the clearing and freshing of their eyes, wash themselves in milk, that so they
may appear, and be judged white and comelye, shyning with clear
brightness, And remaining by fullness. These words have been diversely
interpreted, and according to the same, several senses have been given. I
will only rehearse two, leaving the godly reader to embrace that, which he
shall find to be most agreeable to godlynes and truth. Some think, that by
this should be meant, that as the doves be full of moisture, that remain and
continue by full vessels: so is Christ the husband of the church, of whose
fullness we all receive even grace for grace. Othersome, because the word which
is here translated fulness, signifies a thing sometimes, that is fitted for
any hollow place or room, as the precious Stone in a ring is made meet and
fit, to fill up the hollow place of the ring, do therefore interpret it of
the eyes, fitted as it were, for the holes of the head: q. d, As the Stones
that are set in ringes, are fitted for the place, and so make a comely show: so
are the eyes of the Spouse, none of them standing too far out of the head,
for that is full of staring, neither any of them sincke in, for that is
piteous to behold, (both which things are unseemly and deformed in the
eyes, as we see by experience, and do after a sort disfigure the countenance)
but more fitly apted by a thousand degrees, than precious stones are to ringes,
for the beautifiing thereof. And this I take to be the more simple sense, but as
I said before, I leave ye reader to his own holy choice.

Verse. 12. His cheeks are a bed of spice, that is, comely and pleasant to the
sight, and sweet to the smell. The comeliness thereof is contained in the
word bed, and the sweetness thereof in the word Spice. For beds, as we see,
set out the gardens, and spices we know, smell well then, when they have been
long gathered, no doubt also but they are sweet then when they grow. And as
the flowers of spices, I take it that he means by this speech, they are
most sweet and pleasant to look upon. For the flowers of good things, as we
see by experience, are for the time, more delightful to look upon, and more
sweet to smell too, then the bodies themselves yielding the same. His lips
are as Lillies, that is, glorious and beautiful, and fair to behold, for
that flower amongst others, is of a goodly color, and fair to look upon.
This flower is commended in many places of this book, as whereunto sometimes the
church it self is compared for the beauty of it cap. 2. 2. And in ye same cap.
ver. 16. it is attributed to Christ. Se also cap. 4. 5. Neither is this flower
only beautiful, but of a pleasant smell, and of good and tall growth, al which
tends still to ye expressing of the glory and beauty of Christ, and to the
sweet and pleasant smelles, that are to be found in him, whereunto also no
doubt, but he alludeth in the words following, saying dropping down pure myrrh.
This is expounded before verse. 4. of this cha. In all this, as also that which
goes before and follows after, we must mark, that the holy ghost means not
to move men to wanton love (for besides that he knows our over great
inclination thereto, we believe according to truth, that no ungodliness
dwells with him) nor instructs men to paynt out their lovers, according to
their fleshly liking: but under these figurative and borrowed kind of
speeches, taken from the comeliness of the creatures, yt we our selves are well
acquainted with, as also from other porportions in them, he does lively paint
out the excellent graces in Christ, which as in respect of themselves cannot
well be expressed, and by reason of our weakness, can not better be declared:
yea, he paynteth out under the same, the spiritual and heavenly love of the
Church to Christ, which does not nor cannot satisfy her self with any words
or comparisons, to express both the most excellent majesty and glory of her
love Christ, and the holy causes in him that stir up her affections of love
toward him. Allegorically to handle all these things, is not in my purpose
or power, and yet me thinks this much may be said according to truth,
that by his head, mentioned verse. 10. and there resembled to gold, yea to most
pure gold, there may well be meant, his eternal diety or Godhead, or if you
will his whole person, which does as far exceed all things, both in color
and glittering, and all manner goodness, as gold, yea most fine gold, all other
metalles: and by his locks mentioned in the same verse may be signified, the
innumerable and unmeasurable graces of God bestowed upon him, even as the
hayres of a man's head, are without account: to proceed, by the curling of
them, may be signified not only the fast twisting and twinding of them one
within another, they being tied together as it were with a chain, but also
the prevailing strength of the same: as also there may be meant by the
blacknes, that excellent comeliness, beauty, and glory thereof. And whereas
verse. 11. she makes mention of his eyes, thereby may well be resembled the
quickness of sight, as you would say, that is in Christ, or his
understanding or perceiving of things, that being more excellent in him,
then our eyes in us, because our sight may be deceived, but he can not. For
he sees and beholds all things, as the scripture affirms in many places,
as Proverbs 15. 3. Zecha. 4. 10. Heb, 4. 13. And whereas she resembles them
to Doves eyes, sitting by the rivers of waters. etc. No doubt but thereby she
means the purity and cleanness of Gods sight, who as he loves no
wickedness, neither will have evil to dwell with him. Psalm. 5. 4. So he
cannot abide to behold it, in which respect Abacuck says notably of him
chapter 1. 13. Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil. thou can not
behold wickedness. And whereas in this verse 12. she mencioneth Christ's
cheeks, lips etc. no doubt, but by the cheeks she means his comely and
favorable countenance, as by comparing the same to spices, the sweetness and
pleasauntnes thereof: as also by the lips etc, the sweetness of his word and
truth, full of all manner of joy, and rejoicing the heart, as the Prophet says
Psalm. 19. 6. spreading abroad the sweetness thereof even far and wide, after
the manner of the pleasant lilies, and most precious, pure, and sweet mirth.
For the word lips, see before chapter 4. 3. also verse. 11. attributed there
by Christ, to the church. Thus the scripture uses to resemble divine things
to human, though it be true, divine things can by no human, either words
or matters, be sufficiently expressed.

Verse 13. His hands as ringes of gold, that is, glorious and precious, for
ringes were counted in those days, great ornaments and deckinges. Isaiah. 3.
21. Luke. 15. 22. neither does she say simply ringes, but ringes of gold,
adding yet somewhat more in the words following, to express his glory. Set
full of Tarshish, that is, of precious stones so called, which what they were,
is not certain, and that makes the interpreters to turn it diuersely, some
using here the word Chrisolite, other some turning it, Beril of the sea. If
it be a Chrysolite, some take it then to be a very rich precious stone, that
came out of Aethiopia, glistering as gold (whereof it seems also in the greek
tongue, to take the name) sparkling as fire, but yet as some think somewhat
green, or as other report having the color of the sea in some sort. If we
read it Beril, it is another stone, that grows (as some hold) in India,
Berill, it self, being as they suppose an indian word, and given by the
people as a name to that stone, in green color it resembles the sucaradge as
some suppose, and was wont to be cut of the Indians six square, which they
did to make the dim or dull color to show better, for otherwise, as some
affirm, it did not show, because it was of a color like oil after some, or
like water in the sea, after othersome. Some write, that in former times, this
stone was most usually set, in such rings as lovers did use to give one to
another, or in marriage rings, because of the power that was thought to be in it,
to procure and continue love and liking, one of them toward another. But to
come to the word it self, that the holy ghost uses here, I find it in the
scripture to be used, sometimes for the name of a man, as Genes. 10. 4.
sometimes for the name of a city or place in Cilicia, as Iona. 1. 3. which it
should seem to take from them, it is mentioned in Genes. chap. 10. 4. And
this place was famous by Paul's birth, as appears Act. 21. 39. Sometimes it
is used for the name of a precious stone, as here, which the interpretors in
other places where it is mentioned, have not yet agreed upon what it should be,
sometimes they turning it, a Chrysolite, an other while a Carbuncle, an other
while a Hyachath, an other while an Onix, etc. such variety there is. Other
some will have it to be a stone of a blewishe color, or of color like the
sky, or blackish or dark as water being deep, which they call by the name of
Turks, this and the name of Tarshish, not much differing. Some of the Jewish
Rabbis, take it to be a precious stone, whose color comes nigh to the
color of Hyacinth or Iamith, which some take to be purple colored. All this
is put down, that the godly reader may choose that which he shall judge most
agreeable to the truth. For mine own part I think she means, that there is
nothing in her spouse, but most rare, dear, precious, and glorious things:
understanding also by his hands, not only his strength and power, which is
also usual in the scripture, but also al his works, because Christ's power in
the perfourmaunce of them, is the same that men's hands are to them, meaning
hereby, that the works of God are pure and beautiful, yea most precious, yea
then gold or precious stones, yea as numbers of ringes filled with all manner of
costly stones; by which also using the word ringes in the plural number, no
doubt but she means to express the varietye and great stoore of these
wonderful works, of which David says, Psalm. 40. 5. If I would declare and
speak of them, they are more in number than I am able to express. It
follows. His belly, vz, or his breast. She puts part of him for the whole
body. Like the whitenes of Iuorye. She means that he was as comely and
clear as the Iuorye, which is a thing well known unto us, to be very white
and bright, made (as some say) of an Elophantes tuske, which kind of beasts
are only in Africa, naturally as some hold: neither does she simply compare it
to Ioury, but adds, covered with Saphirs, that is, that has most rich and
sumptuous cost bestowed upon it. Iuory of it self, because it is a thing rare,
and far brought, must needs be very costy, how much more then, when it is
beset wholly with precious stones, yea with most costlye precious stones, such
as Saphirs are, of which we can hardly say any more certainly, than before of
Tarshish. Some, specially of the Jewish writers, take it to be of the color
of the air: some a white stone, some a red stone, some take it to be an
adamant: some think it to be of a blewishe color, intermixed with purple,
having certain sparks, like gold as it were, in the same: and this last
seems in my mind, to be the likliest judgment. In Medea, or amongst the
Medes, is the best sort of them, and yet none of them all, are very clear.
Whatsoever it be, this I take to be the meaning of the church, to show, that
Christ her spouse, was not only most comely adorned, but also most
sumptuously and costly, even as Iuory beset with pearls and most precious
stones.

Verse 14. His thies, are as pillars of marble. She proceeds in the
commendation of his parts: and in that she resembles his thies unto pillars,
she means thereby his strength, which yet is more set out, in that she says
they are of marble: by which she does not only note as before, the strength
thereof, but also the comelynes of the same. For marble (though there be
sundry sorts thereof) are counted such stones, as are commended for several
colors and spots in the same, and has his name in the Greek tongue, as it
should seem, for a certain green kind of glittering green. Set upon sockets
of fine gold. She means by this speech, that they have not only a fair and
fine foundation, but even a sure one also. For as those pillars are glorious,
that are set upon fine gold, and like long to last, because gold hardlye
rusteth or cankereth, so is it with Christ: the Church noting by all these
things, the assured soundes, strength, constancy, and durablenes of her
spouse: because as amongst stones, marble, so amongst metal, gold, is most
strong and durable. His countenance as Lebanon, that is, pleasant and
delightful: for Lebanon as we have heard before, was a pleasant and fruitful
place. Excellent as the Cedars, that is, as glorious and as much to be
esteemed, as the high and mighty Ceders of Lebanon. So we read, as the Laurix
tree, which is a tree having leaves like a Pine tree, the wood and timber
whereof, is very fit for building, not only because it is easy to work in,
but because it will hardlye or not at all perish, either by rotting or worms,
yea if that be true, which some write of it, it will not easily be consumed
with fire, but there is a long space, before the fire can either take hold of
it, or burn it to coals. By which no doubt also, there may be well meant, the
eternal durablenes of Jesus Christ the son of God, who though he be a fire
to consume the wicked, and though the wicked think by flames as it were, to
burn him, yet they shall not be able to annoy him.

Verse 15. The roof of his mouth is sweetnesses. She means by one
instrument of nature, wherewith the voice is formed, to wit, the roof of the
mouth, even the voice it self, and the words uttered therewith: and by
sweetnesses, which she uses in the plural number, she means not only the
pleasantness of his word, which as David says, is more sweet unto his
taste, than the honey and the honey comb. Psalm. 19. 10: but also the great
abundance, and wonderful plentye thereof. What a sweet voice is this: Come
unto me all ye that labor, and be heavy laden etc. Math. 11. 28. And this:
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son etc. John 3. 26.
See for this Phrase also, Psalm. 45. 2. And he himself is wholly delectable, yt
is, there is nothing, neither within him, nor without him, but it may move me^ to
take a singular delight and pleasure in him: she affirming yt we are of him
whollye and together, which she had before declared in every part of him
almost. And how can this choose but be true, both in the whole, and in every
part, seeing that God was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto him self.
2. Cor. 5. 19. and that in him dwells the fullness of the godhead bodily, God
being manifested in the flesh, and justified in the spirit. Collos. 2. 9. 1.
Tim. 3. 16. So that whosoever doubts of this, or denies it, may as well call
the truth of God him self into question. This is my well-beloved, vz, that I
have described unto you And this is my lover O daughters of Jerusalem. As
though she should say: he is such a one, as I have painted him out unto you, in
this excellent show and beautye, that ye may easelye know him in and amongst
others. And this dubbling of the words, that she here used, was not only
profitable to express her earnest affection toward him, but also to move
them, with whom she talked, both to the earneste loving, and liking of him,
whom she had described, and also that they might be the better able, either to
do her message mentioned verse. 7. of this cha, to christ, or to bring her, where
he himself was. And in calling him her well-beloved and lover, she meanneth to
express, that as Christ had carried unfeigned good will toward her, so she
did in some measure, of a sound mind unto him, as her dearling and best
beloved, on who^ alone, she could find in her heart, as we say, to bestow her
whole love, her self and all. To be short, in ending thus emphatically, she
gives us to understand, that not being able by any figures, phrases,
metaphors, similitudes, words or speeches to describe him to the full, she
would in a word as it were, shut up all, that he him self within and without,
both generallye and every part of him, was altogether amiable, and worthy
indeed to be affected, both of her and also of all those, that either should
hear of him, or see him.

Verse 16. O thou the fairest among women. See this expounded before in this
chapter verse 8. Whither is my well-beloved. This is the second question of the
Damselles and friends of the Church, as we have noted before, which they
propound not, as of evil will toward her or her spouse, but of a good mind
to embrace him, as appears by the words, and to go with her to seek him.
Whither is thy well-beloved, (vz, yt thou have so notably painted out unto us,
and so plainlye opened,) Turned a side, vz, from thee, and yet it should
seem, that they mean by the word, yt he is not gone far, nor will be long
absent. That we seek him with thee. They show the end of their asking, that so
they may remove all doubt, and suspicion out of the Churches head, that they
ask not otherwise, than of an unfeigned mind, and hearty good will, both
toward Christ and her, in that they offer them selves as it were, to be
companions with her in seeking him. All comes to this, that after the Church
had liuelye painted out the person of her love, to the Daughters of Jerusalem,
that is, to the friends of the church, and had descrybed his complexion,
members, speech, and other excellent virtues, qualities and graces in him, that
if they had but either seen him, or heard him speak, they might have known
him, the holy Ghost shows what effect this took in their hearts, namely it
so inflamed them, with an unfeigned love toward him, that presently they will
be companions with her in seeking of him. These questions do the faithful, and
elect people of God propound, laboring thereby to fetch from the mouth of the
Church, a profitable instruction, and professing that they are desirous to
seek and find him, even as she. If this seem strange, we must know and
understand, yt without the church, Christ can neither be sought for as he
should, neither indeed found.

Verse. 17. My well-beloved is gone down into his garden. The churches answer to
yt former demand, for she has nothing in her, but she will acquaint her
children and friends with the same. And in that she uses the word of going
down, she speaks it not only as having respect to the daughters of
Jerusalem, with who^ she talked for their good and instruction, but as having
regard also, to the situation of the city it self, from whence they could not
pass to their gardens of pleasure without the city, but they must of
necessitye go downward, because the city stood upon the hill, and they planted
their gardens in the lower places, because they were more plentiful and
fruitful: and what she should mean by the word garden, see before chapter
4. 17. To the beds of spice, that is, to comely and sweet smelling places in
the same: this Phrase is expounded verse 12. of this chapter. To feed in the
gardens. The church notes the ends, wherefore Christ is gone down into the
gardens, that is, to eat and to drink there, and to take therein his
pleasure and refreshing. And to gather lilies, that is, sweet and good flowers.
Men go to there gardens commonly (as we see by experience amongst us) either to
make merry as we say, or else to gather such fruits, as grow there: that does
the church apply in a spiritual sense, unto her head and spouse Christ,
meaning that Christ is come into that place, where his word is purelye
preached and heard (for there in deed is the seat of the church) that is
Christ his garden, set with diverse sorts of plants, and decked with excellent
flowers: this was called before a garden enclosed, chapter 4. 12. through the
beds of sweet smelling spices, which he as a good gardener treads out,
planteth waters and does all in all, namelye, the hearts and consciences of
such as he has regenerated, replenishing them with sundry gifts and graces,
as of prayer, thankesgyuing, obedience, etc, which are unto him as it were
sweet smelling spices or flowers: yea he fedeth in his gardens, that is to
say, particular churches, for it is as it were food unto him, to have
churches, in which he may be confessed and served, yea it is his meat and
drink to him, either to do him self, or to have others do his Fathers
will. John. 4. 32. 34. And he gathers lylies and other flowers for them, when
he perceives them to do good works, which is an odor that smells sweet,
and a sacrifice far more acceptable and pleasant to him. Philip. 4. 18, then
all the pleasant flowers in the world, can be to any man earthly.

Verse. 18. I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine.) This is the
conclusion of the whole chapter, and of all the speech that the church has
with her Daughters and Damsels, wherein the church openly professes that
whatsoever may be either stayed or done against her, yt she is and will be of
a stayed and immovable affection toward Christ, and will be continuallye
strengthened in an assured persuasion of his good will toward her, and so by
this means she fostereth and foodeth her affection and good will toward him:
for she means by this speech, that she belongs so to Christ, and Christ
so to her, that there can be no separation, and therefore good cause why she
should continually love and like him: we had the same before chap. 2. 16 There
being no difference in the meaning, though as in respect of the order of the
words, there is some that being put there in the first place which is here in
the latter, and that there in the latter, which is here in the first, the
meaning being thus, As he will not have an other but whollye delights in me,
so I will not have another lover, but hold my self wholly and only contented
with him. Who feeds among the Lillies, That is, who lives most pleasantly
and sweetly: q. d. as they that eat there me at among the Lillies, and other
sweet smelling flowers, can not choose but live in delights, pleasantness, and
sweetness: so does Christ in his church, and those that there live with him.
And the church propounds this, not only for the singular commendation of
Christ her spouse, but also thereby as it were by a forcible argument, to move
all the faithful continually to love and like him that has in him such
abundance of sweetenes and pleasure.

Verse. 1. Teaches us, yt howsoever God have bestowed great and many spiritual
graces upon his church, and the particular members, so yt they are endued with
knowledge, faith, and many other holy virtues, yt yet notwithstanding, there are
certain remainders of their natural corruption in them, which will sometimes
break forth in them, to manifest the neglect of their duetye toward God and
men: which yet notwithstanding we should labor all the dais of our life in a
holy striving to set our selves against. Of this combat read Romans 7. 14. 15.
16. etc. Secondlye, it teaches us, as on the one side to confess our
infirmityes, as the church does here her drowsinesse and sleeping, that so we
may obtain forgiveness at Gods hands, for if we confess our sins, God is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. and receive
instruction, comfort and pray for our brethren, who knowing our miseries, can
not but extend ye bowels of pity and compassion toward us, because they have
learned to weep with the^ yt weep, etc. Romans 12. 15. So on ye other side
notwithstanding, to acknowledge the graces of God in us and upon us as the
church does here, sayng that her heart was awake: for otherwise we shall rod God
of his glory, who has given us his good things, and deprive ye brethren of yt
comfort they might have by us. Satan's subtletie would be waighed in this
assault, who if he can not puff us up in pride of the things we have not,
would cast us down, in supposing a want of the things we have, So hard a
matter is it to be wise according to sobriety, as the Apostle wills us.
Roman. 12. 3. Thirdly, we may learn, for the better feeling of our sin, and
the working of a more sound detestation of it in us, to aggrauate the same unto
our selves, in all the circumstaunces and occasions thereof: howbeit in a just
measure and proportion, least otherwise we be found false witness bearers
against our own souls. This does the Prophet David in many Psalms, and namely
Psalm. 51. and Daniel also chap. 9. 5. 6. etc, yea and the whole church in
sundry Psalms, and particularly. Psalm. 106. 6. But this will not our cursed
generation yield unto, and that is the reason why we are so besotted, and
senseles in our sins, yea frosen as (the Prophet says) in the dregs of our
own iniquity: Zephan. 1. 12.

Verse. 2. Doc.
Teaches us, what shifts and excuses flesh and blood can find, to put the
Lord from them in his gracious calling of them, with the refusal also of
their own good, through the want of the graces that he would give them:
sometimes they alleging, that it is no convenient time to come, as the people
did in the buylding of the Lords house. Haggai. 1. 2. Sometimes that there
profittes and pleasures are to be followed, as in the parable of them that
were bidden to the wedding. Mat. 22. 1. 2, etc. And sometimes one thing and
sometimes an other. And even as the church here has her excuses, and reasons of
refusal. So we see ye same in Moses the man of God, when he was to be sent for
the deliverance of Gods people out of Egypt, Exo. 3. 11. 13. also Exo. 4. 1.
10. etc. and in Jeremy, refusing the execution of the Prophets office. chap. 1.
6.

Verse 3. Teaches us, in time to accept of the Lords merciful visitation,
least otherwise he offering us his favor, and we either contemning it, or
neglecting, or not reuerentlye esteeming of it, according to the worthiness
thereof, we do not only provoke him to depart, and pull sorrows upon our
selves thereby, but cause him to bestow it upon them that will thankfullye
receive it, and bring forth the fruits thereof, as our savior says Math.
21. 43. It is a doctrine much used in the old and new Testament, both to stir
up men, to embrace and that with speed and earnestness Gods favor offered
them, least refusing it, they be barred of it then, when they would be glad of
it. See to this end. Proverb. 1. 24. 25. etc. Isaiah. 55. 6. Amos. 8. 12.
Galat. 6 10. Ephesians. 5. 6. Heb. 3. 13. and in sundry other places of that
Epistle.

Ver. 4. Does not only teach us, what excellency and fullness there is of
good things in Christ, but withal shows his great and unspeakable love
toward the Church, who though she have offered him, by means of her
discourteous dealing, just occasion not only to depart from her, but to take
with him also, all his favors, does yet notwithstanding not deal so, the Lord
comfortably, as in respect of the church, and wisely as in regard of him
self, supplying his absence, with the sweet graces that he has left behind
him: which graces also the Church shall do well, not only thankfully to
receive, but profitably to use, to the strengthening of her faith and hope, even
until she may come unto the full fruition of her head and spouse for ever. To
this end tends Paul's doctrine of the ministeries of the Church, mentioned
Ephesians. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc

Ver. 10 Teaches us, not only to be greatly grieved for our former iniquities,
yea so grieved, that we seem to be and are in deed, even almost as it were
swallowed up of death with ye same, or as ye prophet speaks psalm, 88. 3.
There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is there rest
in mi bones because of my sin. etc: But also yt howsoever the Lord love his,
he does notwithstanding for their sins chastise them, and yet not take his
loving kindness from the^ for ever. Psa. 89. 32. 33. Yea these afflictions, are
both tokens of his fatherly love toward them, as Heb. 12. 7. 8. and pledges
also of our salvation. 1. Corinthians. 11. 32.

Verse. 6. Teaches us, what is the nature of the wicked against the godly, vz.
hardlye to entreat them and to deal most cruelly with them which the Church
of God, and the particular members thereof have found true in all ages and
times, which thing also the holy ghost propounds not only here but in many
other places of scripture, not as to discourage us from entringe into the race
and course of godliness, but to fore tell us before hand, what we must look
for, and to forewarne us also to be furnished with the graces of constancy and
patience in the truth. And as we see the persecutions of the church put down
in the word, and foretold there, as acts. 14. 22. 2. Timoth. 3. 12. and other
places, so we have notable places, containing the terrors of ye wicked, and the
joys of the faithful, as Philip. 1. 28. In nothing fear your adversaries,
which is to them a sure token of destruction, but to you of salvation and that
of God. And 2. These. 1, 6. 7. etc. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense trybulation to them that trouble you, (which what it is he declares
verse. 8. 9.) and to you which are troubled rest with us: by which we see, that
the sufferinges of the Saints, shall not be in vain, and that the ungodly
shall not always triumph, whatsoever they imagine or suppose.

Verse. 7. Teaches us in the days of our distress and heaviness, not to
conceal the same or keep it close, for then it will be as a fire to consume us,
but to lay it out to the Godly, that so from them we may receive according to
Gods good pleasure, instruction and comfort, and by doctrine and prayer:
according to Saint James his rule. Acknowledge your faults one to another, and
pray one for an other,. James 5. 16. Taking always heed, that in this behalf
we choose such, as will faithfully keep things committed unto them, and be
able also to give us comfort by the knowledge and experience which they them
selves have had. 2. Cor. 1. 4. Least otherwise laying our afflictions before
them that are unskillful, we loose our labor, and trifle out the time, or
committing them to such as will blase them abroad, we add yet more affliction
and grief unto our own souls for want of circumspection and warines both in
that and other great cases also.

Verse. 8. Teaches us, by questioning and demaundes (specially propounded unto
them that be able to instruct us) to labor to attain to the knowledge of such
things as we have small, or no skill at all in, finally and above all the
knowledge of Christ, for this is life everlasting to know God, to be the only
true God, and him, whom he has sent Jesus Christ. John 17. 3. And by this
means have always Gods Children, labored to profit, as John. 1. 38. 48.
also John. 14. 22. See also Exodus 13. 14. etc. Also Deuteronomy. 6. 20. and sundry
other places. By which the Lord would seem amongst other ways allowed in his
word to make this, whereby men might attain to sound knowledge and ripe
judgment in his truth, and though we in the corruption of our nature, cast in
our own ways, the stumbling blocks of fear, of shamefastnes, and sundry such
like, to hinder us in this case and course of godliness, yet we must labor
again to remove them, and in holy boldness to propound questions, yet none
that are curious, but such as are good to edify withal. Romans 14. 1. 19.

Verse. 9. Teaches us, first if we know any thing, the manifesting whereof
may tend to Gods glory, and the good of his children, we should simply
propound it, for God has not given men talents to the end, that they should
lapp it up in napkins, and digg and hide the same in the ground, as the
unprofitable servant in the parable Math. 25. 25. Luke. 19. 20. Neither yet
that in a proud conceit of their own estimation, because they alone would be
counted wise, learned, etc. they should keep it to them selves: but lay it
out for advantage to them selves by increase of the same, and to Gods glory,
who shall have praise in their weldoing, and to the good of his children, who
can not choose, but reap profit thereby. Secondly, that howsoever we would that
Christ should be glorious amongst others, and tenderly beloved of them, that
yet we should also have a care, that he might be dear and precious in our
eyes above the rest, and that we might (if it were possible) more unfeignedly
love him than all others.

Verse. 10. 11. 12. And so on forward, till you come to the end of the 15,
wherein is contained not only a most large, but also a most excellent and true
description, of the rare and wonderful graces in our savior christ, do teach
us: first to be in continual love and liking of him, yt has by a manner of
speech, such a world of spiritual wealth in him. In worldly things, the name of
abundance, is argument sufficient enough, not only to cause us to affect, but
even to strive to attain the things that under yt color be set before us. what
a transgression shall this be, yt we shall not only have abundance, but infinite
treasures, and that of good things, yea and of good things concerning eternal
life, and we shall either with profane persons, as if we were hogs or dogs,
trample them under our feet, or with careless me^, make no account of the^, or
with ignorante, dull, and heavy spirited persons not have them in their due
regard. It is amongst others, the great sin of this thankles generation, to
despise Christ, many thinking it enough, if they can with the lips of their
tongues talk of him, but none striving in a steadfast persuasion of a lively
faith, to feel him, and his merits effectually in their hearts, not only to
the apprehension of eternal life, but even to the subduing of evil in them,
and the fashioning of them to good, that Christ dwelling in the^ by faith, the
body might be dead because of sin, Rom, 8. 10. also 6. 6. and they being
rooted and grounded in love, they might be able to comprehend wtal saints, what
is yt breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, yt we might be filled with all fulness of God.
Ephesians. 3. 17. 18, etc.
Oh yt it were in me, either with a solid mind, in deed to embrace him self, or
yt I had the tongs of al holy angels to propound him to others, that they might
taste and see, how good the lord Jesus is. Secondly, yt in this large
commendation, the lord has not only provided for the manifestation of the
wonderful glory of his son, but also has labored to stir up ye heaviness of the
hearts of his children, in setting him before us, yt is so excellent, yea
excellency it self, as also to take from the wicked all excuse of ignorance,
who can now allege nothing for themselves, such Christ is so plainly and
certainly manifested unto us, yt even all our senses, may after a sort, be even
as it were satisfied with him, and in some measure say, as John says: that
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life, etc. 1. John 1. 1.

Ver. 16. Teaches us, that the faithful labor not only by demandes to increase
their knowledge and faith, but yt there is a proceeding and growth in the same,
ye yt more they hear of christ, yt more they are inflamed with a love and liking
of him, and that to spare no labor, pains, or cost, even to seek him, and
find him also. See Psalm. 84. 6. 7. Romans 1. 17. This is lively set out, in the
wise men that came to seek and worship Christ. Math. 2. And in the queen of
the south, that came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon. Math. 12. 42. But the people of this age are like the
Israelites with manna, the more plenty they have of it, the more and sooner also
they wax weary of it, upon so unthankful a nation has the Lord bestowed his
mercyes.

Verse. 17. Teaches us, to acquaynt Gods children, with all the good things
made known to us. See the like verse 9. of this chapter.

Verse. 18. Teaches us every day more and more to feel the certaintye of our
salvation in our selves, and the infallible testimonies and tokens of Gods love
toward us: which that we may the better do, we are not so much to look
upon our selves in our sins, for who is it, that shall not then distrust or
despair rather, as to look upon the Lord, and that not only in his eternal
foresight, but also in his unchangeable love, there being not so much, as a
shadow of turning in him. James. 1. 17. whose gifts and calling also are
without repentance Romans 11. 29. yea in the holy spirit of truth that he has
given us, which is the earnest of our inheritance. Ephesians. 1. 14, and the
pledge and earnest pennye of all the promises of God in our hearts. 2. Corrint.
5. 5.

CAP. 6. and the sum thereof.
Christ bearing witness or yielding, to the earnest affection an love of the
church toward him, does highly commend, that her spiritual beauty, which is
known and confessed by all to be in her ver: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. He sets
out the earnest affection that he had to marrye her to himself. verse 8. and
confirms her in (...) good will toward him: first by here ^^^ling verse 10.
afterward by the commendation of such graces and (...) things, as he had
committed unto her ver. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. And las^y, by an assured
promise made her of h^^ continual presence and large liberali^^ toward her,
even until the most de^^red day, wherein the marriage shall (...) solemnized
and performed verse. 18. 19.

1 THou art beautiful (my love (...) Tirtzah: comely as Jerusalem terrible as
an army with man ensigns.

2 Turn thine eyes over (...) me, that they may lift me (...) thine hear is
like the flock of Goats, which look down from Gilead.

3 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, which go up from the washing, all
which bring out twins, and there is none barren amongst them.

4 Thy temples between thy locks, are as a piece of a Pomegranate.

5 Though there be threescore Queens, and four scoore concubins, and no
number of the damsels.

6 Yet my dove that is alone, my perfect one, she that is the only daughter
of her mother, even that clean one, to her that bare her, so soon as the
damsels saw her, they called her blessed, even the Queens and the concubins
praised her, saying,

7 Who is she, that is looked for, as the morning, fair as the moon, pure as
the sun, and terrible as an army with many ensigns.

8 I came down, to the fair dressed garden, to behold the green plants of
the valley, to see whether the vine flourished, and the Pomegranats budded.

9 When I perceived not these things, my soul set me upon the chariots of my
free people, so that I said

10 Return return (O Shulamite) return, return, that we may behold thee.
What shall you see in that Shulamite? Even as a company of tents.

11 O how beautiful are thy feet, with these shows, Oh thou daughter of the
Prince: The joints of thy thyes are like jewels, the work of the hand like a
cunning workman.

12 Thy navel is as a round cup, it shall not want liquor: thy belly is as a
heap of wheat compassed about with lilies.

13 Thy two breasts are like two young roes, that are the twins of a roebucke.

14 Thy neck is like a tower of Iuorye, thine eyes are like the fish pooles,
in Heshbon, by the gate of Batherabbin: thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon,
that looks upon the face of Damasec.

15 Thy head upon thee, is as Carmell: and the bush of thy head, is as purple
the king may be tied in the rafters.

19 How fair art thou? And how pleasant art thou (O my my love,) in these
pleasures.

17 This thy stature is like a palm tree, and thy breasts like clusters.

18 I said I will go up into the Palm tree, I will take hold of her bows:
thy breasts shall now be like the clusters of the vine, and the savor of thy
nostrils like apples.

19 And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, which goes straight to my
well-beloved and causes the lips of the ancient to speak.


AS in the former chapter, and specially toward the end thereof, Con.
the church had very highly commended Christ her head and spouse, and that not
only to stir up others, in soundness of love to embrace him that was so
excellent, but also to raise up, and increase the feruency of her affection
toward him: so in this chapter, Christ again on the other side, does
likewise notably praise her, not only thereby to express his hearty goodwill
toward her, and to let her understand, that no love or commendation bestowed
upon him is lost, but that it shall be required to the full: but also to draw
on others in a sound mind to join them selves unto her, whom he both so
tenderly loves, and highly magnifieth.

In this chapter (wherein Christ comfort and confirms the Church, being
tossed too and fro with doubtings, Diuis.
least Christ for his unkindness, should utterly depart from her, and running
up and down to seek her head and spouse: In this verse only, to wit, the
eight verse. In the third part, he declares his good will and hearty affection
toward the Church, by a notable commendacion of her, promising as it were,
his continual presence and aboade with her, even until the day of marriage,
so that she shall not need any more to be discomforted by his departure, from
verse 9. to the end of the chapter. In which third part notwithstanding, Christ
propou^deth four special things. The first is, that Christ declares what
council he took when he perceived, that that time of the marriage, which was
hoped and looked for was not yet come, Verse 9. Secondly, he earnestlye
calls the Church to come back again, and to return unto him, she in her
seeking, having as it were, ouergone him.

Verse 10 Thirdly, there is a notable description

Verse. 1. Thou art beautiful my love. Christ meeting with the church that
labored and sought to find him, does after the manner of lovers, bewraying his
great affections, maruailously commend the Church, for her excelent beutie:
All which things, as they must be spiritually understood, so we must know,
that all the glory she-hath, how great or how little soever yt be, she has it
from Christ her spouse. So that he does nothing as it were, but commend his own
graces in her, and yet these things are not delivered without cause, whether
we respect Christ, or ye Church it self or others. If we respect Christ, it
propounds unto us, the manifestation of his unfeigned and continual love
toward the church if we regard others, it is done to make them in love and
lykinge toward the Church, which Christ himself loves so tenderly, and so
highly commends: if we respect the Church, it is don for her comfort. q. d.
Thinck not that that goodly beuty of thine is decayed, or that I have cast
from me thy love and lyking, by reason of thy former discurtesies and
negligences, I am not so scornful and dysdainfull, as to think thee
deformed for that spots sake, thou have sufficiently washed it a way, with
thy tears and repentance. Wherefore as I said before, chap. 4 1. 2. etc. So
even now I affirm the same still, thy favor and beutie is most acceptable
and delightful to me. And Christ doubleth this, because it is hard for the
Church, and the members thereof, to believe the Word at the first, and
specially the word of promise, and then chiefly, when we regard our evil
dealing with the Lord, and our multiplying of it against him. As tyrtzah. It
is the name of a most pleasant City in the coasts of Israel, situated
upon the river Euphrates, where, after that the kingdom of Israel was rent
from the house of David, Hieroboam placed as it should seem, his kingly
palace. Of this City you may read 1. Kings. 14. 17. also 15. 21. and 16.
6. etc. Neither doubt I, but that it had the name given it of pleasauntnes
(being derived of a word that signifies to accept or like of) because it did
by the pleasauntnes and beutie thereof, draw all men as it were to the lykinge
thereof. Comely as Jerusalem. For the beauty and glory of this City, besides
that we have the commendation of the word, it being called therein, the praise
of the world, Isaiah. 62. 7. See also Psalm. 122. 3. Yt did even as foreign
writers record, not only in beauty and comeliness contend with the
Cytties of the East, but as sum of them do report, was the most famous of
them all. See PLINY lib, 5 CAP. 14. Thus we see the pleasauntnes, Gorgeousnes
and bewty of the Church set out unto us by earthlye similytudes. And though it
be true in deed, yt none of these can sufficiently declare the same unto us,
yet we may perceive, that the Scripture has taken not only the most excellent
things of the lands of Judah and Israel, but of the whole world to set forth
the same unto us, that so under these earthly resemblaunces, he might the better
make us, (who are very gross and dull) to conceive of heavenly and spiritual
things. It follows. Terrible is an army with many ensigns. One would
think, that this should be no great commendation, specially since resembling
the church to a woman, neither does it agree to that sex, neither is it
prayseworthy in them (as some suppose) to strike terror into others. But we
say, first even for woma^kinde, that it is, and shall be no small commendation
unto them. If with their grauitye and majesty, they strike terror and fear,
into impure fellows, even by sobriety and severity of countenance, driving
such from them, as would make them disloyal to their husbands. Which thing
also, may notably agree to the Church, in a double respect, to wit, first,
when as in respect of her excellent majesty, she so terrifieth her
adversaries, especially false teachers, who would defile her with corrupt
doctrine, that they dare not so much, as touch her, otherwise or further,
then as GOD permits and appoynteth: Secondly, when as in regard of her
disobedient children, she wounds them by the word and Discipline for a
while, that by repentance they may be healed and helped for ever, against the
subtilty of Satan, and the strength of sin, she not striking them thereby,
to confound them no more then God does strike his children, by his rods to
overthrow them for ever, but to reconcile them to their eternal comfort and
salvation. Neither does the Lord mean this only, by resembling his church to
armies with many ensigns, but also to set out unto us thereby the good order
and invincible force of the same. For even as in great armies, the more good
militarye orders there are established and practiced, and holy courses kept,
the greater is their glory and comeliness, and the more do they flourish and
prosper: even so is it with the church. And as it is an impossible thing to
prevail upon an army, consisting of innumerable and valiant people, so is it
as hard yea, altogether impossible, to prevail against the Church, sith it
is of such strength, power and faith, as, though it may be assaulted, yet it
can never be overcome. See the like phrase to this, verse. 7. of this chapter.

Verse. 2 Turn thine eyes over against me. That is, look upon me and
regard me, q. d. Though thou be past, yet turn thine eyes back again,
that thou may behold me, That they may lift me up, that is, that so I
may receive comfort in the sight of thee. Thus Christ speaks to the
church, that he might give her to understand, that he would render to her
like for like. She had twice before declared, that she was as it were faint
and sick through love, for which purpose see chap. 2. 5. and also chap. 5. 7.
The very like strength and power of love, to be in him toward her, does here
Christ declare, both that so she might know there was no love lost: and also
that she might be comforted, in the heaviness she was in. I know that others do
otherwise turn this part of the verse: as thus: Turn away thine eyes, from
me, for they are stronger than I, or they overcome me, giving also this sense,
that christ would have the church, to cast her eye from him because he could
hardly keep himself from showing again most manifest tokens of his love etc.
But the other in my mind is most simple and plain, not only agreeing best
with the circumstaunces and occasion of the place, and purpose of Christ, but
also standing well with the meaning of the Hebrew word, which may and does as
well signify to turn to, as to turn from, and in this verse rather to turn
to, because afterward in this chapter also verse. 10. The Lord calls the
Church unto him. This is then the meaning, that I take this first part of the
verse, to contain in it, the words of comfort and consolation. q. d. be of
good comfort, and in an assured faith look up to me, yt so I my self also who
am in some sort cast down with thy heaviness, may receive both comfort and
glory by thy faith and conversion for no doubt but since there is so great and
straight a conjunction betwixt Christ and his church, as the apostle speaks
of 1 Cor. 12. 12. There is also a sympathy and fellowlike feeling, or suffering
together as it were, Christ being seized with sadness (as a man would say)
in the grief of the church, and rejoicing again in the gladsomnesse and joy
thereof. Thine hair is like the flock of goats, which look down from
Gilead. This is already expounded before, chapter 4. 1. Spirituallye by this
may be meant, either the multitude of believers, or the abundance of Gods
graces bestowed upon the church: or else he means that the beauty of the
church, is stayed and sure, and cannot decay by any infirmity of her own,
because it is whollye stayed and vphelde, by the grace and power of Christ. For
as it could not fall out otherwise, but that the flocks in Gilead, must
thrive and prosper: so it could not otherwise be, but that the church, and
graces of God in the same, must needs continue and increase, because it is
underpropped and nourished, with the aboundaunte blessings of Christ, the
head and husband thereof.

Verse 3 Thy teeth are like a Flock of Sheep, which go up from the washing,
that is, white, pure and clean: All which bring out Twins, That is, they are
also even and equal, as commonly twins are: And there is none barren amongst
them. He means that they were all full, and none wanting as I take it: for as
teeth aunswearing euenly one to an other, as in respect of the upper and nether
iawe is comely: and as when either inche one iawe or in the other, one stands
not further out then an other, but all are of an equal height or euennes, it is
some beuty many times to yt countenance, so was it in the church. See all this
expounded before chapter 4. verse. 2. where Christ speaks even the same
things of the church, using it here, not as a vain or idle repetition, but as
having regard to the church, and that in a double consideration. The first is,
to show her, that notwithstanding her offense he loves her still as before,
which also causes him to use the same words here that there. Secondly,
because he knew how hard a thing it was for the church, to believe the
promises, and therefore for the strengthening of her weakness, he doubbleth
them and trebleth them, as you would say.

Verse. 4. Thy temples, vz, of thy head, between thy locks, he speaks of
the church, according to the manner of women, who were wont to lay their
locks out, yet so that their temples notwithstanding the same, and the beauty
thereof, might be seen. Are as a piece of pomegranate, that is, of a ruddy and
beautiful color, and that so as no doubt, but there was holiness and chastity
meant under the same. All this is expounded before chap. 4. 3.

Verse. 5. Though there be threscore Queens. As before Christ had commended
the church, for singular beautye in her self, so now he proceeds to commend
her, by comparing her with others: q. d. put the case that even there were
innumerable Queens, for he puts a number certain for an uncertain, and
those most fair and beautiful, as Queens were wont to be chosen in that
respect. See Hester 2. 2. 3. 4. And fourscore concubines, that is,
innumerable, a certain number for an uncertain as before. The Hebrew word
turned here concubines, does as the learned note, sometimes signify wives,
though not just and lawful wives, which were married without any solemnity, or
betrothing of matrymony. And no doubt but he speaks this according to the
corrupt custom, both of the age wherein he lived, and of former and subsequent
times also, many taking it as a thing lawful, (whereas it was indeed
altogether wicked and ungodly) not only to have many wives, but concubines
also, as we may see by the continual practice of the fathers expressed in the
word, though not commended, but condemned therein rather, as Malach. 2. 15.
Some marvel why Solomon mentions only threscoore Queens and fourescoore
concubines, whereas 1. Kin. 11. 3. (...) It is said that he had seven hundredth
Wives that were queens, and three hundred concubines, whereunto though we
might answer, as some learned men do, namely that it is likelye that he wrote
this, before he burst forth to take so infinite number as it were, yet me
thinks the more plain sense is as before, that he puts a number certain
for an uncertain, which is not only usual in other scriptures, but eue^ in
this book also, chap. 3. 7. where he makes mention of threescore mighty men
of Israel, that stand about Salomons bed. Some allegorize here one way, some
an other. Some think that by the queens, there is meant the famous peoples of
the world, and mighty congregations, and by the concubines, such as be less
famous: but me thinks here, that the plain litterall sense is the best. And
no number of the damsels: q. d. Suppose that they and their maids of honor
attending upon them, were as a man would say, without number or innumerable:
yet should they not be able to match the church for beautye, comelines and
glory, but should even of their own accord, give her place before them all,
Queens, concubines, waiting gentlewomen, and al other whatsoever.

Verse. 6. Yet my dove that is alone. In what sense the church is compared to a
Dove, has been oftentimes declared before. chap. 2. 14. and chap. 5. 1 so yt
we shall not need to stand upon it here. She is said to be alone, or as we say
in our speech, an odd one, both because she was chosen by God, out of all the
people and nations of the world, and was most dear unto him: and also because
compared with other, none of them could come nigh her to match with her. My
perfect one. See this expounded cha. 5. 1. She that is the only daughter of
her mother. An other title attributed to the church, by which the holy Ghost
means both that she was most tenderly beloved, as only children are. See
Judge. 11. 34. Luke. 8. 42. and also that she had or should have, a most rich
and precious portion, as the only child or heir of her mother: all this
must be spiritually understood, the meaning whereof is, that so long as the
church remains here upon the earth, and is not gathered into her husbands
house, she cleaneth whollye to her mother, that is the heavenly Jerusalem.
Galath. 4. 26. by means wereof she glittereth with such exceeding great
glory, that the world wondereth at her, for the heavenly gifts and
spiritual excellency, that God has bestowed upon her. See Deuteronomy. 4, 6. Even
that clean one, to her that bare her. An other title attributed to the
Church, the commendation thereof, to wit that she is Clean, or as some
read it Pure, others elect, all which tend to one thing, she having not
these, or any of these graces from her self, or of her self, but off and
from the Lord. So soon as the damsels saw her. He means by this speech,
that the beautye of the church was excellent, for even at the first sight and
beholding, they were constrained to confess her, to be the most excellent and
beautiful of the world. They called her blessed, that is, they accounted her as
endued with rare and wonderful graces, even for the things which they saw at
the first sight and blushe in her. See for the phrase Luke 1. 48. Even the
Queens, and the concubines, vz, mentioned before verse 5. Praised her, vz, for
the excellent parts that were in her q. d. high and low, mighty, and mean, of
honorable estate and base condition, were constrained to commend her, and
therefore she must needs be more excellent that was praised of them al.
Saying. Now he shows what form they used or should use, in the commendation
of the church.

Verse. 7. Who is she. They propound this question, not so much as though they
either doubted, or were ignorant, what she was, as by that manner of speech,
the rather to note her excellencye. See the like demand, Psalm. 24. 8. Also
Psalm. 77. 13. where they demand thus, who is so great a god, as our god? q. d.
She is so beautiful and glorious, yt we know not what to resemble her unto.
That is looked for as the morning. Under this manner of speech, the holy Ghost,
does not only note, the earnest desire of the faithful, to see and behold
the glory of the church, but also her great glory it self, which is enlarged
not only because it is desired, yea greatly wished and looked for, even as
watch men look for the day break, of which see Psalm. 130. 6. but also because
it is resembled to the morning, which, as we know by experience, is not only
fresh and comfortable, but glorious also and beautiful, as in respect of the
liuelye and clear colors thereof, and death as a man would say, more and
more increase in light, in which respect also it is to be marked, that she is
not resembled, neither to the night, nor to the dawning of the day, or day
break, but even to the glory and beauty of the morning it self. Fair as the
moon, vz, in her full, or most glorious show, at which time she seems a
very beautiful and fair creature indeed. Pure as the sun, He means not
only simply, and of it self, as the sun has not her light from any other,
but glorious also and full of wonderful majesty: so in Christ's transfiguration
it is said, that his face did shine as the sun. Math. 17. 2. and Revel. 1.
16. it is said, that his face shonne, as ye sun shines in his strength. In a
word under these speeches, the holy Ghost would not only note the growth of
ye church, by comparing it to the morning, but the excellency and glory of it,
by resembling it to the moon, yea to the sun, the most excellent and
glorious of all the heavenly creatures that we do behold. And terrible as an
army with many ensigns. This is largelye expounded before in the first verse
of this chapter. Ver. 8. I came down to the fair dressed garden. Many turn it
the garden of nuts, with what reason let the^ see. This rather stands both with
the etimology of ye hebrew word (as good expositors note) and also more agrees
with the circumstance of the place, because afterward he mentions vines
po^granates and such like, with which me^ are wo^t to plant their gardens, and
not with nut trees, which besides yt they are ce^mo^, and every where to be had
are of no precious accoa^t or estimation. I omit ye mistical reasons yt the
jews allege, why they themselves should be compared to nuts, as full of
childish toys and conceits. No doubt but for the clearing of the sense, this
is to be noted, as before, that here beginning the second part of the
chapter, in which Christ labors to comfort his church, he says, that he
did not of lothsomnesse or wrath, depart from her, but rather of a very earnest
desire that he had to finish ye same most holy marriage, and that therefore
indeed he went away for a while, yt so he might be ye more assured of the
time. And in yt he resembles the church to a fair dressed garden: he speaks
after the manner of me^, who in ye beginning of ye spring prune, purge and
dress there gardens, and orchards, yt so it may bear more fruit: and when he
says, he ca^e down to the same, he speaks yt also according to ye manner of
men, who in the summer time come to see how their ha^dy works thrive and
prosper: so yt al is as much q. d. Thou should not have bin dismaide. (O
church) y^ I departed from thee, for therein I dealt but with thee, as good
gardeners and vine-dressers deal with their orchards, gardens and vineyards, who
coming (perhaps before yt time of fruit) to look for fruit and finding none,
depart, not for ever, but til another more conuente^t season, when they may
receive fruit. And besides yt this agrees well with christ's purpose. q. d. think
not not yt I will any more lose my labor and cost, bestowed upon thee, then
owners of their garde^s and orchards, ye words following also in this ver. do
help to strengthen and uphold this sense. To behold the green plants of the
valley, yt is, things newly planted and set, and to see also how they did thrive
and grow and he uses ye word valley, which in ye hebrew tongue, signifies both a
river and a brook, and a valley also, through which a river or brook, did or
might run because men commonly plant there, as which they take to be more
ple^tiful and fruitful. To see whither the vine flourished, and the pomgranates
budded. By 2. words he means one thing, namely, yt as men look not only to
see the growth of their grifts and plants: but also their fruits, whither they
were then ripe: so he did wait, whether yt time appointed for ye marriage were
come, whereof also he had forerunning signs, even as the flourishing of ye
vine, and budding of pomgranates, were tokens of ye spring past, and of the
summer coming on. See for this purpose cap. 7. 3. of this book. Which order
and course our savior him self observes, Mat. 24. 32. see also for this end
and purpose. Isa. 5. 1. 2 Verse. 9 When I perceived not these things. Vz. The
Vine to flowrish, the Pomgranate to bud, etc. Which are mentioned ver. 8.
meaning thereby, that when he perceived the time of the marriage was not yet
come, as men know y^ summer is not come, when these things sprout not out: to
which also may be added, that when he perceived, how grievously the church
took his absence then. My soul, my loving affection and tender heart: for now
he goes about to declare, what council he took, when he perceived that the
long looked for time of marriage was not yet come, namely that he made great
have back again as it were, to comfort his Church, which he expresses by the
metaphors following. Set me upon the chariots, that is, yielded me good and
sure means to be carried: neither does he only note hereby, the means of
his coming to the Church, but in the words following, the speed that he
made. Of my free people. q. d. As they they that be willing and free hearted
people, do the things that they do cheerfully, and therefore also with more
expedition and speed then others: so came I cheerfully, and with a ready
mind, after I had once resolved upon the matter, to see and comfort the
church, for this free hearted and willing people, see. Psalm. 110. 3 I know
other give other senses of these words, but me thinks this is most plain
and simple. So that I said. As before he had declared his purpose and
resolution of his returning to the church, to the great comfort of the same: so
now he shows what he spoke when he came to her.

Verse. 10 Return, return. These are the words of Christ unto the Church,
who in seeking of him, had as a man would sai, gone beyond him. And this calling
of her back again, is expressed unto us under the similitude of an earthly
man, who as it were a far off, whooteth and shouteth even as loud as he can,
by words and speech, to bring such back, as wander out of the right way. O
Shulamite. No doubt but under this term, he means the church: which some
think signifies, made most perfect, thorough the eternal purpose and
calling of her, by God to himself. Me thinks also it may be derived of
Salem, by which name Jerusalem was called in former time as appears. See
Psalm. 76. 2. Gens. 14. 18. Heb. 7. 7. 1. 2. and though perhaps it may rather
be said Schelemite, than Schulamite, yet it may be of another form, as in
the scripture we read Schunanite of Schomem. 2. King. 4. 8. 12. And the rather
I would refer it to Jerusalem, because that word is often used in the
scripture for the church it self. Return, return. This is no vain
repetition, but profitable to express Christ's earnestness and vehement love
twardes the Church, and the salvation thereof, as also to note, how hardly,
even ye church it self is reclaimed from straiyng, yt must have so many and so
earnest calls to pull her back. That we may behold thee. Christ speaks this in
his own name, and the name of his friends whom he had mentioned verse. 9.
before: for he would have them also to be partakers, of the beauty and glory
of the church, this being spoken also according to earthlye customs, as the
bridegroom has his friends, who^ he would make partakers of the glory of his
Bryde, so the bryd has hers, who^ she would be glad to have beholders of her
excellency and glory likewise. The brydes friends may be said to be all yt
sound particular members of the church whom she would gladly have not only
to behold, but to be partakers of the majesty and magnificence of Christ her
head and spouse. The Bridgromes friends may be said to be the same, not
that they are friends to Christ or his church of nature, but by grace, whom
he would have to behold the infinite riches, and inward beauty of his church,
that they might in the holy love of the same, live and dye therein. Others
think the friends of Christ to be the holy angels, but me thinks the former
should be better, because Christ says John. 15. 14. 15. that the faithful
are his friends. What shall you see in that Shulamite? Christ turns his
speech unto his friends, by asking of whom this question, he minds not to
bewraye in him self any ignorance, or doubting of the great graces, that
were to be found in the Church: but the rather thereby to stir them up, to
be faithful beholders and witnesses of that great glory, which is in the
church, and which he could not otherwise express, but by a wondrous demand
made of it. See verse 7. of this chapter. Even as a company of tents. It is an
aunsweare to the former question: which whether Christ make or his friends, we
will not stand much upon, though we rather think, that as Christ propounded
the question, so he was best able for his skill, as being best acquainted
with the graces of the church, and readiest also for his good will to
aunsweare, and satisfy the same. The meaning is to set out the excellent
order, glory, and power of the church, comparing the same to a comelye order of
pitching of tents, and innumerable and invincible people in the same: others
turn it as ye company of Mahanaim: q. d. you see how glorious the church it
self is, by yt which has been spoken before, but if you would behold with
what a notable troop it is accompanied, you shall do well to call to mind that
notable number, and that same joyful day also, wherein the people returning to
David did receive him with ye great joy and comfort of them all, as he did
comfortably entertain them, and all this was done at Mahanaim, as appears 2.
Samuel. 19. but I leave it to the godly to approve, whether he likes and
lists to receive: in truth they both tend to one end.

Verse 11. Oh how beautiful are thy feet! Christ rejoices at this coming
of the church, nigh unto him, and his approaching to her, even as one, tht would
say to his friend, whom her has not seen of a long season. O how good and
excellent are these feet of thine, that brought us now at the length to the
beholding one of another. For the phrase, see Isai. 52. 7. also Romans 10. 15.
And here he begins in a lively description to commend the church, in every
particular member, even as a man would say, from the sole of the foot, to the
top of the head. With these shows, which thou meanest, and which no doubt
Christ as a loue-token bestowed upon her. This may be referred, either to the
ministers of the word, or else to the sound affections of the Church, which are
sometimes signified by Feet. as Eccles. 4. 17. or to the good works, which
the thurch is enabled to perform through Christ. O thou Daughter of the
Prince, That is, thou most noble and excellent Damosel, who art as it were
sprung from a most famous and honorable stock: Thus Christ compares the
church to such, because such either are or should be according to their
high place, more excellent, then those of more base condition. And thus we
see, that the Church is thorough Christ become the Daughter of God almighty,
who governs the whole earth, and who makes her famous, noble and glorious,
by the gifts and graces of his holy spirit bestowed upon her. The joints of
thy thies. From ye feet he ascends upward, meaning as it may appear by that
which follows, that they were very cunningly and artificially made. We must
imagine here nothing but spiritual, namely, that there was and is a most
cunning framing and making of the whole church, and all the parts of the
same, every part having in it, comeliness, beauty, glory, strength, Other
turn it thus: the compassing of thy thyes, Meaning thereby ye girdle wherewith
she was girded, which they did use to wear in old time, lower by much then we
do, even upon their thighs, as it should seem, Psalm. 45. 3. Or about the
Loins, as Math. 3. 4. But I think that the former (so it be soberly and
chastely read and regarded,) is better and comes nearer to the purpose of
Christ, who makes here as it were a special enumeration or recital of ye
parts of the church, Are like Iewelles, That is, very fine and costly: if we
read it as referring it to the girdle, which in deed Brydes were wont, and are
yet accustomed to wear, very sumptuous and fine: otherwise neat and comely, if
we refer it to the thighs, The work of the hand of a cunning workman. This
is added to note the excellencye: q. d. most workmanly or cunninglye made,
even like unto iewelles that have the most cunninge and curious workmanshippe
bestowed upon them that can be. Some understand this of that spiritual
begettinge of children, which the church continuallye brings forth unto
Christ by the ministry of the word, and working of the spirit, but I rather
refer it to the strength, beauty, and comeliness of ye church it self, and
the particular members thereof.

Verse, 12 Thy navel is as a round cup. That is very comely and bewtiful to
the show, as we see globe glasses, or standing cups, made after yt fashion are.
It shall not want liquor. q. d. it shall always be plentiful as a cup yt is
full to the top, see Psalm. 23. 5. Some read it thus, Let not the liquor thereof
fail, as though in earnest affection he had cried out or wished rather, yt the
womb of ye church compared to a round cup (in which similitude he persisteth
still) might never have bin decayed, or consumed rather, but might always have
been as the pors widows pitcher of oil mentioned 1. King. 4. 2. 3. But me
thinks the other is more simple. Thy belly is as a heap of wheat, that is,
most fruitful and abundant, having great store like a wheat heap. Compassed
about with lillies: q. d. Besides yt it is fruitful, it smells well and is
most sweet, as those places and things are, yt are beset with Lillies. There
is meant under all this, the great fruitfulness of the church, and ye plenty
of Gods graces upon the same, furnishing it, not only with abundance of
waters, which in those hot cuntries were much drunk and very scarce, but even
with abundance of very necessary and sweet food, meant by wheat set about
with lillies: all which Christ sets forth here, not only to express his own
love toward the church, but as we have said before, to draw on other men to do
the like.

Verse 13. Thy two breasts are like two young roes, that is, fresh and lusty,
whose milk is not consumed with age or years. That are the Twins of a
roebuck. that is, they are equal, and even one of them is not greater then
another. Equalitye in women's breasts, that is to say, when one of them
exceeds not another in greatness, is a thing much set by amonst men, and it
is a comeliness to women them selves: let us remove hence all earthly
thoughts, and apply this humain similitude, to spiritual things. See the
words of this verse also expounded before, cap. 4. 5. where there is but very
little difference in words. and in sense none at al, Christ using yt same there
as here, in the commendation of his church, saving yt he descends from yt
highest to the lowest parts, whereas here keeping another course, he ascends
from the lowest to the highest.

Ver. 14. Thy neck is like a tower of iuory. By co^paring it to a tower, he
means yt it was strait and upright: and by saying it was of iuory, he meneth
yt it was most white, and pure. Before cha. 4. ver. 4 he compared it to the
tower of David built for defense, there co^me^ding it for ye strength thereof,
and here rese^bling it to iuory, be co^me^deth ye beauty of it. Some understand
hereby the Preachers of the word, who indeed are aloft in the church, and are
in the same instead of watch towers, or towers of defense, they being of
notable equality, and wonderful concord among them selves, in whose doctrine
also, there is nothing but that, which is upright and even, nothing but that
which is well polished, and nothing but that which is sweet and pleasant. Some
think, that amongst other notable works which Solomon made, he builded a
tower of Iuory, and that he should resemble the church thereto in this verse.
But for as much as yt stands, upon no ground of the word, and it seems in
reason impossible, for where should men provide so much iuorye, I rather
approve of the former sense. Thine eyes are like the fishpooles in Heshbon, by
the gate of Bathrabbin. In that he resembles the eyes of the church, to
fishpooles, yea to the the fishpooles in Heshbon, he does not only note out
the pleasantness of the same, as in respect of the color and beautye, but
also commends them for the necessary use of them, even as fishpondes or
pleasant waters were in those hot and dry countries. For Heshbon was a city
beyond Jorden, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, wherein Sihon him
self raygned as appears. Josh. 9. 10. Also Josh. 13. 10. 21. And in that he
adds by the gate of Bathrabbin, which should seem to be some of the gates of
Heshbon. and is put down for the more certaintye of the thing, I suppose that
thereby he meanethe the multitude that should repair to the church, even as
great numbers came to these fish pondes, which yet I am more confirmed in,
because he uses the word gate, alluding no doubt to the custom used in
those days both of the Judges and people, who did sit in the gates, and
repaired thither for judgment, as appears in many places of scripture.
Others read it otherwise, but for as much as in other places of this chapter,
and namely verse. 1, he resembles the church to certain beautiful places, yea
and in the end of this verse also he does the like, I see no reason, why we
should leave this reading or sense, specially seeing it is very (...) for the
place, and stands well with the proportion of faith. Some understand by the
eyes and fishpondes, the Doctors of the church, who are said to be eyes,
because they look to the guiding and conducting of the rest, and fishpondes,
to whom people may repair to fetch abundance of water, yea who should
bring out of their treasures, both old and new things. See math. 13. 52. Thy
nose is like the tower of Lebanon. By the tower of Lebanon, I suppose he
means that tower that Solomon built in that house, which he builded in the
forest of Lebanon, of which we read a large description. 1. King, 7. 2. 3,
etc. And the nose of the church is compared unto that tower, because it was
fair and beautiful as it: because also it was straight, and of equal
proportion, like the tower for straightnes: and good proportion in noses, is a
good grace of comelines, even to the countenance, That looks upon the face
of Damasec. He means not as some have fantastically imagyned, that from
Solomon's tower, men might behold the city of Damascus in Syria, but that
Lebanon it self, and therefore the house and tower builded there, lay as it
were over against Damasec, or Damascus, the holy Ghost using this description
here not so much for any misterye, as some imagine, and specially the Jewish
rabbis, as to note the certainty of the former things, vz, that he speaks
not of an uncertain, or of an unknown thing, for Lebanon, Damascus, and other
places, were of common fame and notice. By the nose, some understand as before
by the eyes, the ministers of the word: which we should not think strange,
because that they are resembled to these sundry things, by reason of sundry
parts of their offices, as being eyes to look to them, noses, even after a
sort, to smell and provide for them, sweet and pleasant things, etc. And one
thing more is to be marked here, that in these commendations and praises
attributed to the church, the holy Ghost chose to compare and resemble her, by
such places of the land of Judah and Israel, as had some excellent and
notable thing in them, that so the comparisons expressing her beauty, might be
the more excellent, and her glory resembled by the same, the greater: and
therefore also we should not think them either hard or strange: to which also
we may add, that even to this end likewise, he takes upon and lays out the
affections of lovers, who chose for the expressing of their affections,
toward their lovers and friends, great and excellent things, as who would
say, that they are of mind, that the beauty and good qualities of such as they
affect, can never be sufficientlye commended or set forth.

Verse. 15. Thy head upon thee, that is, that which is upon thy head, meaning
thereby, either the hair of the head, or some kind of precious tire or
ornament, worn upon the head. is as Carmell. This was the name of a very high
mountain in Phenicia. Now because that this was most fruitful (for the word
commonly is taken for a place full of pastures, set also with trees, whereof it
is lykely too, that this place had his name) he does therefore resemble the
head of the Church, (which indeed properly is Christ him self, Ephesians. 1.
22): or it may be here used, for the graces, wherewith he has adorned the
Church, to Carmell: which as it is excellent for the heyght, so are the graces
bestowed upon the Church: and as it is a very fruitful and plentiful
place, so are the graces of God in great abundance powered forth upon the
church. Others read it thus, is as scarlet, meaning costly and full of majesty,
as that color is, but me thinks the other should be more simple, both
because Christ had compared the church to places before, and also because
immediately after he makes mention of purple, which some think does not
much differ from scarlet, many affirming scarlet, to be a kind of purple, in
which respect also they reconcile the Evangelists: Math. Affirming chap. 27.
28. that they put upon Christ a scarlet robe, and John chap. 19. 2. as also
Mar. 15. 17. calling it a purple, or a purple garment. And the bush of thy head
is as purple, that is costly and dear, as which did not belong to any, but
mighty men and Magistrates, see Luke 16. 19. also Daniel. 5. 16. which no doubt
also they did wear as an attire of great comeliness and beauty. By bush or
locks of the head. the holy Ghost means the multitude or number of
faithful and believing people, as by resembling the same unto purple, he
means the glory and comeliness thereof, when they are decked with the
riches of Gods graces. The king may be tied in the rafters. q. d. There is no
king in the world so glorious, or maiestical, that could if he did behold thee
with a right eye, be satisfied with the sight of this thy great glory, but
being persed, and as it were amazed thereat, should still be held, and bound
as it were, with a continual desire to look upon thee, so highlye would he
esteem thy great glory, before his own, and all the glory of the world else.
That which we turn rafters here, othersome turn galerries, and some one
thing, some an other, by reason of the doubtful signification of the word, but
the sense comes all to one end* q. d. as a great personage, beholding the
beautifullest house in the world, would after a sort wish as it were, that
he might be tied to the rafters, beams, galerries, etc. of such gallant
places, that so as it were, by his continual abode there, he might be
satisfied with the sight thereof: so there is not the mightiest Prince in the
world, but if he did look upon the beautye of the church, with the eye of
faith, he would desire to be bound to any part of piece of it, thought it were
never so base, that so he might continually look upon the inward and
spiritual beautye thereof. See this performed by David. Psalm. 27. 4. Also
Psam. 84. through out.

Verse 16. How fair art thou? As before verse 11. when he begun to commend
the church in her several parts, he had used a vehement exclamation, thereby
to set out, both his great love and liking of them and the excellency thereof:
so having finished that particular praise, and beginning here generallye to
commend her, he uses the like: q. d. Thou art so beautiful and fair, both in
every part of thee, and in the whole, that I know not what words to use to
express ye same, neither in deed ca^ it be sufficiently declared. And how
pleasant art thou, ye word also signifies sweet, as well I as pleasant he
means nothing else but yt she was wholly and altogether delightful. O my
love, that is, thou whom I love, or you that art beloved, the substantive for
the adjective; to note both the exceeding great love of Christ toward her, as
also the good graces and parts in her to move love and affection in others to
her. So Galath. 3. 13. Christ is called a curse for us: and the church gives
this title of love to Christ before. chap. 2. 7. In these pleasures, vz,
reckoned up before in her particular commendacion. The meaning of Christ is,
that the church her self wholly, and every part and piece of her, together
with all her ornaments and attayres, or what soever did generally or
particularlye belong unto her was glorious, excellent, sweet, pleasant,
beautiful, comely. delightful, etc.

Verse. 17. This thy stature, vz, which has been before described particularly,
and by peecemeale. Is like a palm tree, that is, fresh and flourishing, and
stands upright, yea notwithstanding all ye weight that is laid upon it, the
weight it self being removed, it stands straight again as before. For this
we know, both by experience and the wrytinges of authors, that have undertaken
to declare the natures of things, is the nature of the palm tree: so that in
resembling the state of the church, to a Palm tree, she means that it is
straight and upright (which also is commendable in womankind) and that
notwithstanding affliction, she still lifts up her self. So that he means
in a word, yt the church was of a most strong and straight body. See Psalm. 92.
12. Also if any list to read of the nature of the palm tree, look upon Aul.
Gell. lib. 3. Hoct. Attic. Also Problem. Arist. and others. And thy breasts
like clusters, vz, of grapes, meaning by this manner of speech that she had
most comely, most firm, and most plentiful breasts, as those clusters of
grapes, that are thick set with grapes, are indeed. If we understand by the
breasts here as before chap. 4. 5. the two testaments, they are clusters of
grapes indeed, both to alay hunger, and to slake thirst, yea they are both meat
and drinck unto us, and yt not only to uphold us, in some deformed or weak
estate, during this life, but also to make us comely, beutiful, and strong, to
live ye life of God here, yt afterward we may live eternally in yt heavens.

Verse. 18. I say. Here begins ye third part of the chap. which is also the
last part of Christ's speech unto his church, as we have show before, and
contains in it a certain promise of such duties, as Christ will perform
unto his church, til the marriage day come, and also a repetition of such
effects and fruits, as Christ shall receive from the church. And there is in
this word I say a veheme^cy, co^taining as it were, in ita grave sentence: q.
d. I give thee my promise, and look what I promise thee, I will perform. I will
go up into the palmetree. He means by this speech, that he will be present
with his church, whom before verse 17. he had resembled to a palm tree. I will
take hold of her bows: he means by this speech, that he will purge it,
and so not only perceive, but receive notable fruits of her, even as in
Palm trees the teader branches, are specially pruned and trimmed, because
that they yield flowers and Buds for fruit. By which it should seem, they
were not such trees as ours are. He that list to read more then this, over and
beside all that which is spoken before, let him see Pliny lib. 13. cap. 4
Othersome also affirming, that they bear a certain fruit, both pleasant and
profitable which we call Dates and of this mind are many, writing of the
nature of Plants and trees, both old and new, and particularlye Dodineus. And
by the word which is turned here bows, which properlye signifies the
highest bows in the tree, and is not used in any other place of the old
Testament but here, this may yet appear, because the palm tree, that the
Philosophers write of, does at the top, send forth such long ^^wes, and
there it is also, whereas (they report) the fruit it self grows. In sum,
this is Christ's meaning, that joining him self unto the church, and being
present with her, he will do it to this end, that he may see, how they
thrive in the fruits, that is, in the graces and blessings he has bestowed
upon them, and that he may gather the same, and so enjoy them, and be as it
were, partaker of them. Thy breasts shall now be, q. d. whatsoever they have
been heretofore to me (and yet we may not think, but yt the Lord has
always graciously regarded his church) now at this time, and for ever
hereafter they shall be delightful and pleasant unto me: and that he means
by the words following, Like the clusters of the vine, See for this, ver. 17
And the savor of thy nostrells, that is, the breath that comes from thee
Like apples, that is, like sweet and pleasant smelles, that come from apples:
see before chap. 2. 5. By all which we must note, that Christ does not only
mean to deliver unto his church, the comfort of his continual presence, but
withal to note the effects of the same, because where Christ is indeed he is
not in vain: q: d. I will not only be present with thee, satisfying my self
as it were in thy breasts and beauty, and delighting in thy love continually.
Prou. 5. 19. But also I will make thee strong, fresh, lively, yea sweet and
pleasant to all such as shall come unto thee, by means of such graces, as I
shall indue thee withal, and to the same end, tend to words of the verse
following.

Verse. 19. And the roof of thy mouth, vz, shall now both unto me and
others, be like the best Wine, vz, both for color, strength, taste, and
sweetness, for all these concur together in wine, meaning that it shall smell
well, and be most sweet, and mighty in operation: to which end, namelye the
commending of the Wine for the goodness thereof, tend all the words following,
which goes straight to my well-beloved. q. d. It is such excellent wine, as I
would wish it, or send it even to the dearest and best friend I have, even to
her that I love, as my self, if not before my self. And causes the lips of the
ancient to speak. Another commendation of the wine. Old folks many times be
dull and heavy of speech, but this wine has such force in it, that it will
even open their mouths, and cause them utter a voice as a man would say,
whether they will or no. The word that is here turned Ancients, may also in
the hebrew tongue, be derived from a word that signifies to sleep: q. d. the
wine is so strong, that it stirs up the heavy senses, and does after a sort
as it were, refresh the mind, in so much that it makes them that sleep to
speak. Which manner of speech, though, as we respect the similitude, it may
seem hyperbolical, or very excessive, yea, more then true, yet if we
respect the spiritual meaning we shall find it is the truth it self: For
what is Christ's purpose here, but amongst other Graces given to the Church,
to show, that this is one excellent, that he will indue her with such power,
and delightfulness of speech, (which he understands by Roof of the
mouth, because without it nothing can be uttered, it being one of the
principal instruments of nature, given us to frame our voice by, see Chap. 5.
15) yt it shall even as it were raise up men, not only from natural sleep, but
from y^ sleep and death of sin, see Ioh. 5. 21. 25. This being performed
specially by the preaching of the gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation, to all that believe. Romans 1. 16. and is not mortal, but immortal
seed. 1. Peter. 1. 23. By which we are quickened and raised up together,
and made to sit together in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Ephe. 2. 1.
6. etc.

Verse. 1. Does teach us that there are many things in the Church, that may
make us in an unfeigned affection to love and to like the same, as the
spiritual and inward glory, beauty and comelines thereof. Yea, it shows us yt
the Lord has furnished the same with majesty and might, not only for ye
comfort and defense of the sound members thereof, but also both for the
correcting of such as would be straying and straggling from that same holy
fellowship, as also for the withstanding and ouercomming, of such as would
without assault anoy the same. O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom
and mercy of God: of his mercy toward his own sons and servant, and of his
wisdom, in intrapping the ungodly in his own subtilties and force. If the
Church had been beautiful and amiable only, howesoeuer many of her own
children might in a reverent regard of her, have dutifully behaved them selves
toward her: yet some Nimrodes of the earth, would have supposed, with their
giantlike force, to have defloured and defaced her, but the Lord has
gratiouslye provided means against both extremes, that as there is in her
many things to move her unfeigned friends to love and like her, so there is
also many things in her again, to terrify either her counterfeited friends,
or her open and known enemies.

Verse. 2. Teaches us in Christ's example speaking comfortablie to the church
distressed, not only his great love toward the same, who as a man would
say, can not endure the heaviness and grief thereof, which ought to be no
small consolation to the church, and the particular members thereof, since he
that is both able and willing to help them, does pity their case. (See Heb. 2.
17. 18): but also teaches us kindness of heart, and tenderness of affection,
toward the afflicted, for which see Romans 12. 15. 16. yea to use comfortable
speeches, toward those that are distressed. See Isaiah 40. 1. 2. etc. least
otherwise we adding bitterness of words to grief and anguish, either of the
body, or mind or both, we do not only add to their affliction, but to our
own transgression also, the Lord condemning us justly, not only for hardness
of heart, but for churlish words also.

Verse. 3. Teaches, that the often repetition of one, and the self same thing
in the word of God, is not only idle or superfluous, as some curious ears
deem, but profitable, pleasant, and altogether necessary, whether we respect
the Lord him self, who thereby testifies the wonderful hunger and thirst as it
were, that he has of our salvation, while he does so often urge it upon us,
or we regard our selves, who are not only heavy to learn good things, but
dull and slow of heart to believe the same, and maruailously backewarde to
perform them, or consider the posteritye, who by that means are put in mind,
of their own corruption to good things, which also may move them, more and
more to fight against the same. See for this doctrine, and the proof thereof.
Phillip. 3. 1. Also 2. Pet. 1. 12. where he says, that though they have
knowledge, and be established in the present truth, yet he will not be
negligent, to put them always in remembrance thereof.

Verse. 4. Is no warrant for women, to lay out their locks, howsoever some out
of this place, and such like, have gone about to iustisie it. First because
that this is to be spiritually understood, and not in the letter, and therefore
they do injury so to abuse the word. Secondly, because the holy Ghost has
condemned it in the new testament, as 1. Timoth. 2. 9. where he condemns
broidred hair: as also 1. Pet. 3. 3. where the self same thing is forbidden,
but especially 1. Cor. 11. where he will have a woman either to cover or hide
her hair, or else if she grant not that, to yield to this, to have it
shorn or cut off. And thirdly, because the manner of laying out of hair in
those dais, was much more modest, or at least nothing so garishe, as it is
now. And therefore comparing unequal things together, they must learn to
conform them selves, to the sobrietye and modestye of holy matrons, and such
as have unfeignedly professed godliness.

Verse. 5. 6. Teaches us, that the inward glory and beauty of the church, is
highly to be preferred, before all the outward pomp and glittering of the
world whatsoever: for the outward things, be not only transitory and vain,
but many times are baits laid by sin and Satan, both to deceive us in this
life, and to destroy us in the life to come: whereas the glory of the church,
is not only pleasant and profitable for this present world, giving us
directions also how to walk in the same, both toward God and men, but an
instrument and a mean, to bring us to the haven of Heaven, and everlasting
blessedness at the last, Godliness it self being profitable unto all
things, and having the promise of the life present, and of that that is to
come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. By this also we may see, that the Church it self is to
be discerned, by better eyes then these of the body, yea, by better judgment
then the light of reason. For if our reason not reformed be enemy generallye
to all religion, why not also to the Church it self, the mother and Nurse of
all sound Faith: and that is it also we say in the Confession of our faith,
that we believe there is a holy Universal Church, which is the company of
all Gods elect, which also is sometimes Visible, and yet then rather to be
descerned, as in respect of us, by the eye of a sound Faith, and yet in
respect of it self, by the holy exercises thereof, as the Word, Sacraments,
and Discipline, than by antiquitye, Vniuersalitye etc, Or any other Mark
which the Papystes can give. Lastly, we learn by the same Verses, that the
LORD will have even the myghtiest of the People, that shall submit them
selves unto the CHVRCHE, and highlye extol and commend the same. See Isaiah.
Chapter 60. Verse 10. Also Chapter 49. Verse 23. Wherein also GOD provides,
as on the one side for the comfort of his own, while he gives them Kings
and Magystrates, not only to maintain them, but also to profess the Truethe
together, with them for their better incouragemente: So on the other side he
meets with the mallyce of the wicked, who many times spare not to think,
but to speak also, that the Church is but the raking of the earth, and the
off-scoure of the whole world, which yet appears false by this practice of
the Lord.

Verse. 7. Does not only set out the inward glory and beauty of the church,
under many excellent earthly similitudes and comparisons all which should make
us as it were inamored with the sound and holy love thereof but also shows
the glory and excellency of it to be so great, that it cannot well be either
resembled by any thing but in part, or expressed by words but in part. And
therefore we may see that they are fowlye out of the way, that either conceive
basely of the church, or speak contemptuously of it, as a number of profane
people do, who going no further then their outward eye, or carnal reason, will
lead, do with Esau prefer base and contemptible things, before the glory and
beauty of the whole earth. See Isaiah. 62. 7.

Verse. 8. Teaches us not only Christ's great care toward the church, he
dressing it and pruning it, as a good husband does his Orchard and garden, of
which our savior himself says, that the father purges every branch that
bears fruit, that so it may bring forth more fruit. John. 15. 2. By which
also we may see, that the Church without Gods manuring and husbanding of it,
yields not, nor brings forth fruit: See 1. Corin. 3. 6. 7. 8. 9: But also
that he will come to visit the vine, that his own hand has planted, and to
see what fruit it bears. Isaiah. 5. 1. 2. etc. And that therefore the church
had need always to be fruitful, not only because the Lord will certainly
come, but because he will come suddenly. See Math. 25. in the parable of the
virgins, and specially verse. 13. Also Math. 24. verse. 44: and so forward to
the end of the chapter.

Verse. 9. Amongst other things, delivers unto us this doctrine, that in all
duties that we are to perform, whether we respect God or men, we should
always do the things that we do, willingly and cheerfully. The Lord was
well acquainted with the dullness and lumpishnesse of our hearts, which makes
him so often in his word to urge this, and we know amongst men, how slenderly
we regard those things that are done for us, yea though they be done for us,
with an heavy and unwilling mind, many men wishing that such vnchearefull
doers, should rather surcease doing, then perform the same. But specially
before God, this is a foul fault, as we may perceive by many places of
scripture, and particularly in that the Lord appoints a free will offering
by his law. See Leuit. 22. 23. Exodus. 35. 5. 29. Also Exodus 25. 2. Also 2.
Cor. 8. 3. 12, and many other places where he requires cheerfulness of us.

Verse. 10. Where Christ so earnestlye seeks the conversion of his Church,
and labors in the spirit of gentleness, not only to reclaim, but also to
receive the same, after her error to favor, we do not only see the great and
tender love of our Savior to penitent sinners, who says, Come unto me all ye
that labor and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you, Math. 11. 28. And who
also therefore came into the world, that he might save sinners, yea, the
cheifest of sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15. But also he by his own example teaches
us, in the spirit of love, to restore such as are fallen Galath. 6. 1. and to
labor their conversion, unless they be hardened in their iniquities, rather
by meekness then by extremity, and over hard handling of them. But as this
belongs unto all generally, so does it particularly concern the Church
governors, and amongst them, especially the ministers, who of calling and
conscience ought to do it. Luke. 15. 4. 1. etc. Also Ezech. 34. 4. etc.

Ver. 11. Setting out unto us the glory, comlines and strength of the church,
teaches us, to join our selves in an unfeigned affection, to that holy body,
that is endued with such excellent graces. For though it be true, that these
things are attributed to the churh, as serving for the singular praise of the
same, yet the end whereat the holy ghost aims, is to draw men by the same,
even inseperably to be joined thereto: to which end also tend all the
particulers, afterward and reckoned up in the verses following.

Verse. 12. Commending unto us the continual increase and sweet delights of
the Church, is also an argument very effectual, and as a man would say, framed
to ye humor of man's nature, to move men to love and like of the church. Nothing
many times discourageth men more from doing good things then to see yt they are
or shall be left post alone as we say, which though it should fall forth, we
should yet labor notwithstanding to over come ye same, because God will not have
us to follow the multitude, specially to do evil. Exo. 23. 2. and Ios. his
example teaches us yt same. Josh. 24. 15. And yet how great is Gods care over
us, yt for ye hartening of us on in yt ways of righteousness, leaves us not
alone, but gives us the holy society and fellowship of many of his saints, not
as though we meant, the multitude of the church, or glorious increase of the
number thereof, to be so great (no though the Lord do extend it, from one end
of the earth to the other) as though it were able to match and compare with the
wicked, for we know Gods number to be the least, as appears in the general
flood, wherein only eight persons were reserved. See for this purpose also Isa.
41 14. Math. 7. 13. 14. Luke 12. 32. By which also we may see, that multitude
or vniuersalitye of persons, as they say in poperye, is no good, sure and
sufficient note of the true Church of Christ*

Verse 13. Propounding unto us, the just proportion and holy consent that is
in the church, and particular members thereof, containing in it an other reason
to lead us to the liking of it: for every particular praise, is as it were a
special reason that Christ alleges to gain that at our hands by. The
strength of this good order and blessed unity in the church, stands not upon
men, as the members thereof, for we know by corruption of nature, they are
always unstayed and contentious, but first upon God him self, whose house
the church it self is. 1. Tim. 3. 15. who being also the God of order and
peace, and not of confusion. 1. Cor. 14. 33. it is reason his house should be
conformed, and made like to him self. And secondly, upon the unity of those
spirtuall graces, that God has blessed it withal, there being but one body,
one spirit, one hope of our calling, one faith one Baptism, etc. All which
are notable instruments to cause us to endeavor to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. 4. 5. Neither is there meant hereby,
either a perfect unity or cons^^^ o^ ^^ndes in all things, because that
neither has been, is or shall be performed upon this earth, not for that
there is any want in the thing it self, but by reason of the remainders of
sin in men, God having reserved that excellent (...) to the life that shall be
revealed, there being here variety of judgment in the matters of smallest
weight, though the foundation it self, shall be always unshaken: or approving
of unity to be an essential note, to discern the visible church by: because
either it must be unity in verity, (which is the life and soul of the church,)
or else it will not serve, and unity it self, howsoever it may be very
profitable for the preservation of the whole, yet it is no sure mark, to know
the whole by, no not in natural bodies, much less in this spiritual body of
the church.

Verse. 14. Propounds unto us two good lessons. First, the excellency of the
ministry, in that it is resembled to eyes, fishepooles etc. the Lord by the
means of them, converting men unto him self, and bringing forth most
notable effects, both for his own glory, and the good of his servants, of
which we may read in many places of the scripture, and particularly. Romans 1.
14. 15. etc. 2. Cor. 2. 14. 15. etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. 14. So that
whosoever they are, that do not very highly esteem the same, they offer
great dishonor to almighty God, and tread under foot the mean of their own
salvation. Secondly, in that he resembles the church, and the particular
members, yea and if you will also the ministers especially, to the tower of
Lebanon, that looks Damascus in the face; we learn therein the courage and
constancye of the same, that fears not the faces, nor flattereth the persons
of any, no not of their greatest enemies, we knowing that Damascus was an utter
enemy to ye people of God. Whereof also we may yield this reason, that if the
good children of godly parents, shall not be ashamed nor afraid to speak to
their enemies, either in the gates of the City, where magistrates sit in
judgment, or in the gates that enemies do besiege, of which David speaks,
Psalm. 127. 5. Much less shall the Church or children thereof be overtaken
there with, howsoever they may sometimes have their fears. And this we may see
performed particularly in Sephen, Acts. 6. 15. And generally thorough the whole
seventh chapter of the said book of the Acts.

Verse. 15. Commending unto us the excellency and abundance of Gods graces
bestowed upon the church, is another argument propounded by the holy ghost, to
draw us on more and more to love the same. Al which is put down, not only for
the high and exceeding commendation of the church of God, as which is endued
with all manner of lovely graces from the Lord: but also that so he might win
that at our hands, either by some one of these sundry reasons, or by all of
the^ jointly together, that otherwise could not be gained of us. We learn
also, that not mean men only, but even the mightiest of the earth, should make
this their special crown and glory, to delight in the church of God, yea to
take delight in the very stones thereof, as Gods servants are said to do.
Psalm. 102. 14. For what could it or can it boot them to live, and not to
live, as the principal members or at the least sound members thereof, sith
all of them must confess. that without the church there is no salvation? And
the rather they above others should strive hereto, because their examples, are
many times forcible, to fetch that from men, either for fear or favor etc.
that other men's works can not win.

Verse. 16. Delivers unto us this doctrine: namelye, that the Church
contains in it, not only more glory and beauty, then can be seen with the
outward eye, but than can either be conceived in heart, or expressed with
mouth. Which also should move us unfeignedly to affect the same. Whereof also me
thinks we may yield a dubble reason: the first because of the narrowness
and straightness of our own understanding, we being not able sufficiently,
either to think or speak of the least of Gods graces, much less of the
church, upon whom the Lord has bestowed even the very treasures of his
goodness: secondly, because of ye excellency of ye graces the^ selves, whether
we consider them generallye or particularly: they being as in respect of
themselves, even of his nature from whom they flow, yt is to say, altogether
infinite and inco^prehensible. Ver. 17. Teaches us, yt howsoever the church,
both in the whole and in the parts thereof, may be greatly, by the burden of
afflictions oppressed for the time, that yet notwithstanding it shall rise up
again, do the wicked what they can. Which as we know to be truly performed
in Christ our savior the head thereof, whom it was impessible yt the sorrows
of death should altogether hold down. Act. 2. 24: so was it also verefied in the
Apostle, and other believers, who says of him self and the^: we are afflicted
on every side, yet not in distress, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down
but perish not. 2. Cor. 4. 8. 9. which indeed arises in them, from the
strength of Christ's ouercomming, we being in him, become more then conquerors,
Roma. 8. 37. Oh whom would not this comfort and encourage to suffer any thing,
yea every thing, for the profession of Christ, and the keeping of a good
conscience before God and men.

Verse. 18. Teaches us, that the greatest matter of joy to the church, stands
especially upon these two points, to wit Christ's continual presence, and his
making of the same fruitful, in the several duties, that the church is to
perform, to God and men. One of these may not, nor can not be sundred from
other: because where Christ is, he is not there idelly or in vain, (though
we must confess also, that the force of Christ's grace appears not a like at
al times, because it is darkened many times, with the mystes and clouds of our
own corruption) but dwelling in their hearts by faith, he makes the^ fruitful
in all good works, and inableth them to comprehend with all saints, what is
the breadth and length, and depth and height, that is, all fullness as it were
of faith and obedience. See for this purpose Epes. 3. 17.

Verse. 19. Does notably commend unto us, the excellency and gracious effects of
the word of god. Whereof, who so lists to read, may see a large discourse
psalm. 119. And if they suppose that to be to tedious, they may more shortly
see it comprised Psalm. 19. verse. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. which the holy Ghost does
so much the more highly extol, because men are wont to have it in very small
regard and account. And yet in ye praising of it, he does not as me^, (who to
win men to the love and liking of such things as they propose) give excessive
or vnture commendations thereof, but in all truth and simplicity, exalts the
same: and if he come short any way, it is because the Lord is too sparing in
it, not that he wants words to express the praise of it, or that the thing
it self is not most high and excellent, but because he is for our weakness
sake contented to stoop down, commending it so far forth, as we are able
through his spirit to conceive of it, and not otherwise. Is it not then a
pitiful thing, that this word shall receive so great a commendation, and that
we shall be so backewarde in intertayning the same?

CAP. 7. and the sum thereof.
The church hearing of the earnest affection and love of Christ her spouse,
toward her, whollye resigneth up her self unto him. verse. 1. and
afterward does not only seek, to know the signs of the day set for their
marriage, but does wish from her heart, that the time thereof were come. ver. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. She admonishes her Damsels, handmaides or friends, of their
duty, that they should not hinder her, being now conversant with her husband
Christ: verse. 8. And lastly she declares her most ardent and earnest love
toward him, desiring even for ever, to be beloved of him again. ver. 9. 10.
11.

1 I Am my welbeloueds, for his desire is toward me.

2 Come my well-beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us remain in the
villages.

3 Let us rise up early to the vines: let us see whether the vine flourish,
and whether the small grape, has opened it self, and whether the pomgranates
flourish: there will I give thee my loves*

4 The mandrakes have given a smell: and in our gates are all sweet things:
new and old: I have kept them for thee.

5 O that some would give thee, to be as a brother unto me, that sucked the
breasts of my mother: though I found thee in the streat, I would kiss thee,
neither would they despise me.

6 I would lead thee, I would bring thee into the house of my mother that
teaches me: I would cause the to drink spiced wine, yea sweet wine, made of
my Pomegranate.

7 His left hand should be under mine head: and his right hand should embrace
me.

8 I charge you by an oath, O ye daughters of Jerusalem: why should ye stir
up, or why should ye awake, this my love, until he please?

9 Who is she that comes out of the wilderness, leaning upon her
well-beloved? Under the apple tree I raised thee up: there thy mother conceived
thee: there she conceived that bare thee.

10 Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a singet upon thine arm: for love
is strong as death, jealousy is hard as the grave: the coals thereof are
coals of fire, and as a flame from the lord.

11 Many waters cannot quench this love: neither can the floudes ouer-flow it:
if a man would give all the substance of his house, for this love, in
contemning they would contemn him.


OUR Savior having in the former chapter graciously comforted his poor
distressed church, partlye by giving her, an high and excellent commendation,
and partly by promising her, his continual and gracious presence, even until
the time of the solemnization of the marriage between them, Con.
be come. The church in this chapter, shows what notable effects these
comfortable words of Christ, brought forth in her, namelye they did
continuallye strengthen her faith in the truth of those promises, and made her
every day more and more, in earnestnes and vnfayneones to wish the approaching
of the marriage day, that so they might be inseperably joined together for ever.
Which thing as Christ had done before in the other chapter, so does the church
here, thereby to let the Lord, as it were understand, that there was no want
of love and affection, both toward him, and toward the things also, that
he him self affected.

In this chapter, and the next following (for in both are principallye
contained the words of the church of Christ) the church laboring according
to her power, to render like for like unto Christ, does set out her most
earnest desire, toward that same wished day, of their spiritual marriage.
Diuis.
But in this chapter, she does principally propound two things.

1 The first is, that the church does generallye declare her good mind,
toward Christ her Spouse: and this is contained in the first verse.

2 In the second, (because there are two principal members of this church that
is in subjection to Christ, that is, the fulness of the Jews, and the fulness of
all the Gentiles (as the Apostle says, Romans 11. 25.) the old church, that is
to say, specially and principally the church of the Jews, does declare that
she did very earnestlye wayt for her spouse, and diligently perform her
duties, and this reaches from verse 2. to the end of the chapter. For as for
that part of the church, which consists in the fullness of the Gentiles,
mention is made of it in the next chapter, as you shall see by the church of
the Jews.

Verse, 1. Sense.
I am my welbeloueds, that is, I do certainelye and assuredlye in the right of
affiaunce and marriage belong unto him: q. d. I am no others but his. And these
are ye churches words, manifesting what great good the comfortable speeches of
Christ, mentioned in the other chapter, did her, and declaring what assurance
and certain persuasion she had of his holy graces toward her and in her,
and of her constauncye and continuance, in all sound affection toward him.
For his desire is toward me, that is, he does desire me, and in this
affection most tenderly love me, q. d. There is a mutual love between us: as
I love him, so he loves me, and as I belong to none, but to him alone, so he
belongs to none other but to me only, whereof I have amongst many other
graces, this as a singular pledge, that he loved me, when I was his enemy, that
when I was straying away, he called me back, that he forgave me when I had
sinned, and did continuallye power his benefits and mercyes upon me, yea
that he offered and gave him self unto me (as appears by his dealinges in
the other chapter) and therefore I can not choose but love him, and belong unto
him alone. So that we see, that the Church, makes the testimonies and tokens
of Christ's favor, sure proppes unto her own continuance in good things, and
obedience of his holy will.

Verse. 2. Come my well-beloved. Here begins the second part of the chapter, in
which the church, but specially that of the Jews (which in the days of
Solomon was in flourishing estate) does by turning her speech unto Christ,
(whereas in the former verse he had spoken, as it were to some others) stir
him up by common affection as well as she, to wayt for and observe the time of
their holy marriage, and this is contained in this and the third verse.
Secondlye, she yields up all the good things that she had, to the glory
of her Husband and head, verse 4. yea even her self, for the wonderful love
that she bare toward him, verse. 5. and so on forward to the end of the
chapter. So that these words, Come my well-beloved, are words of exhortation,
and provoking as it were, taken also from the love of the church, toward
Christ, more effectually to persuade the thing she desires, because men
willinglye commit them selves to the company, and easelye yield to the
requests of such, as they take to be their unfeigned friends. Let us go
forth into the field. She speaks it after the manner of men, inhabiting
cities, and having their farm houses abroad in the country, will walk they
and their people to the same for recreation, and to see how forward the
spring is; and whether the time of Summer and harvest, do draw nigh: but all
this must be understood spirituallye, as though the Church should say, I
beseech thee, do not aloue and by thy self, employ thine affection in
searching out the wished time of our marriage, as thou seem to say before.
chapter 6. 8. but let us both together imploye our common diligence thereto,
for I likewise desire to have that Marriage day draw year, and the thing it
self performed also. Neither must this exhorting of CHRIST be understood,
either as though he were of himself unwilling to it, or needed the
prouocations of the Church, for we know he is most ready to all good
things, yea and stirs up the church, to the doing of the same, or else
they would never be performed: but the church requesteth it for ever, for the
strengthening and encouragement of her self thereby, that so having his
continual presence and felllowship, she may the more cheerfully go forward Let
us remain in the Villages. This part of the verse is diuersely read, by
reason of the diverse significations of the words used therein, as that word
which we turn remain, signifies also to lodge all night, which acception of
the word I rather incline to in this place, because the church seems to
exhort to it, as it were of this purpose, that so the next morning, they
might be more ready to look upon and behold the vines, and other things
mentioned in the next verse: and that which is turned here Villages, others
turn Cypres trees, which some take to be a bushe or tree, growing in Egypt,
Syria, and the countries thereabout, much like to that we call Priuet, Yea some
have taken it to be the very self same. See Pliny lib* 12. cap. 24. Also
chap. 1. of this book, verse, 14. And indeed the word is used in scripture,
both to signify Villages and little towns, and also the Cypres. But whatsoever
it be the meaning is all one. q: d. I will now no more be found unprepared
(which was the fault of the Church, mentioned before chap. 5, verse. 1. etc.)
I am ashamed of that carelessness, negligence and sloth: it is my duty to
watch with thee, and therefore I will endeavor the perfourmaunce of it, yea I
will day and night wait for the assured signs of thy glorious appearing, and
the rather because that as thy glory, so my chief good stands in the
perfourmaunce of this duty: and so the church perfourmeth that unto Christ him
self, as she her self affirmed in his person before chap. 2. 10. had
performed unto her.

Verse. 3. Let us rise up early to the vines, that is, to visit and look
upon the vines. The church shows what commodity she and her spouse shall get,
by remaining or lodging all night, in the country villages, or amongst the
sweet Cypres trees, out of the city, namely that they shall be ready earelye,
to make trial of that, that they come and look for. Let us see whether the
vine florishe, that is, what likelihood there is, of the approaching of the time
of marriage, for to this end tends this, and all the similitudes and
comparisons following. And whether the small grape, or as you would say, The
first grape: which is called first, because of the first sprowting thereof,
and small not only because of the littlenes, but also because it wareth
greater and greater. Has opened it self, that is, has declared it self unto
men, that it is now become a grape and grows, which at the first appearing of
it, or as it were in the bud, can hardly be discerned. And whether the
Pomgranates flourish. The budding of this fruit, (whereof also there was good
store in those countries) was a sign of the spring now, and the flourishing
thereof, as it were of the summer at hand. By all which as has been said
before, the church labors to come to the undoubted signs of the day of her
marriage with Christ. I know others otherwise expound it, as though the church
should entreat Christ, and stir up her self, to look upon the signs of
salvation, and Gods grace amongst his own people, which are many times
compared to Vines. Indeed I deny not, but that Gods people, is Gods vine, and
that the bringing forth of flowers and fruits, may well resemble good works,
and the outward manifestation of Gods graces, wherewith he inwardly adorneth
his Servants, and that they may well be compared to Pomgranates, which
fruit is of it self, most pleasant and delightful to the taste also: but
yet me thinks the former sense is more plain and simple, except we will
say thus, that the more abundance of good fruit, that Gods people yield
and bring forth the more nighe is the marriage, but because the perfection
and fullness of our Fruit, cannot be in this life, but in the life to be
revealed, that therefore the perperfection and consummation of the marriage,
shall not be till then. It follows. There will I give thee my loves, that is,
there will I make manifest and open declaration of my unfeigned affection
toward thee. And she speaks of loves, in the plural number, thereby to
set out, both the excellency of the same, and the abundance or plenty thereof
likewise: which indeed most properly is to be referred, to the great and
last day, at what time we shall not only by signs most certainly perceive,
that the marriage day draws nigh, but shall in most perfect love, be most
perfectly knit, unto our head and husband Christ.

Verse. 4. The mandrakes have given a smell. Before we speak any thing of the
sense of this verse, we will a little look upon the words. The word that is
here turned Mandrakes, is not used in all ye old testament, but only in this
place, and Genes. 30. 14. 15. in which almost all interpretours both Jews and
Christians, do turn it Mandrakes: but if the circumstances either of that
place of Genes. or this here may be waighed, it will be found, not to be so
rightlye translated. For the place of Genesis, if we weigh Rubens childhood, we
shall perceive, that he was drawn and moved toward them, rather by some
pleasant show, and color of them (the Her boristes agreeing, that the leaves
of the Mandrake, specially of the male, are of a whitish green color, and
the apples of it fair, yellow and round) then by any virtue or strength, he
either thought or knew to be in them. Besides that they should not be Mandrakes,
me thinks there are yet two circumstances more, the one taken from the place,
where it is said Reubens flowers did grow, namely in the plain and open field
as it were, whereas they that write of Mandrakes, affirm that it grows most
gladly, in dark and shadowie places: an other is from the time, vz, that these
flowers were ripe in the days of wheat harvest, whereas the Herboristes
affirm, that Mandrakes can not be so soon ripe: whereof also this may be
one reason, because they delight in dark and cold places, we knowing by
experience and reason, that things growing there, can not be so soon ripe, as
they that grow abroad, and have the power of the sun to set them forward.
Concerning this place it self, me thinks there is one special reason to
lead me, why it should not be turned Mandrakes here: namely because a sweet
smell and savor is attributed unto it, whereas they that be experienced in
Mandrakes, write and affirm, that they have no good sent or savor at all. Me
thinks rather, that both in Genesis, and in this place, the circumstances
being considred, and namely that Rahel was there drawn to a liking of them, by
the sight of them, rather than by their virtue: and here preparation is made
and offered in the sweetest manner that can be, to entertayne the Brydegrome,
that therefore it should be turned, as Immanuel turns it well ( These lovely
flowers, yielding a savor) understanding by lovely flowers, the delight that
for their color and pleasant show, they offer to the eye: and by yielding a
savor, meaning the sweet sent they give to smelling: q. d. Christ should have
all sweet things to smell to, and pleasant to look upon, provided for his
intertaynement: and yet me thinks I am more confyrmed in this judgment,
because the word here used, is derived from a word, that signifies love or to
love. If any man see more, or better, let him humbly thank God for it, and
lay it out to the benefit of the church, And in our gates are all sweet
things. The word signifies precious also. And when the church says, They are
in the gates, she means not only that they were ready, but alludeth also
unto customs and orders, observed on marriage days, men being went to straw
the houses, entries, doors, yea and streets and all, with sweet smelling
herbs as we see, in use amongst us. New and old. q. d. There is great stoore
and plentye of them, for this is an usual thing, by these terms to express
abundance. See for the phrase Math. 13. 52. where Christ affyrmeth that the
Scribes which are taught of God, bring out of their treasures new and old
things. I have kept them forth. The church protests, that as she had
carefullye reserved these things against the marriage day, so that time
being come, she will plentifully power them abroad, that so Christ her spouse
may take pleasure in the things, that she willinglye offers for his
intertainment. Many mistically expound these things, for the sweet savor that
the godly yield in the church by their good works, and holy conversation,
and I doubt not but it may be so taken: how be it I suppose this to be the
more simple meaning, that the church, alluding to the outward manner of men in
worldly marryages, does mean thereby, the great preparation that both she had
in former times, and presently made against the marriage day, and would then
plentifully power the same abroad, for the greater manifestation of her
unfeigned love toward Christ.

Ver. 5. Oh that some would give thee. The church having showed ye great
preparation she had made for the marriage day, begins to declare the
earnest affection she had toward Christ, wishing (as many do in the
earnestness of their mind, specially when they either feel the want of good
things, or are moved with the excellency thereof) that she might continuallye
enjoy him, as a most faithful friend. Now in that she mencioneth none, to
whom she powers forth this wish, she means not that every one could
grant this, or that she did at all adventures speak it, but knowing that it
was only in God to grant the same, she does under this exclamation or wish,
express the fervent desire, she had to have this performed unto her. See Iere.
9. 1. To be as a brother unto me, that is, most faithful, friendlye and
loving, see Genes. 13. 8. Also Psalm. 133. 1. That sucked the breasts of my
mother. She is not contented only to have him as a brother, but as a most
natural and kind brother, because many times it falls out, that brethren
also are at great iarres, through the neglect or forgetfulness of those bonds,
wherewith they should be tied most straightly together* she wishes that she
might find Christ, as loving toward her, and as continual with her, as one
most natural and kindharted brother is to and with another, that so she might
both continually, and most familiarly also, enjoy his love and comfortable
both presence and speech. Though I found thee in the street, that is, in so
open and public place as it were. See Luke 14. 21. I would kiss thee, that
is, I would neither be ashamed nor afraid, to perform the duties of a holy
love, and sound good will toward thee. See chapter 1. verse 2. Also Luke 15.
20. Neither would they despise me, vz, that knew what it meant, otherwise
perhaps there might be misiudging. We know it is an immodest and unseemly
thing, to kiss women and maids openly, as many do: but if thou were my
brother (as though she should say) no body would dislike me for it, though I
did it openly, because of a holy affection I carry toward thee. So here we
see, that as she proposed her wish and desire, so here she begins to
show, what she would do, if that might be granted, proceeding in reckoning up
of other things that she meant to perform, meaning only here, that in the
performance of those holy duties, she would set fear and shame aside, and not
regard the scorns and reproaches, wherewith the wicked are wont to exercise
her, and will still exercise her, till the marriage day indeed come.

Verse. 6. I would lead thee, I would bring thee. She doubleth the word as
it were, to note not only the ioyfulnesse of her heart, to think upon this
(which if it were so delitfull now, that she could not tell with what words
to express it, what would it be then, being performed in full measure) but
also the certain purpose, that indeed she had to execute the same, binding
her self by the means of this manner of speech, more straightly to the
performaunce thereof. Into the house of my mother. She alludeth no doubt to
the custom in those days, which was to bring the Bryde and the Brydegrome
also into the houses of either of their parents: see chap. 3. 4. and Genes. 24.
97. where Izhac is said to have brought Ribkah, into the tent of Sarah his
mother. And no doubt but here under the name of mother, the whole universal
church, which rising up together into one body, shall in good time as a pure
virgin, be presented glorious, and unspotted to Christ. See 2. Cor. 11. 2.
Ephe. 5. 27. For the better understanding of this point, we must well weigh
two things: the first is, the manner of the Hebrews in their speech, which use
to call some whole thing or body, by ye name of father or mother, and the
parts deryued from the same, by the names of sons or daughters, whereof also
there is some reason, because as children be as it were chippes hewn from
their parents, so are other things, when they are disioyned one of them from
an other. The second is, the consideration that we must have of the church,
which in the holy scripture, is to be considered after two sorts, to wit,
either generallye or particularly. The church general or universal, is
likewise to be considered after two sorts. For sometimes there is contained,
under the name or word of the church, Christ with all his elect people, which
therefore by reason of the straight and narrow conjunction, that is between
him and them, is also called the Brydegromes mother, as ver. 9. of this
chapter: and in which regard also, the church is called his sister chapter 4.
9. and also chapter 8. 1. Sometimes under the same word, there is signified the
elect only, as in this place, and before in this book. chapter 3. 4. also
chapter. 6. 6. and such like. Where we must mark, that the very self same
distinction, must be observed in the new Testament also, where the church,
considered together with her head Christ, is called Christ. 1. Cor. 12. 12
Ephesians. 3. 4. that is to say mystical Christ, as the Fathers were wont to say,
or Christ in a misterye: but when we consider the church, severed from
Christ, then it is called Christ's church, or his body. Now concerning the
particular consideration of the church, or the regarding of it in some part, it
is to be waighed, either as it is distinguished by occasion of times or of
place. In respect of times, it is distinguished thus, that one part is called
the old Church, and that is it which was before Christ's coming: the other is
named the new, and that is that which has been revealed since Christ was
manfested in the flesh, he casting down the partition wall, and making of the
old and the new, but one sheepfold. See Ephesians. 2. 14. 15, etc. Also John. 10.
16. In respect of place, thus: the Church of Jerusalem, the Church of Antioch:
the Church of Corinthe, of Rome, etc. Now which way soever we consider it, as
in part, it is indeed Christ's Sister, even as if it were the Daughter of one
and the self same mother. But all this is performed and brought to pass,
through the election of God, Which teaches me, vz, all godliness, and every
good thing, especially in my duetyes toward thee, and how to entreat thee,
and behave my self toward thee, in all such things, as may please and
delight thee. I would cause thee to drink spiced Wine, She means such
Wine or Wines, as we call Ipocras, which besides the nature and strength of the
Wine it self, has by the composition and confection of men, mingling many
Spices with the same, great power in it, and pleasantness also by the smell
of the Spices, that as the heart is strengthened, and warmed thereby, so the
sent might be satisfied, with the pleasant smell thereof. Yea sweet Wine
made of my Pomegranate. The word turned here sweet Wine, signifies must or
new Wine, yea generallye all moisture, which either by expressing or treading,
is fet from any fruit: For it is derived of a word, that signyfieth to
express or tread down, but because he adds Pomegranates, we may see that
he means specially the maysture, juice or liquor, that is or may be wrong
from them. In a word, she means that if she might indeed be partaker of
him and his graces, she would most comfortablye and ioyfullye intertayne and
receive him. For under these metaphors, taken and borrowed from an earthly
banquet, she means nothing else, but the spiritual intertainement of him.
Some think these to be the words of the Jewish synagogue, wishing for
Christ's coming and manifestation in the flesh, and promsing a meruellous
intertainment of him: but I extend it more largely, that it should be the voice
both of the old and new Church, wishing the continual conjunction of Christ
her spouse with her, that so she might never be pulled from him, which
indeed shall be fully performed in the life that is to come, but yet so far
forth, as it is lawful, she desires to have it performed in this life, that
so they may never be sundred one of them from another, that in that holy
conjunction also wherein she cleaves whollye and altogether, to CHRIST her
head and spouse, she may freelye and openly serve God, without the fear of
tyrants, or the infamy and slander of worldly men. See Luke. 1. 74. Neither
is this to be taken, as contrary to that which was said before in the division
of this chapter, touching the church of the Jews, because that the
verification of it in the^ is no hinderaunce, to have it verified likewise in
the church of the Gentiles, and so by consequent also in the whole body of the
Church, and so must we understand that, which is in the beginning of the next
chapter: namely that look what the Gentiles were unto the Jews, in as much as
the Jews were called before them, the same are they that are of the Church,
and are not yet called as in respect of them, that are already called, but of
this matter, more in the beginning of the next chapter.

Verse. 7. His left hand should be under mine head. As before she had set out
how she would receive and entertayne him: so now for the strengthening of her
self in the assured persuasion of his unfeigned love toward her, she shows
how he would comfort her, namely that for her ease, he would put his left
hand under her head, as men commonly do, to sick and infirm persons. And
his right hand should embrace me, vz, most comfortably and lovingly as
dearest friends do one an other. See this whole verse expounded before chap.
2. 6. there being no other difference but this, namelye that there she
affyrmeth the thing in present action, and here by waighing the earnest love
of Christ toward her, she stirs up her hope, assuring her self, that if
she may enjoy his comfortable and continual presence it shall be done indeed.

Verse. 8. I charge you by an oath, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. vz, yt ye
molest or grieve not this my head and spouse, yt either may hinder our coming
together, or may break of our comfortable company one from an other: and this
she speaks unto her handmaydes as it were, or friends. See this expounded
before. chapt. 2. 7. also chap. 3. 5. Why should ye stir up, or why should
ye awake? q. d. there is no reason or cause, why you should deal either so
discourteously, or malepartly with him, specially since in his rest, stands
your own good. This my love, yt is, he whom I so dearly and tenderly love.
Until he please, yt is, till he himself will: and the Church uses this as a
reason to discourage them from awaking him. q. d. Be not carried away with a
fond affection, thinking that it will be good for you and him, that he should
be raised up or awaked: no, no, he knows what and when it is better for you
and him self also then you can either think or declare.

Verse. 9. Who is she. The church going about to declare the love she carried
toward her head, and husband Christ, both in this verse, and in the first
part of it, by the way of a demand, speak of her self: and in the latter part,
taking upon her the person of Christ, she shows what great graces she had
received from him. That comes out of the wilderness, vz, of this wide world,
and her own corruption. Leaning upon her well-beloved. She uses this speech,
not only to note her love toward him, men using to lean upon them whom
they like. See 2. King. 5. 18. but also to set out the strength and comfort
she had from him, without whom by reason of their own weakness, she had
never been able to get out of the wilderness: and all this is spoken by the
way of comparison: q. d. was there ever any Bryde, that took such great
pains, and underwent so many dangers, for the obtaining of him whom she loved?
Take therefore these things following, as assured testimonies, and pledges of
my unfeigned good will, namelye that I have labored to lay aside the old man,
denying my self, and the whole world also, which sometimes in scripture, is
called a wilderness. Isay. 4. 3. and by faith have overcome all difficulties,
that so I might at the length come to the heavenly house. Hebr. 12. 22. Neither
speaks she this as boasting of her self, for she confesses that she was
feign to lean upon Christ, and he as it were to uphold and underprop her
in all good things. Yea and by the words following she shows that she had
the beginninges: by laying both which together we may set, that she gives
all unto him, even as the Apostle does. Phillip. 2. 13. she being but the
instrument of Gods power and goodness in the performaunce of the same. Under
the apple tree Iraised thee up, that is gave thee life, and being, even as men
that are in a heavy sleep, and are thoroughly waked, seem to be raised up from
death to life. And by the Apple tree, he means here not only Jerusalem, from
whence the Lord brought forth a people unto him self, but even all the
places of the world, in which it pleased God to beget and bring forth a people
unto him self: all which and every one of which, may rightly be compared unto
an Apple tree, not only because under the shadow thereof, there is comfort
and refreshing, but also because that the good, profitable, and plentiful
fruit of that tree, may very aptly resemble, the good works of holy obedience,
that the faithful yield to the Lord, in which respect also the Prophet calls
them, the trees of righteousness. Isaiah. 61. 3. There thy mother conceived
thee. How and in whatsense, the church is called a mother. See verse. 6. of this
chapter. There she conceived thee that bare thee. A description of a mother,
and this is repeated, not as a vain word, but to show that the church, can not
bring forth spiritual children to God, but with as much both pain and
danger, if not far greater, than earthly and worldly mothers bring forth
theirs.

Verse. 10. Set me as a seal on thy heart. As though the church should say.
Seeing through thy goodness and strength, I have undertaken and performed, all
these labors and toils to attire thee, I beseech thee, let me not be cast
off, or lose my labor, but let the remembrance and love of me, take a deep
impression in thee, yea even in thy heart and mind. And as a signet upon thine
arm, that is, let me be as dear and precious unto thee, as the signet that
thou carryest about thee: which how precious it was, and highlye esteemed, may
appear, in that Zerubbabell, has a promise made him, that the Lord will make
him as a signet. Hagg. 2. 24. and on the contrary side, in that Iehoiakim is
threatened, that if he were as the signet of Gods right hand, yet the Lord
would pluck him from thence. Iere. 22. 24. The sum is, that it is a request
full of affection and earnestness, which the church makes unto Christ. q. d.
Seeing I have yielded through thy goodness such testimonies and tokens of an
vnfaygned heart and love, I beseech thee again on the other side, to carry me
continually in thy mind to have me always in thy sight, and in thy hands,
even as men wear jewels about their necks, and upon their breasts, and put
ringes, specially their signets and seals upon their fingers, both to have
them always in a readiness, and to show the special account they make of
them. For love is strong as death, that is, the love that I carry to thee, is
most earnest, vehement and mighty, and will overcome all things, so it may
be partaker of thee, even as death it self. Others expound it thus, that she
had rather choose death, than want him that she loved: but the former sense is
most plain and simple in my mind, she using this and the words following,
as reasons to persuade him to love her again, and to continue with her for
ever, seeing she had so earnestly set her mind and affection upon him.
Jealousy is hard as the grave. By jealousy, she means not an ill humor of
suspicion, but the ardencye and feruencye of her love toward him, who could
not abide as it were, that he should love any but her. For jealousy of it
self is not evil (specially seeing the Lord says he is iealouse over us.
Exodus 20. 5. But when it is carried into the extreamitye of a suspicious mind.
And when he says, It is hard as the grave, she means yt it will not be
conquered no more then yt grave which as it deuoureth all bodies cast into it,
whereof also it has the name: so does she devour all difficulties and
distresses, that might hinder her from her love. The coals whereof are coals
of fire. She compares her unfeigned love to an other thing, namelye to fire,
not only because it warmeth and makes hot, but also because it kindles
and increases, yea and is the mean to consume and purge, the church meaning
by this, that the fire of unfeigned love in her heart toward him, should not
only be every day more and more increased, and shine forth as light unto
others, but also consume all cursed corruptions, that might hinder her
affectition toward him, even as fire should lick up straw or stubble before
it: and that is the reason also, why she adds, And as a flame from the
Lord, or as it is in the Hebrew, a flame of the Lord, meaning by that a most
excellent fire, for the Scripture is wont to ascribe great and excellent
things to God, as Psalm 36. 6. Thy righteousness is like the mountains of
God: Others take it as a flame of fire sent forth from the Lord, to destroy
the wicked: but no doubt she means to magnify the greatness of it, as which
God, by the most mighty light of his spirit, does not only begin in those
that be his, but also so kindle and increase, that it endures even for ever
and ever.

Verse. 11* Many waters can not quench this love. She proceeds in setting
forth the earnestness of her affections toward Christ: showing that since
her love was as a mighty and excellent fire within it, it could not be put
out, but with many troubles, afflictions and persecutions. It is an usual
thing in the Word, to compare both the troubles of the godly, and the
troublers of them also, to Waters, see for this purpose Psalm. 69. 1. Also
Revel. 17. 15. Neither can the Flowdes ouerflowe it. Though she mean the same
thing in other words yet it is no vain repetition: for it is as much, as if
she should say, no persecution, no not the greatest, should prevail upon
me, to quench out or drown up my love toward me. And that the word
Floudes is so used in many places of scripture may appear, by Psalm 124. 5.
5. Also Math. 7. 25. 27. By which he means as the apostle says, that
neither trybulation nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine nor nakedness, nor
peril nor sword, shall separate us from the love of Christ, as Romans 8. 35.
If a man would give all the substance of his house for this Love.

She means that though a man would give all that he had, either to buy this
love of her, or to get it from her, it were nothing, it were but labor lost,
and therefore she adds, In contemning they would contemn him, that is, they
would certainly contemn him, and all that he offered to, making no account
neither of him, though he were never so great, nor of the thing offered,
though it were never so precious. For this the manner of the Hebrew tongue, when
they highlye praise, to duble the word, and when they greatly dispraise, to
duble the word likewise. See chap. 1. verse. 1. In sum, this is it that she
means by this verse, namelye to declare, that her love was so firm and fast
to him, that it could not be rent or pulled from him to any other, either by
any force, or by any fraud, or by any flattery, or fair promises, which are
not only the strongest, but the only way also, that the Devil and his
instruments use, to pull men away, from the love and obedience of God.

Verse. 1. Teaches the whole church, and every particular member of the same,
to be thoroughly assured and persuaded of Gods election, and assured favor
toward them for ever and ever. For if it be true in the whole, as against
which the gates of hell shall never prevail, why should it not be true, in
every part and piece of ye same. The knowledge whereof, is not only
comfortable in the days of a distressed conscience, we having nothing so
strong to lean upon, as the mighty foundation of God, which remains sure,
having Gods seal set upon it: but also profitable to beat back, that point of
Popery, which teaches men to doubt of their salvation and continuance in good
things, even unto the end. Neither stands the strength and stay of this
persuasion upon our selves, for then how quickly should we forgo it, since our
first parents kept not their excellent estate, in the time of innocence: nor
upon any good thing either within us, or without us, for all our righteousness
before God, is as a filthye and stained cloth, but upon the unchangeable
nature and purpose of the Lord our God, as also upon those infallible and
sure notes that he has given us of his favor, in which respect also we see,
that the church here vpholdeth her self, because she was assured of his sound
and immovable affection toward her. Indeed if we look into our selves, and
into our great sins and manifold vnwoorthines, who can then find any hope,
either of salvation, or any other good grace? but if we will feel and behold
this, we must cast our cogitation from our selves, and by the eye of faith,
regard the Lord in his eternal love and mercy, choosing us also in Christ
his son, and that unto eternal life, before the foundations of the world
were laid. As for that which is objected by Papists against his truth,
namely that it favors of presumption, is most false, not only because we
renounce all things in our selves, and disclaim from the same, both in whole
and in part, but also we cleave unto God in the truth of his promise, in not
abusing his mercy, nor turning his love into wantonness, but making them more
forcible means, to hold us always in the awe of a good conscience, and
strength of faith toward him. And if any doctrine, savor of pride, and be
intollerablie presumptuous it is that of Popery, which teaches men to trust in
the virtue and goodness of the things they have performed, as available and
sufficient, not only for them selves, but for others also: and yet we may see
the just judgment of God further upon them, not only while that they them
selves are justly tainted with that crime, which unjustly they cast upon
others, but while they are found faulty in crossing their own assertions: for
how can that doctrine of doubting which is delivered in their wrytinges, and
mayntained in their Schools, stand with the matter of men's meryring and
deserving: because if there be desert, and that not only of congruitie, but of
condignity and worthiness as they say in their schools, yea and that there be
works of supererogation also, what need they to fear clayming only of
favor, but of that they have deserved. But this we see* that the Lord has so
stricken them with the spirit of giddiness, that as they swerve from the
truth, so they agree not with them selves. As for us, we do so according to
truth and godliness, remove doubting from men, that we establishe no
presumption before God, but rather teach them stayednesse, and strength of
persuasion, and that not standinge upon them selves, but upon God, the author
of all certainty and truth, and upon that infallible verity of his will, which
he has revealed in his word. For which see John 13. 1. Also John. 1.

Verse. 2. Teaches us, in the spirit of all holy love, to exhort and
prouooke one an other, and that by all the arguments and reasons we can, to
the perfourmaunce of good and holy duties. Whereunto that we may be the better
drawn: it shall be good for us to consider, that this doctrine is not only
sanctified unto us in the examples of good people, but also by the very
commandment of God in his word, and by that duty of charity which is laid
upon us toward other, as toward our selves, we furthering their salvation
by all means possible and lawful: and if there be any other reason or
reasons besides these rehearsed, to use them al also, as knowinge that all is
little enough, both by reason of our own corruption, as also by the
perverseness of them, that we are to deal with. See for this: Leuiticus. 19.
17. Math. 18. 16. Colossians 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13. Secondlye, we learn by that
verse, not only with speed and earnestnes to pursue good things, but even as
a man would say, to prevent the time. It is strange to see, the quickness and
liveliness of men, about atchieuing of worldly things, how they toil and
moyle very sore, and break their sleeps as we say, and how dull and heavy
they be in and about spiritual and heavenly things. No doubt but this
carefulnes in the one, which are matters of nothing in comparison, and
carelessness in and about the chiefest things, shall not only make them void
of excuse before men, but pull upon them more heavy judgment, in the life
that is to come, in so much as they have been busiliest occupied about such
things, as they them selves know to have no durablenes, and have neglected
others, of whose perpetuity, they could not choose but be persuaded.

Verse. 3. Teaches the whole church, and every particular member thereof, even
with earnestness to look for, and hearty desire to wish. the glorious
appering of the son of God, for the perfecting of that betrothing and
marriage, which is begun between him and us. We say many times in the Lords
prayer, Thy kingdom come, but who speaks it, either with an understanding or
a feeling heart? By an understanding heart, I mean one, that conceiueth and
perceives the true sense and natural meaning of that petition. By a feeling
heart I mean such a one, as in an earnest desire that he has of eternal
glory, or of holy love, that he has to al well doing, and to cease from sin,
wishes even the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus, and the ending of the
days of these miseries. It is lamentable to consider, that neither the glory
of God, nor the love of our own salvation, nor the ending of our miseries, nor
the attayning of unspeakable joys, nor the practice of Gods servants, can
bring us on unto the performance of this duty, but as though we were glewed to
this world, in a perpetual oblivion of eternal blessedness, or as though the
cords of our own corruption were stronger, than all the graces of God, or
examples of good men, so we spend the days of our pilgrimage here, and are
very likely so to end them, to the hazarding of our own souls. See 2. Cor.
5. 1. 2. etc. Also Phillip. 1. 23. Luke 2. 29. and sundry other such like.

Ver. 4. Teaches us, even carefully to employ all that we have to the
entertainment and receiving of Christ. And therefore look what graces soever
God has bestowed upon us, we should labor the continuance and increase of
the same in us: for they alone, are the things that make Christ to take
delight to come unto us, and to dwell with us. See Revel. 3. 20.

Verse. 5. Teaches us, in heartye sort and manner always to entreat the Lord
for the feeling of his wonderful favor and rich mercy. No doubt, but if we
used this mean of prayer often times and earnestly, drawing nigh also unto the
Lord in the faith of his promises, for he that will come to God, must believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him Heb. 11. 6. and
in unfeigned repentance for our former evils, for God hears not them that
continue in sin. John. 9. 31. See also Proverb. 15. 8. and Proverb. 28. 9. no
doubt I say, but if we performed these duties as before, God that gives
liberallye to all men, and reprocheth none. James. 1. 5. would give us his
son Christ, and together with him all good things also. Rom 8. 32. yea even
his holy spirit. Luke 11. 13. to lead us into all truth and weldoing. And
hereunto we should be stirred up, as well by the effectual sense and feeling
of our present wants both bodily and spiritual, as also by the excellencye of
the graces to be found in God, which reaches not only to this present life
and world, but to that also which is to be revealed to the sons and
servants of God. Secondly, we may learn out of that verse, for no shame in
our selves, nor yet for no misiudging or evil speech of the wicked, to neglect
the performaunce of any duty, that may testify either our love, or obedience
toward Christ: for if we will do so, we shall not find the want of any
lettes in our selves, nor lack stumbling blocks cast in our ways by the
wicked to hinder us therein, but we must by honor and dishonor, by evil
report and good report, yea in all things approve our selves, as the
servants of God. 2. Cor. 6. 48. unto God and men, and do as our Savior him
self has done before us, that is, for the joy that was set before him, he
has endured the cross, and despised the same, and is set down at the right
hand of the throane of God, that so we considering him that endured such
speaking against of sinners, may learn not to be wearied and faint in our
minds. Heb. 13. 2. 3. assuring our selves that if we suffer any thing with
him, or for him, we shall also reign and be glorified with him. 2. Timoth. 2.
12. for the perfourmaunce of worldly things, touching our own pleasures or
profitees, yea that though sometimes they be unlawful, we neither are ashamed
nor afraid of men, and why should we be so in the doing of spiritual
duties, and that to our God? It is worthy the noting, that many that will not
blush at any thing before men, will be ashamed to perform holy duties to God,
either of Prayer, confession of faith, Catechizing or such like: and on the
other side many afraid to perform even honest things before men. will not
blush to do holy things in the presence of God: and Let these latter people
make much of this work of the spirit in them, and labor to increase in the
same before God and man, that it may be a notable and continual pledge unto
their faith: but let the other fear and tremble, who have a dubble note of
great ungodliness in them, the one that they are not ashamed of evil before
God and man: the other that they are ashamed of good duties, in the presence of
God and man: and let them labor the amendment of it, or else it will go hard
with them both before God and man, and that in this life and the life to come
also.

Verse. 6. Teaches us in all reverence and regard, to esteem the Church,
because there is in the same, the abundance of all treasures, fit to furnish
us in the execution of our duties both toward God and men, and to make us
able in all sweet and delicate sort, to entertayne the Lord of life, to his
glory and our eternal comfort The profane and worldly people, cannot
possibly behold these things, because they look no further, than the eye of
flesh and blood directs them, or the line of their own reason, will lead
them: they only the eyes of whose understanding God has opened by his word
and spirit, perceive these excellent mysteries, for it is the spiritual man
that discerns all things, yea even the deep things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 10.
15. which is not only true in the mysteries of faith and religion, but even in
discrying and discerning the church of God also: for if a man have no beter
loades man, than the light of his own wit, it is more likely that he shall
embrace the synagogue of Satan, by reason of the outward glory, and glittering
of it, instead of the church, than the Lords church indeed.

Verse. 7. Teaches us, that we can never have spiritual ease, nor spiritual
comfort, till we be assured of, and do effectuallye feel Christ and his
merits, and do plentifullye taste of the loving kindness and favor of God
toward us in him. They that are distressed in body and soul, and look for
rest and consolation else where, than in him, we may perceive by this, are
foully deceived, as they also that have their only joy, felicity and
contentment in the outward, either pleasures or profits of this life. Notably
says David, Psalm 4. 6. Many say who will show us any good? But Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy of
heart, than they have had, when their wheat and their wine did abound: whereof
also he seems to render a reason. Psalm. 30. 6. saying, that In the Lords
favor, there is life even for ever more.

Verse. 8. Teaches us, not only to have care and conscience in our selves, to
do nothing to the annoyaunce or displeasing of our Lord and Savior Christ:
but also to labor what we can, that others do not disquiet him. By which we
may see, that the love and care we carrye toward him, should not be
contained within the compass of our own bosom, but be extended to others,
as well as to our selves, y^ by yt means also we may not only provide, for ye
pleasure and profit of him, to whom we belong or wish well to, but further and
advance to the uttermost of our poor powers, the salvation of other men.
Secondly, we may learn to beware of prescribing any thing or time to the Lord,
not only because it argues intolerable presumption and boldness in us, we
seeing by experience, yt superiors will not bear it at their hands, to be
controlled, no not in things unlawful or wicked (and then what a sin must
it be in us, to vsurp upon the Lord, who can appoint nothing but yt which is
good and lawful?) but also because it secretly accuses ye Lord as
insufficient in foresight, to determine or do, whatsoever he shall see to be
good for his own glory, and the benefit and behoof of those that belong unto
him.

Ver. 9. Teaches us two special things, first the whole church and every
particular member thereof, yt will unfeignedly come unto Christ, must utterly
remove from them all impediments and hindrances yt may hinder the^ in that
excellent race, casting away every thing that presses down, and the sin
that hangs fast on. Hebrews 12, mortyfiyng the old man continually, with the
lusts and concupiscences of the same, that so Christ may take delight and
pleasure to dwell in us.

Secondly, yt whatsoever graces we have, either outward, or inward we have the^
only from ye Lord by christ: who is not only the mean to convey the^ over unto
us, but to continue, increase and strengthen the same in us, for in him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Col. 2. 3 And of his fullness have
we received even grace for grace. Ioh. 1. 16. So that we may see hereby, that
not only preventing grace (as papists say) is his, but even all graces
subsequent or following the same. For what have we that we have not received.
1. Cor. 4. 7? Specially since we are not sufficient to think a good thought. 2.
Cor. 3. 5.

Verse. 10. Teaches us, that the thing we should esteem most precious, yea
pray and wish for, is the assured feeling of Gods favor and love toward us
in Christ. Of this some thing has bin said before. verse. 7. of this chapter:
And this is that also which our savior speaks in Luke unto his disciples:
Chapter. 10. 20. Rejoice not in this, that the spirits are subjected unto you,
but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven. Jeremy also
speaks excellentlye of it chap. 9, 23. 24. Let not the wiseman glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength etc: but let him that gloryeth,
glory in this that he understands and knows me says the Lord: For I am
the lord which show mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in
these things I delight. See also 1. Cor. 1. 31. Also 2: Cor. 10. 27. Secondly
that our love to the Lord, should be no cold affection, or some mean measure
of a good mind, but that it should be fervent, earnest, continual, and as a
man would say fyery to consume all lets either within us, or without us, that
might hinder us from expressing the sound affection that we carrye toward
the Lord Jesus. This does Christ notably express by sundry particulars.
Math. 10. 37. 38. But yet more plainlye in Luke chap. 14. 26. When he says, He
that hates not his father and mother, and wife and children, brethren and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, cannot be his disciple, but most
effectually in the abridgement of ye law. Luke 10. 27 Thou shall love the lord
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy thought, meaning that all that we have both inward and
outward, should be employed in and about, the unfeigned love of Gods majesty.

Verse. 11. Teaches us, that no fear or flattery of the adversaries, should
cause us to fall from ye holy love that we carry and ought always to carry to
Christ our head and savior. It is the nature of the wicked to assay, by
fawning and favor offered, to fetch that from us, that otherwise perhaps they
could not get from us, What soever they do, we must be resolute, being assured
of this, that as we will hold and defend nothing, but the Lords undoubted
truth, so we will again in nothing fear our adversaries, because that all
that they do, or can do against us, is to them a sure token of destruction,
but to us a pledge of salvation and life everlasting, and that from God.
Philip. 1. 28. Notable for the ouercomming of this assault, are the words of
the Apostle Paul, in the latter end of the eight to the Romans. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perrill or sword? As it is written:
for thy sake are we killed all day long, we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter: nevertheless in all these things, we are more then conquerours,
through him that loved us: for I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present nor things to
come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 35. 36. 37.
38. 39. In which words and names, ver. 35. 36. 37. the Apostle shows, that
no terror of the wicked, should cause him, or the rest of the faithful, to
fall away from a sound mind toward Christ, and in the other verses, vz, 38.
39. he declares that no show of good things offered being either present or
to co^^ should pull us from, or should pull from us, either that love, wherewith
God in his son Christ, has loved us, or wherewith we in some measure of a
sound mind, do affect and love him. Oh that men would duly regard these
things, that so they might come indeed, not only to the faith and feeling of
the same, but also to the sound obedience and performaunce thereof, that so God
might receive glory at their hands, their own souls might be saved in the
day of Christ, and other men be builded up by their examples to do the like.

The 8. and last Chapter and the sum thereof.
The old Church or Church of the Jews, consulteth with Christ her head and
spouse, concerning the calling of the Gentiles, declaring that it is one part
even of her spiritual joy, to see that they shall be chosen into Christ's
flock. verses 1. 2. 3. Christ again on the other side, sets out his
affection to the church, and wished still to be commended and praised of her,
verses 4. 5. 6. Which the Church taking even as it were out of his mouth, she
desires his continual presence, and favorable aid for ever.

1 WE have a little Sister and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our
sister, in the day wherein speech shall be had concerning her?

2 If a wall is to be builded, we will build in it, a palace of silver, and if
the gate is to be defended, we will fence it about with boordes of Cedar.

3 When I my self shall be as a wall, and my breasts like Towers, then shall I
be in his eyes, as one that finds peace.

4 Shelomoh has a vine in Baulhamon: he gave the vine it self, unto the
keepers: a man brings for the fruit thereof, a thousand pieces of silver.

5 My vineyard which is mine is before my face: to thee O Shelomoh a thousand,
and two hundred to them that keep the fruit thereof.

6 O thou that dwell in these gardens: the companions harkening unto thy
voice, cause me to hear.

7 Fly thou O my well-beloved, and be like unto the roe, or to the young heart,
upon the mountains of spices.


THe Church especially of the Jews, having before made mention of her
unfayned love toward Christ, as we may perceive by the latter end of the
other chapter, does now manifest the sound affection that she carries toward
him, even by an other circumstance, to wit that she takes wonderful care, for
the enlargement of the glory of her spouse, not only by deliberating, but also
after a sort wishing the calling of the church of the Gentiles, yea making as
you would say large and great offers, for the accomplishment of the same. Which
though indeed it did at that time most properlye belong unto the people of the
Jews, who in those days were in outward profession the only people of God,
it does now concern the whole church, who are the same now, because the
partition wall is taken away, that the Jews were, and ought to carry the same
sound mind toward them yt are not yet called, that the Jews did to the
Gentiles, that were then without, the Lord under the church of the Jews,
resembling no doubt, the congregations that should be gathered of all the
nations of the world, and by the Gentiles setting out such, as having not
heard the word, were yet notwithstanding in good time, by the ministerye of
the word and working of the spirit, to be effectually called to the Lord:
whereof of also this me thinks may seem to be a good reason, because yt as
the Lord will always have his church, upon the earth, so he will have yt means
continually used, not only that thereby, they that be converted, may be
strengthened, but also that others may by the same mean, be mightily
reclaymed: otherwise as Gods work should appear for a time, and his glory
manyfested in strengthening them: so his power should be hazarded and glory
also, yea the Church it self might quicklye come to an end in this life, if
there were not as a daily remoouing of some of them to eternal life, by the
means of death natural, to triumph with the rest that are gone before, so a
continual drawing of othersome thereon, by the exercises of the word, to
partake with the rest, in that spiritual warfare, that they are to undergo
in this life. And this I would have to be marked as good, profitable, and
necessary, both for the sense and doctrines of this chapter, specially for the
three first verses of it, that we may not be constrained hereafter, to repeat
the same again.

This chapter consists of three parts, or does especially propounde unto us
three things. The first point is as it were, a consultation of the old Church,
with her head and husband Christ, concerning the chosing and calling of the
Gentiles, into the self same state and condition of eternal grace and favor
with her: and this is contained in the three first ver of this chapter.

2 The second thing is, a notable manifestatio^ and declaration, of the sound
affection of our savior Christ toward the whole church consisting both of
Jews and Gentiles, or of all nations as you would say, this being set out
unto us, not only by commending the church, but by commending it, by comparing
it with Solomon's vineyard, yea by preferring it before the same, and by
stirring up the said church, to the holy duetye of praising him, from who^,
if he did not highly affect her, he would not desire that commendation, ver. 4.
5, 6.

3 The third thing is an earnest request or prayer, that the church being
moved with the love of her husband, and care to obey his commandments, makes
unto him for his continual presence, comfort, and assistance, to lead her and
to guide her, into all truth and weldoing, and this is contained in the 7. and
last ver. of this chapter.

Ver. 1. We have a little sister. She begins to propound the matter touching
the vocation and calling of the church of the Gentiles. When she says we, she
means it of Christ and her self. q. d. O husband and spouse, thou and I have
and by ye word sister, she understands ye church of the Gentiles: which she
calls her sister, and the sister of Christ Jesus also, because they have both
one common father, vz, the Lord, of whom is named the whole family, in heaven
and in earth. Ephesians. 3. 15. yet so yt we always observe this true and holy
distinction that Christ, especially as in regard of his Godhead, is the very
natural son of God indeed, whereas we are his sons and daughters, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, through adoption and grace Romans 8. 16. and 2. Cor. 6. 18.
in what respect further either ye whole church, or the particular churches of
Jews and Gentiles, may be called Christ's sister, or sister one of them to
another, see before chap. 7. 6. She adds that she is little, yt is not ripe
or grown to any greatness, or as a man would say, not come to the years of
marriage or mariageable (understand it always spiritually) because ye fullness
of ye time for their mariagees as you would say or calling was not come Gal. 4.
4. even til Christ him self was ascended, and had sent forth his Apostles,
giving the^ commission for that purpose. Mat. 28, 19. Mark. 16. 15. the
misterye whereof, though it were prophesied of long before, and even ye very
angels did after a sort, desire to behold ye accomplishment of it, yet was it
reserved to be made most manifest, and performed by ye Apostles in their days,
as appears 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. 12. And she has no breasts. This is added,
even to express her littlenes or smalnes as before: q. d. She is not yet
mariageable, or fit for Christ, no more then as a man would say, a very
young Damsel is sit for a man, because they are not apt to conceive, bring
forth, or nourish children, and even so was it with the Gentiles: for neither
were they fit for Christ, and to receive or embrace the Lord, because they
wanted that years and ripeness, that the Lord had appointed with him self for
them, as also the means whereby they should have come to it, for unto the Jews,
and not unto them then, was the adoption, the glory, the couenauntes, and the
service of God committed, Romans 9. 4. If any man will say, there were diverse of
them called, I answer that that was as a man would say, but the addition of
one day, or some small time, to a natural life, in respect of the fullness of
the age that they grew too afterward in Christ. See Ephesians. 4. 13. What shall
we do for our sister. The Church and Christ are brought in here, as it were a
man and a wife, or a brother and a sister, debating what were best to be done,
with their youngest children or kindred, and which way they might most labor
their preferment. We know by the practice of the world, that not only godly,
but natural brethren and sisters, will use all the means yt they can, for the
preferment and good bestowing of such of their kindred, as be unmatched. The
self same affection does the Church and Christ put upon them here, the better
to resemble the care and consultation yt they had, for the calling of the
church of the gentiles. In the day. She puts day a part of time, for ye
pre^^^ed and set time with God, whither it were month, year, etc. Wherein he
would accomplish the calling of the gentiles. Wherein speech shall be had
concerning her, that is, concerning her calling into the church, that so there
may be one sheepefold, even as there is indeed properly but one shepherd.
Ioh. 10. 16. and one church as there is but one head of the same Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. 5. 23. In effect in this interrogation or demand the church
means this much, q. d. When I shall propound thy word for the winning of the
gentiles, and thou shall give a notable increase unto the same effectuallye,
and enlarge it mightilye with wonderful blessings, in so much that the
mystery of that holy marriage, which was kept secret since the world began, but
shall now thorough the sovereign authority of the eternal God be declared
unto all nations. Romans 16. 25. 26, That so they may by faith be joined unto
thy body; then and at that time what shall we do for this our sister the
Church of the Gentiles? Hitherto reaches the question propounded as it were,
in the way of consultation or advise.

Verse. 2 If a wall is to be builded. This verse contains an answer unto the
former question, in which is set out unto us, yet metaphorically and under
figures, the resolution of Christ and his church, what they will do, and what
way they will take, when the fullness of the gentiles shall come in. And here
they are brought in, as men consulting and taking advise, to place and to plant
great store of people, and fearing that the rooms they have prepared, or the
city that they have appointed, will not be large enough to contein and hold
them, they say thus: if the old walls be to be razed and pulled down, and
new, to enclose a larger circuit of ground, for the intertainment of our
friends, be to be erected and set up, let us do it. We will build in it a
palace of silver: q. d. we will not only enlarge our walls for their sakes,
providing by that means things necessary and fit for them, but that they may
know they shall be indeed most heartily welcome unto us, they shall perceive that
as we our selves will spare no pains or cost, for their holy intertainment, so
they shall have al things that may indeed be delightful unto them. And all this
is done to draw on the Church of the Gentiles with willingness and speed to
come to the Lord. Silver is a precious thing as we know, and much set by
amongst men, but when they shall have it in such plenty, that palaces as a
man would say, shall be built with the same, that is strong and mighty to
draw. And that is the reason, why under such earthlye things of great delight,
the Lord sets out spiritual matters. See before chapter 6, 14. of the
Iuory Tower. Also Revel. 21. in the description of the heavenly Jerusalem. And
if the gate is to be defended, that is, the entrance that they must have, is
to be strengthened. We will fence it about, that is, make it strong and mighty
With bordes of Cedar, that is with things that shall last: for Cedar will not
rot or worm eat as Writers affirm: for the durablenesse whereof, see 2. Sam.
7. 2. 7. etc. The meaning is, that if they fear any thing to hinder their
entrance, or stand in doubt when they are entered, of some annoyaunce from
abroad, they shall not need either to fear or doubt, either the one or the
other for they shall have strong and pleasant walls, and mighty and durable
Gates safely to defend them. And as all this is done, to incite and provoke the
Gentiles, in some measure of a sound mind, to join them selves to the
Church, so it is not without cause, that he mencioneth both Walls and Gates,
notinge indeed thereby, that Gods favor to his Folcke shall be all in all
to them, more safelye defending them, then in the strong City. Psalm. 31. 21.
The meaning of this Verse is, that at what time the Church of the Gentiles
shall be called in (which indeed by reason of their infinite multitude,
could not be contained within the narrow Bounds of the City of JERUSALEM,
even as the Prophettes them selves Prophesied and foreshewed, of which you may
read Isaiah. 49. 20, And Zechariah 24. not within the bounds of Judea it
self, that then they shall be constrained by reason of such infinite number,
yea that they will be willing to, rather then the Gentiles should be
secluded, to bring in a new form, and order as it were of a city, yea to pull
down the old walls, and to set up new walls and new gates for the
enlargement thereof, for by the terms walls and gates, there is by the figure
Synecdoche, that is a part or parts put for the whole, meante the city, which
also is usual in the scriptures, See Psalm. 18. 29. Also Amos. 1. 7. And for
the word gate so taken, see Genes. 22. 17. Also Genes. 24. 60. Deutr. 16, 5,
All comes to this end, as though Christ should say, seeing the increase shall
be so great, we will imploye, even our common travail and pain together in
this building up of the whole church together.

Verse 3 When I my self shall be as a wall. The old church having before
declared her good mind, toward the church of the gentiles does not so stay
therein, that she neglects her self: but shows that howsoever she has
received as yet more graces from GOD, then the poor church of the gentlles
had, that yet notwithstanding there was much to be added unto her beauty and
strength, which also she did look should be performed to her, even by the
vocation of the gentiles: and that makes her also to add, And my breasts
like towers, that is fair and comely, by which allo she notes, that though
she were then to be discerned from the church of the gentiles, which as was
said before, had no Breasts, and she had some, yet there should be an
increase still of that comeliness and strength. Then shall I be in his eyes,
that is, in the judgment and accounte of Christ, For because that the
judgment of the eye, is in most things certain, and it is a notable
instrumente to conueyghe to our understanding the truth and certainty of
things, she puts therefore the eye for the Judgment that Christ shall
have of her. As one that finds peace, that is, very dear and precious, and
full of delight and contentment. For even as that man, that has lived in long
and great disquietnesse, seeking notwithstanding for peace, and finding it at
the length, has obtained his hearts delighte and joy, yea, that which he
prefers before all that he had: so was it and should it be with the
Church. All in effect is as much, as if the Church should say: when a
great company of the gentiles being joined together with me, shall grow up
together with them, and they with me, and so we both make but one City, I
shall not be far from that same quietness of Spirit and blessedness, for
which I travail so sore now. I do in deed persuade my self now, that I am
not only entering therinto, but have made some good proceedinges therein,
howbeit the time of my perfection and full strength therein, is not yet come.
Nigh it is in deed I confess, but when the time shall come, that I shall by
the glorious appearing of my spouse Christ, be taken up into the perfect
communion and fellowshippe of peace, then shall the marriage indeed be
thoroughly finished, and that is it, which in so many places of scripture, is
called the last day.

Verse. 4. Shelomoh has a vine in Baulhamon. Here begins the Second part
of this Chapter, which is Christ's speech to the Church Wheerin he does propound
two special things. First by comparing it to a vine, yea to a most excellent
vine, he shows how dear and precious the Church it self is unto him ver.
4. 5. Secondly, he provoke and stirs her up, to publishe his praise, and
the great graces that be in him, verse 6. Concerning the words. The vine is
commended in this verse, first by the person of the owner, to wit Solomon, who
if ever any man living, might have most excellent things, he above others
(as a man would say) might have them, both for the wonderful abundance of
his wealth, as also for the excellencye of his wit. Secondlye, it is
commended for the situation or place wherein it was, vz. Baalhamon: which if
we take as the proper name of a place, as some of the Hebrewe writers do, and
particularlye Alen Ezra: no doubt but it was famous, not only for good
Vyneyardes, but also for great store of the same, from which also as it
should seem, it took the name: for Hamon signifies, a multitude: and if Baal
may be interpreted, as Rabbi Shelomoh thinks it may, namelye to signifye a
plain: to which end he aleadgeth Joshua 12. 7. Of Baalgad, then no doubt
but it was so much the more plentiful, because playnes and Vale countries,
are most commonly accounted most Fruitful. But if we take it as a Nowne
appellatiue as we say, or common, and turn it as some do, and as also the
Word may well bear it in the Lord, of the multitude to wit of Wine,
meaning thereby as some also do render it, in a fruitful place, the sense
and meaning comes all to one, namelye, that the Vine is commended for the
fruitefulnesse of the place wherein it grew. He gave the Vine it self unto
thee keepers, That is, he let it forth to hyre, or for a Rent, to such
as should keep, Dress, prime, cut and trim the same.

A man, That is every one of those, that hired it, or all they together, for
so have you this word used in sundry places of scripture. see 1. Cor. 11. 28.
Brings for the fruit thereof, vz, that he has reaped and received from the
same, or for the rent thereof as we say. A thousand pieces of silver, that is a
very great sum, for he puts a number certain for an uncertain: some
read sickles, meaning no doubt common sickles which was half as much as the
sickles of the sanctuarye, and did amount as some suppose, to the value of our
twenty pence. He that lusts to see or read more of this matter, may view the
most learned annotations of M. Beza. upon Math. 17. 28. whatsoever it be this
is the third commendation attributed to the Vine, namely that it was hired or
let for a very great rent, which also is an argument of the great fruitfulnes
thereof: and in this verse is contained the first part of the comparison.

Ver. 5. My vineyard which is mine. He begins here to put down the second
part of his comparison, namely to show how much Christ's vineyard which is his
Church, differs from Solomon's, even as much as Christ who is greater then
Solomon. Mat. 12. 42. differs from him, and as much as spiritual things
exceed bodily. And this difference is not only noted in the word my vineyard,
but also in the words following. Which is mine. Christ by dubling the words,
nothing both the excellency and the certaintye of it, as we have sundry times
declared heretofore: q. d. It is an excellent vineyard, even as I my self, and
belongs to none other but to me alone: no man shall succeed me in this,
because he is the eternal Lord and heir of all things. Heb. 1. 2. and
therefore of the church also. Is before my face, yt is, I do continually look
upon it, and have an eye over it, or watch over it always for good, noting
not only his perpetual presence, in his church by this phrase, of which see
Math. 28. 19. but his continual dressing and pruning of the same (as the
husbandmen do vineyards) yt it may bring forth more fruit. See John. 15. 2.
And this is the second thing for which Christ's vine is preferred before
Solomon's, namelye because he is enforced to put over his, to the labor and
dressing of other men: but Christ does as it were, with his own hands, prune
and keep his own. To thee O Shelamoh a thousand, vz, pieces of silver or
common sickles do in right appertain, as a rent belonging to thee. And two
hundred, vz, pieces of silver or sickles, for all this must be repeated out of
the fourth verse. To them that keep the fruit thereof, that is, to them that
labor to dress it and make it fruitful. And all this is spoken by the way of
concessio^ or grau^ting. q. d. I yield to this that thy vineyarde is worth a
thousand sickles a year, yea I consent to more than that, that the laborers in
it, and the dressers of it, are worthy for their pains, to have over and
besides two hundredth pieces of silver, and yet for all that this vine of mine
shall far exceed the same, in the respects above mentioned. To be short: The
force of this reason, taken from comparison or the argument it self, is this
much in effect. King Solomon himself not for all his wit and wealth, though
he have a most fruitful vine, and such a one as yields excellent and good
store of wine, can not prune it, and dress it himself, or receive the whole
fruit of the same, but is feign to let it out unto others to dress (and this
is the sum and meaning of the forth verse) but as for I my self (says Christ)
I have a far more excellent and fruitful vine, having many branches in it,
(and every branch bearing many clusters of graps) than Solomo^s has grapes, as
a man would say: yea such care and love do I my self carry to this, as that I
will not let it out to others to dress it, nor suffer any thing of it to be
taken from me (which Solomon can not choose but grant to the dressers of his
vyneyarde) because I am always present with it and have mine eye over it
continually for good. And yet the truth and worthiness of this comparison may
the better appear, if we will well look, either into the persons, or the
things compared. Solomon must of necessity, by reason that he was a man and
weak, have others to labor for him, and to dress the vyneyarde to his use:
but Christ as the eternal God and head of his church needs none of those
aids: for though he use men as his Ministers, that is not done so much to
derogate from his power, who can without their helps work the salvation of
his elect, as for their weakness sake, he speaking unto them in persons
like to themselves, that so they might without fear as it were, embrace the
truethe. Besides, they that labor in Solomon's Vyneyarde, must because it was
worldly, be recompensed with a worldely wages, and eat as you would say,
part of that yt they traveled for: but neither CHRIST nor his ministers if
we should speak of them (but indeed we are not so much to weighe that in
this place) eats any bodily thing that comes from the Church, but he
gives them all their labor, and receives as a man would say, nothing in
comparison from them again. If any man list to pursue this further, he may,
so be keep himself always, within the compass of the place, and the
Analogye or Proportion of faith.

Verse. 6. O thou that dwell. After that CHRIST had extolled the
excellencye of this Vine, that is of his Church, he turns his speech unto
the same, giuinge her therebye as it were to understand, that all this he had
done, not only for her comfort but also for her instruction. For her comfort
in that she was so highly, yet truly commended. For her instruction, yt she
might learn thereby to extol him indeed and truth, that had been so liberal
in her commendation. In these gardens. Hemeaneth the particular Churches upon
the earth, in which the universal church is after a sort, resident and a
continual dweller, Christ yet notwithstanding having care, both over the
whole, and over every particular one, and pruning and dressing them with a
singular affection toward them, as appears by the particular churches
mentioned. Revel. 1. 2. 3. chapters. The companions harkening to thy voice,
caused me to hear, So it is word for word in the Hebrew text: but the meaning
is, make me known by setting abroad my praises to such as are thy companions
and fellows, and either harken to thy speeches, or should harken thereto. For
though by the word fellows or companions, there be principallye meant the
sound members of the church, and namely such as do willinglye submit them
selves to the word and discipline of God. Yet all men (because of our common
creation, and because of our one and common dwelling place, which is the earth)
may be understood thereby specially such as will not live, like hogs and
dogs (to whom we are not to give holy things, nor cast our pearls before
them, as Christ says Math. 7. 6.) but yield and give over their minds to
healthful and sound doctrine.

Verse. 7. Fly thou O my well-beloved. The third part of the chapter, wherein
howsoever the word flying, may seem to insynuate, as though the church wished
the remoouing of Christ: yet does she rather thereby note, the speedye approach
of Christ toward her, even as they that go to things they take delight in,
do run rather than go, or as we would say fly. And be like unto the roe,
or to the young heart. To the end that she may the better express the speed or
swiftness, that she would have Christ to use in coming toward her, she
uses this dubble symilitude. For the swiftnes of these creatures, see yt which
is written. Psalm. 18. 33. To which end also tends the word young, because
they are far more lustye and fresh than when they grow to greater years.
Upon the mountains of spices. If we refer this as some do, to the roe, and
young heart, then it means most pleasant hills or mountains: but if we
refer it to Christ, as indeed I take that to be the most true sense. q. d.
thou that art in the mountains of spices, then it signifies heaven, the same
being resembled unto us (which otherwise can not be expressed) by things of
greatest sweetness and delight in this life. Neither is it besides the
purpose, that he speaks of spices in the plural number, by which he notes
not only the excellency of heavenly joys, but the wonderful variety and store
of them, there being more joys there by thousands of degrees, then there is
or can be in the mountains, that are best stored with all kinds of most
precious and sweet things. In sum, this is the meaning of this verse, that
the church embracing Christ's commandment, touching the publishing and
spreading abroad of his name: and knowing how hard a thing it is to perform
that duetye, as well by reason of the excellency of the matter it self, as
also by reason of the great difficulties and dangers that are on the earth,
for the doing thereof, both sue for his present aid and continual presence to
lead her and to guide her to the performaunce of that, and all other holy
duties whatsoever: as though the church should say, I am utterly determined
to do the things thou do command me: only I beseech thee to be present
with me, and not only to make me see and know the things commanded, but also
give me strength to accomplish the same: yea make (...) I pray thee, by thy
glorious coming to (...) me, and every sound member of my body* (...) thy
gracious promises, and specially eternal life. See the like conclusion or
shutting (...) Revel* 22. 20. in these words: Even so, come Lord Jesus. Which
words the church both their and here utters, not as prescribing unto Christ
a time (for yt were intolerable pride, thrusting themselves into Gods office,
who has set a day, wherein he will, in the person of his son judge all
flesh) but to show the earnest desire, that they have to cease from sin, to
be delivered out of the manifold miseries of this present evil world, and to
be made perfect partakers of eternal life and blessedness, joined perpetually
with their head and Savior Christ.

Verse. 1. In the care of the old church, for the calling of the Gentiles, not
only whole churches are taught, what they should do for the reclayming of
them that are without, appertayning notwithstanding unto Gods kingdom of grace
and glory: but also what particular persons should strive too in the like
behalf. Paul longed after all the church of Philippi, and that from the very
heart root in Jesus Christ. For the more evident declaration of which scunde
love of his toward them, he calls God to record as it were, against his
own soul, that he did not dallye or dissemble with them* Phillip. 1. 8. where
is that careful affection to be ^^und amongst men* Nay, where is any
meas^re of a sound mind? That cursed canker of self love, has utterly
consumed and eaten up the same. For even as we see, that in worldly things and
states, no man regards either the common wealth, or the good of an other: so
has God made us to behold (but yet in his fearful judgment, as the
punishment of our former sin) that no man cares either for the thriuing of
the whole church, at hoame or abroad, or for the furtheraunce of the salvation
of particular people or brethren.

Verse. 2. Teaches us, to spare no pains or cost, for the winning of men unto
God, and for the enlargement of the kingdom of Christ upon earth. Our goods,
yea our lives should not be dear unto us in this behalf. And this matter of
action indeed, the holy Ghost does add to the former care and affection, as a
notable note to discern, who are in truth soundly affected to Gods glory, and
the furtherance and flourishing of his church. Youshal have many will by words,
make a goodly show of a ready mind, and if it go no further the^ speech, none
more forward than they but when it comes to justify their words by their
deeds, then men shall find them, (and therefore much more the Lord) to be
miserable stinckers away and starters aside. If S. John say, that whosoever
has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need and yet shuts up
his compassion from him, has not the love of God dwelling in him. John. 3. 17.
how much more may we safely conclude, that he is utterly vayde of a sound mind
to God and men also, that will hazard either the souls of men, or the while
church, for the sparing of his own pelf? Because the question is not now, of
the body only, or of one particular person, but of the soul also, yea the
souls of many for whom Christ has dyed, and the state of the church of God.

Verse. 3. Teaches us, so to perform the duties prescribed in the former
verses, that is in care and conscience, to advance and promote the good estate
of the whole church, and the salvation of every particular member thereof, that
we do not, either in curiousnes toward other. or in carlesnes toward our
selves neglect Gods graces offered and bestowed upon us. No doubt, but the
holy Ghost, was well acquainted, both with man's corruption, and satan's malice
toward him: all which tend, as in all other things, so particularly in this,
to bring us, to two dangerous and desperate extremes. If he can not cause us in
curiousness toward other men, to neglect our selves then he will labor, by
care for our selves, to neglect our brethren and to make little account of
them. But we see a right raze or course delivered us here, according to which
if we sail no doubt, but we shall escape, those same fearful, dangerous and
deadly gulfes.

Ver. 4. Teaches us, that Princes and mighty men of the earth, may well and
lawfully have, even as it were the best things of the world or land wherein
they dwell, which also me thinks may appear by this, that the Lord has
advanced them, to the highest and best place amongst men, and therefore good
reason that they should have all things in, in some measure of proportion
answering to their states and callinges. Always provided yt they come not by
it by injurious means or oppression, as Ahab did, by Naboths vineyard. 1.
King. 21: or use it as a mean, to grow either in pride or forgetfulness toward
God, as Nebuchadnezzer did. Isaiah. 14. 12. 13 etc. Dan. 4. 27
a thing also which god has forbidden, Deuteronomy. 6. 12: or in presumption and
tyranny over the people. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. but yt they refer it to Gods glory,
the giver thereof, the good of his people, for whose sake God bestows it upon
the^, and the salvation of their own souls, in the sanctified use thereof,
they being led thereby, as it were by the hand, to heaven and heavenly things,
since it pleases the Lord by such to resemble unto us, spiritual and heavenly
graces.

Verse. 5. Containing an excellent description of the church, and the continual
care of Christ over it, does teach us two profitable lessons: the first that we
should continually love the church, which is so excellent, that howsoever
earthly things be used to express the same, yet no one thing, nor all the
things together of the earth can sufficiently resemble it, or paint it out
unto us: the reason is, because worldly things are earthlye only, and
subject unto our human senses: but the Church is spiritual, and to be
discerned by faith: for howsoever it be upon the earth, yet it is not earthlye,
and though it be visible, yet not so much visible to the outward eye of the
body, (though that may be a mean many times to direct us to ye places of ye
churches assembly) as to the eye of faith, which must indeed discern it even as
in respect of the outward marks, to wit, the pure preaching of the word, the
sincere administration of the sacraments, and the faithful execution of
Christ's holy discipline: which though they be outward, yet are they spiritual,
and must be also spiritually discerned or known. The second, that we should
always labor to ioin our selves to it, and never to fear the faces or forces of
the wicked yt persecute the same, because Christ continuallye watches over it
for good: who we know is greater then all, who also has made us such promises,
yt the gates of hell, shall not preuayl against it: Mat. 16. 18. and therefore
no reason but we should be encouraged: for if satan with all his hellish power,
cannot preuail, what shall the wicked of the earth do, who are not, either so
mighty in power, or so many in number, or so deep in subtilty, or any way, no
not in malice matchable which them, though I doubt not, but the hatred and
cruelty of the wicked, is furious as the fire to consume, and outrageous as the
hell or grave to eat up all, if they could have it?

Verse. 6. Teaches us by all means possible to extol and praise Christ, and to
endeavor, even to our vttermoste, to have his truth known amongst all the
people and nations of the world, if it were possible. The perfourmaunce of
which duty is not only acceptable before God, who has commanded the same,
but is profitable to the church, as who by that means is brought to the
creator and father thereof, yea is comfortable to our selves while we feel
thereby yt we are sound members of that holy body, both in that we our selves
grow up in the same, and would gladly have others to do the like. In what
miserable taking then are they, yt either have no care at all to pull on men to
Christ, or else discourage them, from drawing nigh unto him, by setting before
them affliction, persecutions, etc. Or else pervert them, infecting and
poisoning their souls, with false doctrine.

Verse 7 Teaches us many good lessons. First it sets out the weakness of
man, yea and yt of yt sort of men which are ranged into the church, and
therefore have regeneration begun in them, to accomplish and perform the good
things of God. Which is not only profitable for confutation of the Pelagians
and free will men, but also forcible, to beat down, yt high conceit yt we
carry, of our own wits, wills, and strength: against which see Genes. 6. 5.
Psalm. 14. 1. 2. 3. etc. Ioh. 15. 5. Romans 7. 18. etc. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Phi. 2. 13.
Secondly it shows us what we should do in these wants, namely run unto God,
by earnest and heartye prayers: for our better encouragement, wherein we have
Gods commandment, by which we know, yt that duty performed in faith and
repentance, is acceptable before him, and his promise also, by which we are
assured that if we believe we shall have our petitions granted. See James 1, 5.
6. But alas what do we in these cases, either we pray very faintly, and
forsake not our sins, or else we neglect prayer altogether, and seek some
odd worldly shifts, or else run ragingly to some one mischeef or another, and
so ad drunkenness unto thirst, and sin unto sin, to the great displeasure of
almightye God, and wounding of our own souls. Thirdly, that though we live in
this life, and pray for Gods graces necessary to pass our pilgrimage to his
glory, and our comfort: that yet we must always remember eternal life, and to
say, Thy kingdom come. For we have not here an abiding city, but look for a
building that is eternal in the heavens. 2. Cor. 5. 1. And that not so much
for any worldly grief that we endure here, as yt having al tears wiped from
our eyes, we may not only cease to sin, but also be continually occupied in
weldoing, and made partakers of eternal blessedness, with yt rest of the
believers in heaven, whither Christ is gone before to prepare a place for us,
yt where he is as the head there might we be as the members: which the Lord
bring to pass, and that with speed, according to his good pleasure, even for
his crucified Christ's sake. So be it.


