THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH, HANDLED IN FOUR SEVERAL BOOKS OR TREATISES.

The first of which entreats of the day of rest. The second, of the duties of
the day. The third, of the persons whom these duties concern. And the fourth,
the reasons used to persuade all persons to the practice of these duties upon
that day.
Written by G. W. Master of Arts, and Minister of the word of God in Portsmouth.

Isaiah 58. 13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing
thy will on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it, as
glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, nor doing thine own ways, nor
seeking thine own will, or speaking a vain word,

Then shall thou delight in the Lord* and I will cause thee to mount upon the
hie places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iaakob thy father:
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

BY WISDOM PEACE

BY PEACE PLENTY



LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster
row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES BLVNT, Earl of Devonshire, Lord Mounioy,
Lieutenant general of Ireland, Master of the Ordinance, Governor and Captain
general of the town and Garrison of Portsmouth, and the I Will of Portsey, Knight
of the noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Council.
RIght Honorable, and by right most worthy to be honorable, because deserts
have made you truly honorable. The wisest has said it, that much reading
Eccl. 12. 22.
is a wearisomnes unto the flesh. And therefore in this scribbling age, wherein
presses be oppressed with the number of books without number, it may seem a
thing not meet any more to write, unless for the sufficiency of the work it
might be in steed of all other writings, and so the reader might be eased of
the labor of much reading. Notwithstanding, by the iustnes of the cause, which
I neither might if I could (because it is just) nor could if I might (having in
a public assembly taught it) forsake: I have been drawn to publish this
treatise; that what I have taught, may here be made more fully to appear to
any that is otherways minded.

Now whereas it may seem over great boldness for me to press your Honor with
these my labors, that are already over pressed with your own (if yet they
may be said to be yours, and not rather the labors of the Church and
Commonweal) yet I have presumed to do it upon these two reasons: First, in
respect of the cause which I manage. Secondly, in respect of my duty unto your
Honor. And first in respect of the cause, the Sabbath being a principal
means whereby the seed of religion is sown in our hearts, and the holy fire
as it were is kept in amongst us. It being assailed by adversaries of diverse
sorts, to whom should it flee as unto a Sanctuary for succor, rather than
unto your Honor? who have already taken home unto your honorable family the
truth, like as the beloved Disciple did the Ioh. 19. 27.
mother of Jesus, being recommended unto his care. Yea being your Honor have
not alone taken home the truth, but also publicly in the highest and
solemnest assembly of this land undertaken the maintenance and the defense of
the same truth against the common adversary the Papist. In regard whereof, as
the ear that heard you, blessed you; and the eye that sees Job. 29. 11.
you, gives witness unto you, and the hearts of all well affected Christians
(to whom the report thereof has come) applaude it, shouting and crying as in
the Prophet, Grace, grace unto it. So could I joining in Zach 4. 7.
heart and affection with them, do no less than testify the same by
presenting these my labors unto your Honor, to whom of right they appertain,
as a part of that truth which is undertaken by your Honor, but gainsaid by
these adversaries. For first, they hold the Sabbath Rhem. in annot. in Mat. 15
sect. 3. Rhem. annot. in Reu. cap. 1. sect. 6.
to be but a tradition. Secondly, the alteration of the day to be without
scripture or commandment, yea plainly otherwise than prescribed by God
himself in the 2. Commandment: (for so it pleases them to term this fourth
commandment.) Thirdly, the rest but perfunctorie and slight: for they allow
such works to be done upon the Sabbath, as shall be permitted by their
Prelates, that is, such as please Bellar. lib. 10. de cultu imag.
themselves, or such as by custom (which ever declineth) have prevailed. And
lastly, the holiness of the day to consist in coming to shrift, and hearing
of Catechis. Romans quaest. 21. de Sabbath.
Mass. Against all which falsehoods, this truth of the doctrine of the Sabbath
flies unto your Honor for patronage, and after a sort makes supplication
unto your Honor to be a means, that as by the Kings most excellent Majesty's
proclamation it has already, so by law it may further be provided for: at
least, vt ne quid Sabbathum detrimenti capiat, for Gods laws to many are but
as cobwebs to the great flies, which they easily break, without they be
strengthened by the Princes laws, as with other nerves and sinews: for want
of which we see that the Sabbath, the best day of seven, is more profaned in
most places, than all the other seven, as though God had made it to be
profaned, and not to be kept holy. And this in respect of the cause.

Now in respect of my self also I could do no less: for being embarked in
that ship, whereof your Lordship under the Kings most excellent Majesty as the
master Pilot holds the helm, I mean your Lordships garrison town of
Portsmouth, and succeeding others a teacher in that Lecture whereinto your
Lordship first breathed life, I could do no less than in duty present these
firstlings of my labors unto your Honor: especially having already received
favors from your honorable self, as also no small encouragements from Sir
Benjamin Berry, and Master Anthony Ersf^eld.
these your Lordships worthies and notable instruments of government in that
place. So that I thank my God, upon the point of whose providence I have
always steered on my course, I may most truly say that of them (my conscience
bearing me witness that I lie not) which once Tertullus spoke with another
mind of Felix, that by them we have received these two benefits, great
quietness, and many worthy things have been Act. 24. 2.
done unto us, only that which follows wholly and alone appertains unto
your Honor, that this is wholly by your providence. And therefore should not I,
as in particular for my self, or as the mouth of many others, wholly
acknowledge it, we might yet be more ungrateful unto your Honor, than
Tertullus to Felix.

By these reasons therefore (right Honorable) I being lead, have presumed to
approach so near unto your Honor, as to put forth these my labors under the
liuerie of your honorable favor. Wherein although there be nothing answerable
unto your greatness, yet if, as the finger serves to point unto the Sun, and
the juice of a Limmon to ingraue as well as Aqua fortis, so this may serve to
point unto that which I would, but cannot attain unto sufficiently to make
known your Honors worthiness, and something to express the thankfulness of
my heart, I wanting better means to utter it, I shall think my self not to
have attained the lowest degree of happiness in my low estate.

And thus humbly craving of your Honor pardon for my boldness, I cease any
further to interrupt you from your waightier affairs: yet not ceasing in my
best wishes upon my knees to pray unto that God, who is good without quality,
great without quantity, infinite without place, and everlasting without time,
that he would long preserve your Honor amongst us, that the Prince may long
enjoy you such a subject, the Commonwealth such a Counselor, the Church such
a stay, the truth such a Champion, the soldier such a Leader, and learning
such a Patron; and after this life here ended, there to enjoy with him another
that never shall have end.

Your Honors in all duty most bounden, GEORGE WIDLEY.

A TABLE OF ALL SVCH THINGS AS ARE contained in the several chapters of every
book.
The first book.
CHAP. I.
HOw the whole law is distributed. page 1. 2 How the first table has reasons
annexed which the second for the most part wants. page 3 What force these
reasons of the fourth Commandment have to persuade us to obedience. 4 What
things this Commandment contains in it in special above the rest. 6 How
this fourth Commandment is analyzed or divided. 6
CHAP. II.
How many sorts of Sabbaths there were among the Jews. 7 How the moral and
ceremonial Sabbaths differ. 8 What use the ceremonies had unto the Jews. 10
Whether the Sabbath be perpetual. 13
CHAP. III.
The time of the Sabbath or rest changed. 31 To what day it was changed. 37 Why
the time of the Sabbath was changed. 38 Whether it may be changed again. 53
Whether we may still call it the Sabbath. 52 Whether by the Lords day, Reave. 1.
10. be meant our Sabbath or day of rest. 43 Objections against the Sabbath
answered. 46
CHAP. IIII.
Whether the whole day natural be to bekept. 57 How the night is to be kept.
60 When the Sabbath begins and ends. 61
The second book.
CHAP. I.
That we must prepare our selves to sanctify the Sabbath, and why. 63 Wherein
this preparation does consist. 68. 69
CHAP. II.
Rest commanded. 72 This rest must be a solemn rest. 73 What works are
forbidden to be done upon the Sabbath. 74. 75. 76. 77 What works be allowed to
be done upon the Sab. 90. 91. 92. 93 With what cautions works of necessity
must be done. 95
CHAP. III.
Whether recreations may be allowed upon the Sabbath. 98 Whether pastimes, as
dancing, etc. upon the Sabbath may be allowed. 102 Whether the Sabbath may be
broken by our speech. 113 Whether it may be broken in thought. 118 Whether a
man may do the things commanded to be done upon the Sabbath, and yet break
the Sabbath. 117
CHAP. IIII.
Whether the rest of the Sabbath must be sanctified. 119. and how. 120 What
these duties are which be required to the sanctity of the Sabbath. 123 Whether
we be enjoined to come to the public assembly upon the Sabbath. 224. and how
to demean our selves there. 126. 127. 128 Whether the word must be preached
upon the Sabbath. 130 Whether the people be bound to hear it upon the Sab. 132
Objections to the contrary, answered. ibid. Whether the Sacraments and
discipline be duties of the Sabbath. 136. 137
CHAP. V.
Duties both public and private to be done upon the Sabbath, as first prayer.
138. 139 Reading of the Scriptures. 141 Singing of Psalms. 144 Catechism. 145
Works of mercy. 149
CHAP. VI.
Private duties upon the Sabbath, which are meditation. 152 Conference. 156
Sloth, pride, dumme Ministry, lets to the sanctification of the Sabbath. 150.
161
The third book.
CHAP. I.
Whether every man is bound in his own person to keep the Sabbath. 164
Whether every man be bound to see those that are under him to keep the
Sabbath. 166 Whether the father be bound to see that the son keep the
Sabbath. 169 Whether the master be bound to see that the servant keep the
Sabbath. 171
CHAP. II.
Whether we be bound to see that our cattle rest upon the Sabbath, and why.
177 Whether we be bound to see that the stranger rest, that is, within our
gates, and why. 179 Whether every man be bound to hinder the iustruments of
evil. 182 Whether we be bound to labor to bring others to the knowledge of
God, 186 Whether toleration of a false religion may not be suffered. 186
Whether the governors be bound to compel Idolaters to worship the true God.
190
The fourth book.
CHAP. I.
In what manner the first reason of this Commandment persuades to the keeping
of the Sabbath. 195. 196. 197 Whether all Gods commandments are grounded upon
reason. 199 Whether it be sin not to dispatch our worldly business upon the
six days. 200 Whether it be not lawful upon any of the six days to use
recreation for the health of the body. 203 Whether a man may consecrate any
one or more of the six days to Gods service. 206
CHAP. II.
How the second reason of this commandment persuades to the keeping of the
Sabbath. 208 How God is our Lord, and how he is our God, and what we thence
learn. 209. 211 To whom we must consecrate days. 215
CHAP. III.
How the third reason persuades us to keep the Sab. 216 How far we are to
follow examples. 217 Wherein we are to imitate God, and wherein not. 221 How
God may be said to rest, and the use of the words. 222
CHAP. IIII.
How the fourth reason here brought persuades to the keekeeping of the
Sabbath. 228 What it is to bless and ballow the Sabbath, namely, to bless the
keepers of it. 219 Whether the breakers be accursed. 219
The end of the Table.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH, HANDLED IN FOUR BOOKS.
THE FIRST BOOK, TREAting of the Sabbath day.
CHAP. I.
The distribution of the whole law, Sect. 1. The Commandments of the first
Table have their reasons annexed, Sect. 2. The reasons annexed to the fourth
Commandment, Sect. 3. The contents of the fourth Commandment, Sect. 4. The
analysis of it, Sect. 5.

The distribution of the whole law.
of man's memory abridged by God himself in those ten words, which he spoke
on the Mount Sinai, and writ in two tables of stone, as it were in a book of
two leaves. In the first leaf whereof, is written the duty of man to God,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God: and this Christ calls the first and great
commandment. And in the second (because God will not be loved alone, but will
have man also loved with him) is written the duty of man to man, Thou shall
l^ue thy neighbor as thy self. Now in the first of these, which teaches man's
duty to God, are contained four commandments. The first whereof teaches
Gods inward worship: the second, his outward worship: the third, the reverent
use of them both: and the fourth, the time when his worship is especially to be
performed. And in the second table are contained six commandments; in the
first whereof are taught special duties; and these mutual, as of the
superior to the inferior; and of the inferior to the superior; in these
words, Honor thy father and thy mother. In the other five are contained
general duties. And first, because life is the ground of all the rest;
therefore in the f^rst of them, which is the sixth, he takes order for the
preservation of life. Thou shall not kill: Secondly, because as life must be
perserued, so he would have us live an honest life. Therefore he gives a
commandment for that, Thou shall not commit adultery. Then thirdly, because
an honest life must be honestly maintained, God takes order for that also, he
will have no stealing, Thou shall not steal. And as he has taken order for
our goods, so also for our good names: he will have no false witness borne,
Thou shall not bear false witness. And last of all, because as when we see
many pipes and conduits infected, we go to the fountain, because from thence
comes the corruption: so sin being conueighed by the heart, as water by the
pipes from the fountain; because from the heart come evil thoughts (for it is
indeed the very puddle and sink of all sin) God therefore gives us a
commandment, to keep us from the first motions and ticklings of sin,
although neither heart consent, nor deed follow; In these words, Thou shall not
covet. And this is the general strain of these ten words, as Moses calls
them, Deuteronomy. 4. 13: upon which hang the whole law and the Prophets, Matthew. 22.
40.

All the commandement^ of the first table have their reasons added, so have not
these of the second, except the first.
in with many reasons: The others are barely set down without any reasons
added: whereof I take this to be the cause: for that these of the second table
are such things, as even a natural man in a sort consents easily unto. For
say unto him, Thou shall not kill: content (says he) for then shall no man
kill me. Thou shall not commit adultery: agreed (says he) for then shall not
my wife or daughter be defiled. Thou shall not steal: I like it well (says
he) for then I shall keep my goods; and so of the rest. But come unto the
commandments of the first table, it is not so: here is more ado to persuade
men to obedience. Must we love God above all? We love pleasures more than God,
2. Tim. 3. 4. Must we serve God as he requires in his word? We will not serve
him but as we please; as those 2. King. 17. 41. that feared the Lord and served
their images also. Must his worship be done with reverence? that is
precisenes. Must we serve him on the Sabbath? why when shall we play then? God
seeing this our perverseness in things concerning him; uses reasons, and those
most effectual to persuade us unto the obedience of them, they being such
things as a natural man does not easily admit.

The reasons of this commandment of great force to persuade.
persuade by, than in this: it needing indeed greater fortification than any of
the rest, because the assault against it is stronger than against any of the
rest. For the devil has stirred up some that deny that there should be any
Sabbath at all; but that every time should be alike. Others acknowledge a time,
but cannot agree upon the day. Others confess the day; but yet deny that the
whole day should be kept holy: God shall have but one hour, or two of the day.
And we are almost of the Jews mind, the time is not yet come, Hag. 1. it is
too soon to go to Church, too soon to hear, too soon to pray. In regard of
which slacknes of ours, he uses four reasons, all of great moment to persuade
us. And first because he knows that nothing will persuade so well with us as
a benefit: therefore in the first he gives thee six days to keep one: where
if he should command thee to keep six days and give thee but one, thou
ought to have done it for that ones sake: how much more then since he has
given thee six days to keep one? Secondly, lest It is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. And will thou then withhold the right from the owners thereof?
Prou. 3. 27. Or, as the Apostle reasons, shall I take the members of Christ,
and make them the members of an harlot: so, will thou take the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God, and make it the Devils Sabbath? which if thou keep not unto
the Lord, thou keep unto the Devil; as the Idolaters that sacrificed unto
their Idols, sacrificed unto the Devils, 1. Cor. 10. 20. Thirdly, lest thou
should say that for he kept it holy. And therefore as Abimelech said, What
ye see me to do, do ye the like: so what you have seen God to do, do ye the
like. Lastly, if Gods blessing rests upon them that keep it.

than in any of the rest. For first if you What things this commandment
contains in it in special.
watch as it were in the gate, which all the rest of the commandments want,
though never so orderly set down; Remember (says he) the Sabbath. As if he
should say, think on this day before hand, and prepare thy self before it come:
for thou art forgetful that there is any difference betwixt this and other
days; therefore (says he) remember. This is as it were the first stake.
Secondly, he what works are forbidden upon this day to be done, but also unto
whom, and why. Thirdly, least thou God himself did keep it. A rare example
and a thing that he specisies not in any of the rest, nor scarce again in the
whole Scripture: so that in these three things this commandment is alone; and
neither these nor the like things may be found in any of the rest expressed.
You must think God had a meaning in it, and what else can it be, but that he
would have this commandment understood and remembered, as being most necessary
for us to know? because upon this day we are taught how to walk in the
obedience of all the rest. Which that we may the better attain unto, let us
see what things offer themselves in this commandment to be examined and
considered of.

CHAP. II.
The diverse kinds of Sabbaths, Sect. 1. The difference betwixt the moral and
the ceremonial Sabbaths, Sect. 2. The use of the ceremonies to the Jews,
Sect. 3. That the Sabbath is perpetual, Sect. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Arguments
to the contrary answered, Sect. 11. and 12.

How many sorts of Sabbaths there were amongst the Jews.
We are to consider, that amongst the Jews there were two kinds of Sabbaths:
one of years, another of days. That of years was every seventh year, in
which they might not sow their land, but let it rest: or every seven times
seven years, which was the year of Iubile: in which bondmen went out free,
and alienated possessions returned again unto the owners, Leuit. 25. 10. Of
these Sabbath of years we intend in this place no further discourse, we come
therefore unto that other part of the division, namely the Sabbath of days. And
here again I must distinguish: for the Sabbath of days was also twofold;
ceremonial, and moral. Now of the first sort were all the Sabbaths that were
instituted by Moses in the ceremonial law: such as were the Passover,
Pentecost, the new Moon, and the feast of Tabernacles; which, Leuit. 23. are
called Sabbaths. Of the second sort, which we call moral, is that Sabbath
which is commanded in the Decalogue or ten Commandments: of which here in
this treatise our purpose is to write.

Moses Leuit. 23. 37, 38 points at: where The difference betwixt the moral
and the ceremonial Sabbaths.
having spoken before in the chapter both of this Sabbath and of those feasts
before named, he concludes his speech of the feasts thus: These are (says
he) the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall call holy conuocations, etc. besides
the Sabbath of the Lord, that is, besides those Sabbaths which they were to
keep every seventh day. Now the difference was: First, this moral Sabbath God
himself spoke it immediately, Exodus 20. 1. and afterward writ it in tables of
stone with his own finger, Deuteronomy. 9. 10. and therefore Exodus 32. 16. these
tables are said to be the work of God, and this writing to be the writing of
God engraven in the tables. And this he writ not once, but when the tables were
broken, he wrote in the second time, Exodus 34. 1. And lest any man should say,
that God also spoke and writ the rest when Moses Deuteronomy. 5. 22. had rehearsed the
ten Commandments unto the Israelites, he adds that all these words God
spoke, and added no more, but wrote them upon two tables, and when he had
written them, as appears Deuteronomy. 4. 13, 14. he commanded Moses at the same
time that he should teach them ordinances and laws, which they should observe
in the land which they went to possess. So that this is manifest that the
Decalogue or ten words was only spoken and written by God; but all the rest
added by Moses, which is the first difference. Secondly, this moral Sabbath
was more ancient. For it had his institution, as appears Genesis 2. 2, the very
next day after man's creation: yea and his observation together with his
institution: for God himself rested upon it, where as those ceremonial
Sabbaths took their beginning but from Moses. Thirdly, it was also more holy:
for where as upon this day it was not lawful for the Jews to dress their
meat, Exodus 16. 23. nor to kindle a fire, Exodus 35. 3. upon these ceremonial
Sabbaths, it was permitted unto them to do it, Exodus 12. 16. And lastly, it
was more durable: for the covenant of the moral Sabbath was an everlasting
covenant, Exodus 31. 16. as also shall anon further appear: whereas the other
was but a vanishing shadow, and to last but unto the coming of Christ: for it
was foretold by Daniel, that the Messiah should cause the sacrifice to cease,
Dan. 9. 27. And that the Jews knew well enough, in that John being demanded
by them what he was, and denying that he was either the Christ, or Elias, or
any of the Prophets. They demanded again of him why he did then baptize:
thereby intimating yt unless he were one of these, he might change nothing in
the Law: wherein they secretly granted that these might do it. And as the
Messiah had authority in himself to change the ceremonial law of Moses, so
might he also change these ceremonial Sabbaths; they being a part of that law
which was ceremonial; which also he did. And therefore says the Apostle, Let
no man condemn you in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbaths: which were but a shadow of things to come, namely of our eternal
rest in heaven, which we obtain by faith in Christ. Which Sabbath the Jews
thought did shadow out only their rest in Canaan: but the Apostle Heb. 4. verse.
8. confuteth them, for (says he) if Jesus (that is Joshua) had given them rest,
then David would not after that day have spoken of another rest; saying, that
God swear in his wrath that the unbelieving should not enter into his rest, for
their unbelief sake: yet this rest in heaven remains now unto the children
of God, that is, to the believers; although the shadows thereof be done away,
the body which is Christ, being come.

The use of ceremonies unto the Jews.
under the pedagogie of the law: and to this end he provided diverse outward
ceremonies representative, that might be always before their eyes: to put
them in remembrance of the inward graces signified and represented by them.
Insomuch that whither soever they did cast their eyes, there was something to
teach them. For if they looked upon their bodies, then circumcision offered it
self; if upon the couerings of their bodies, the fringes taught them; if upon
their tables, there was choice of meats; if they came into their houses, the
Law was written upon the lintles of their doors; if they went into the fields,
there were the first fruits; if unto their flocks, there were the first borne
to be redeemed; if they brought forth children, then the first begotten; if
they thought upon the times, there were also remembrances for them. In the
week, the seventh day; in the month, the first day; and in the year the
seventh, and the fiftith were to be kept holy: but if they came into the
Temple, then the shadows were in number without number, there was the Altar,
the sacrifice, the veil, the mercy seat, and a number such like which did
most lively shadow out Christ unto them. For in all these ceremonies Moses
wrote of him, Ioh. 5. 46. but now all these shadows are ended: for the body
which is Christ is come. And he has taken them away, and therefore now we
must not any more be lead as children, but as men of a riper age. For if we
should yet hold these things, it were to be feared that the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel that have trodden in their footings, had bestowed their
labor upon us in vain, Galat. 4. These feasts therefore and ceremonial
rites, and ritely ceremonies, the date of them being out long ago, the
writings razed, and the seals cancelled; we intend not to spend any longer
time in the survey of them.

Sabbaths to entreat of that Sabbath which is moral: which is here commanded
in the Decalogue to be kept holy. For of this only is mention made in this
place, and not of the other Sabbaths. Therefore the Lord says, Remember the
Sabbath, speaking of one: and not, remember the Sabbaths, as intending to
establish and perpetuate many by his command. And that he means this moral
Sabbath, appears by the reasons; where he shows that it was that Sabbath
which was to be kept one day of seven. Indeed I confess that the other
Sabbaths were here by a figure called Synecdoche inclusiuelie commanded, so
long as the ceremonial law continued: even as in the second commandment were
also commanded all the ceremonies in Gods outward worship, so long as the
ceremonial law was to continue: but when there was another kind of outward
worship instituted, the former fell away; and yet the second commandment
continued a lasting precept even unto us for ever: so also might these
ceremonial Sabbaths, for the time they lasted, be here in the fourth precept
commanded: and yet when the ceremonies were to have an end, they were to
determine with the ceremonies: the commandment notwithstanding to remain for
ever; and as effectually and fully to command these other times that should
afterward be appointed by Christ or his Apostles in the steed of the
Sabbaths, as ever it did command the former.

That the Sabbath is perpetual.
that therefore the Sabbath is also perpetual. Now that it is here commanded,
and is a part of this moral law, I think no man will be so blunt to deny.
And that this law is perpetual, appears, first in that it is the same with
the law of nature, that is written in the hearts of all men. For The moral law
the same with the law of nature.
what else is the law of nature, but a divine rule written in the hearts of all
men, more or less, by God himself; by which they know in general what is
good, and what is evil. Now that this law is the very self same with it, who
sees not? Only there is this difference, that the one is written in stone as
well as in the hearts of men: whereas the other is only written in the stony
hearts of men: which difference is only in the manner, but as touching the
substance they are all one. And therefore the Apostle Romans 4. 14. says, that
the Gentiles which were without the law, (understand, written in stone) yet did
by nature the things contained in the law, which (as he says) showed the
effect or sentence of the law written in their hearts. Which he proves by the
working of their own consciences, that did both excuse and accuse them. And
(were it not a thing superfluous in a matter so evident, and so often done by
others) if a man should but a little examine the records and writings of the
ancients, he might find the very self same things with Moses law, written and
confessed by the Heathens themselves. And first to let pass these things which
we have in common with the beasts, as that every nature seeks the
preservation of it self, and the propagation of it kind: come we first unto
the first table; for if the Heathens were ignorant in any thing, it was in
things concerning God. Wherein I confess the law of sin after the fall had
much over grown the law of nature: yet notwithstanding God would not in this
leave them without testimony, Act. 14. 17, to the intent that they might be
without excuse, as he says Romans 1. 20: and therefore that which might be
known of God, was manifested unto them: for God had showed it unto them, Romans
1. 19. And that it was so, appears in the records that yet are extant, and
are alleged by the Fathers to that purpose. And to begin with the very first
commandment, which teaches the true knowledge and inward worship of God.
Have not the Philosophers themselves, as Plato, Pythagoras, and the rest,
written whole discourses of his nature, attributes, and worship? which if a man
desire to know, he may either read in their own writings, or find them urged
to that purpose by the Fathers that had this controversy with the Heathen that
knew not God. And for the second commandment, let Numa Pompilius by name
testify what he thought of it: who, as Plutarch witnesses in his life, would
not so much as suffer an image in Rome to be erected. For (says he) being that
God is an invisible spirit, he was not to be figured by any visible image.
And this was so generally received amongst them, as that for the space of 170.
years there was no image of God erected in Rome. And as touching the third
commandment, the name of God was with such religion regarded amongst them, as
that there were some found amongst them, that did choose rather to die, than to
break their oath, as Regulus: which also their laws yet extant against
periuries and blasphemies, do sufficiently testify: which, were they in force
amongst us, we should not have oaths so rife as now they are, even as our
steps, or as the stones of the streets: or if we had, yet we should have law
to punish the blasphemer, whereas now we have none: but of this sufficient.
There remains only the fourth commandment, that a time, all business set
apart, is to be sanctified to Gods service. Wherein let their Feriae and dies
festi, that is, their holy days and days of rest from labor, testify that
they held a time, all business set apart, to be kept holy unto the Lord. Now
as for the second table I hope I shall not be put unto much business in it,
seeing the Philosophers entreat most of the duties commanded therein; yea they
were in ye knowledge thereof so exact, as that it is possible to find amongst
them some one precept that contains in it the effect of the second table:
namely, that sentence which was so rife amongst them: Quod tibi non vis fieri,
alteri ne feceris, that is, That which thou would not have done to thy
self, that thou shall not do to another. Now what else is this but the same
with that Matthew. 6. which Christ calls the law and Prophets? Whatsoever
(says he) ye would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto them, for
this is the law and the Prophets. So then the Decalogue being the same with the
law of nature, is one and the same for ever. It follows necessarily that the
Decalogue is to remain for ever, and consequently the Sabbath (being a part of
that Decalogue) is to remain for ever.

The continuance of the law warranted by the Apostle
this question; Do we then (says he) make the law of none effect? God
forbid: thereby accounting it as a most sinful thing once to be conceited: yea
he is so far from that mind, as that he resolves it quite to the
contrary: We establish it, says he. Now that which is established is made
more sure, than it was before. And therefore those that say the moral law is
abolished by the law of faith, speak like Peter in the transfiguration, they
wot not what they say. For the Apostle says it is established, and not
abolished by faith.

Neither yet is the Apostle alone in this case; The law warranted to continue
by Christ.
but he follows therein the example of his master Christ, who expreslie
affirms so much, Matthew. 5 17. where speaking of the moral law, he says,
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the Prophets, I am not come to
destroy them but to fulfill them. The occasion of this doctrine, as it should
seem was thus, because he had found fault many times with the Pharisees for
their over strict keeping of the Sabbath, preferring the rest of the day before
the good of man, as if man had been made for the Sabbath, and not the Sabbath
for man, the Pharisees therefore began to accuse him as a breaker, or rather as
an abolisher of the law: And as it may seem some of his Disciples also began
to drink in this opinion and to promise liberty unto themselves, as if Christ
had come to put an end unto the law; especially seeing he went about to
establish justification by faith; which Christ observing, directs this speech
unto them: Think not (says he) that I am come to dissolve the law: as
opposing this his speech directly unto their conceit, which they had of the
abolishing of the law. Neither yet does he here rest: but in the second place
he shows that he is so far from the destroying of it, as that he came to a
quite contrary end; namely to fulfill it. Now he which does fulfill it does
not destroy it: for these are opposed by him as being contrary the one to the
other. For it were impossible for him both to destroy the law, and yet to
fulfill it. Neither yet does he here content himself to show the end of his
coming, namely to fulfill the law; but when he has done, he shows in the
third place the durablenes of this law, and that there is nothing so lasting as
it; no not the heavens, though never so constant in their motion; nor the
earth, though never so fixed a center: for they shall both pass away before;
the whole law does he say shall pass? Nay rather than the least jot or title
of it shall escape or fall. And therefore whereas some say so much of the
moral law shall stand, as Christ has reestablished in the new Testament,
therein they grant the very thing in question: namely, that the Sabbath shall
remain: for Christ has established the whole law; yea and has warranted
every jot or title of it to be as durable as the heavens: and therefore unless
we can turn heaven and earth vpside down, let us beware to take one jot or
title from the law of God. Fourthly, that we may certainly know that neither
this law, nor any part of it is dissolved, he shows, that he that shall
break one of the least commandments, As in Luke, thou child shall be called
the Prophet of the highest, that is, shall be.
and teach men so, shall be called (that is, shall be) the least in the
kingdom of heaven: as also on the contrary, he that shall etc. And lastly, he
is so far from the breaking of it, that he requires a more exact keeping of
it. For (says he) if your righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now as for
those that are of opinion that this place is to be understood of the
ceremonial law which Christ did fulfill: though it be true that Christ did
fulfill that also, yet that he means the ceremonial law in this place, I
cannot see how they will be able to prove: unless they will also hold, first,
that the ceremonial law is not abolished: secondly, that it shall last as long
as the world lasts: thirdly, that if a man break the least ceremony
thereof, and teach men so, that he shall be the least in the kingdom of heaven:
fourthly, that if he observe and teach them, he shall be the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven: and fifthly that we are more bound unto the observation of
them than were the Scribes and Pharisees, if we will enter into heaven. All
which things Christ verifieth here of that law of which he makes mention. All
which if any dare be so shameless as to affirm of the ceremonial law, yet
they shall be undone and prove nothing thereby against us, but all for us:
namely, that the Sabbath shall continue; it being as they say ceremonial. But
the truth is, it cannot be understood of any other law than of the Decalogue or
ten Commandments, as I have already showed. And yet further to show that
Christ's meaning was so, he presently falls into an exposition of certain
precepts of the Decalogue, wherein the Pharisees had taught amiss.

But now will some man say, he does not there expound the Sabbath; and
therefore the Sabbath is not reestablished. Answ. Besides that he little
considers what I have showed, that every jot and title thereof is established
as firm as the heavens: and that he that breaks the least commandment and
teaches men so, shall be the least in the kingdom etc. Besides all this, I
say, he may abolish by this reason the rest of the commandments that are not
there expounded. He must therefore know that there was another reason that
caused Christ not to speak any thing of the Sabbath: for it was Christ's intent
and purpose there to show how they came short in the exposition of the law, and
made the commandments speak less than they did; whereas they extended the
Sabbath too far, as touching the outward ceremony, and made it speak more
than in truth it did. And therefore his intent being to show how they came
short in the exposition of the law; it was not meet to bring in an instance
quite besides his intention.

The Sabbath continued by Christ.
by that which I have already alleged: so also by that Matthew. 24. 20. (where
he wills that his children which should live about 40. years after his
ascension, should pray that their flight might not be upon the Sabbath) he
does sufficiently declare that he held not this commandment in account of a
ceremony, but of a moral precept. For first, if it had been ceremonial, they
might have fled without any care; for it had bin abolished forty years
before. Secondly, he should have done ill to have used this as a scarcrow, or
as a bugge to fray children with, when there was no such thing. Yea thirdly, if
this commandment had been ceremonial, he should have contradicted his own
doctrine, in establishing that which himself did take away by his death. And
last of all, had he held it a ceremony, he should rather have taught them not
to have stood upon the keeping of it, being it had been a great sin for them
to have retained it, and made an account of it, it being abolished and done
away before. Now as for those that would qualify Christ's speech, by saying
that he spoke not as he meant, but according unto the superstition of the
Jews, that held it unlawful (as they say) to flee upon the Sabbath, and that
therefore his speech was directed unto them which held this error. First, this
their evasion has no ground. For how will they make it appear that the Jews
held it unlawful upon the Sabbath to flee for preservation of life, being they
had no ground for it in the Scriptures? Secondly, their own practice was to
the contrary: for they fled out of Egypt upon the Sabbath, Exodus 12. And as for
that in the book of Macchabees, that some would not fight upon the Sabbath,
(besides that it is no scripture) we see them in the same place condemned for
it, and the case generally resolved by their brethren to the contrary, as they
might well do having such presidents in the Scriptures for their so doing; as
2. King. 11. and in the destruction of Jericho, Josh. 6. and elsewhere. Thirdly,
if there had bin any infected with that error, he would rather have willed them
to have prayed for the change of their minds, than for the change of their
flight. Fourthly, be it that some held it unlawful to flee upon the Sabbath;
yet what was that unto his Disciples, who were not possessed with that error?
for this was spoken unto his disciples apart, as we see verse. 3. And lastly, if
he had spoken to such as had held that error, he would rather have continued
his form of speech which he used in the former verse; and as there he says,
Woe be unto them which are with child in these days, manifestly speaking of
others: so he would rather have continued that form of speech, and have said,
Woe be unto them that in these days shall hold it unlawful to flee upon the
Sabbath; for then had the speech been plain. But it is certain that as the
form of Christ's speech was altered, so the words looked quite another way: as
namely unto the hindrances and lets that might befall unto them. And first to
the bodily lets, if their flight should fall in the winter, the shortness of the
day, together with the foulness of the way, might be combersome: Therefore
pray (says he) that your flight be not in the winter. And with this it well
fitted, that having set down their bodily lets and grieuances, he should in
the second place set down the spiritual lets and grieuances, which might
befall them if their flight should be upon the Sabbath. For how could this but
grieve them to see not only abomination, or desolation, in the Temple? but
abomination of desolation to be set up in the high places, even in place and
steed of Gods worship, and that in the time of his worship also; how could
this I say be any other than grievous unto them? and therefore exceeding
grievous, because then also upon the sight thereof they were to be deprived
both of Gods word and worship, and to be driven out into exile. Yet if
troubles and afflictions must needs come, a man would desire that they might
not come at the worst, or in the midst of his happiness. And if a man must
needs die, yet he would desire to end his prayers first, and first to be
prepared thereto. In regard of which Christ wills them to pray that their
flight might not be upon the Sabbath: that is, that though it were vneuitably
decreed, that their flight should be; yet that the extremity of it might be
something mitigated for the elects sake. And this I hope that notwithstanding
these wrenches, it is evident that Christ's meaning was that the Sabbath should
continue.

The moral law was long before the ceremonial.
and make it stand but as a Jewish ceremony: when as yet it is more anciently
descended, than to take his beginning with the ceremonial law. For in the
writings of Israel mention is made of the keeping of the Sabbath by that
pattern that cannot err, even by God himself, before the giving of the
ceremonial law: or before Israel was a people, or called after the name of
their father Jacob: yea I say long before there was any promise made unto
Abraham their father. Neither yet alone did God then keep it, but did also
institute it to be kept. Yea but it was not kept, will some man say. What then?
shall the disobedience of some make the law of God of none effect? God forbid:
though neither yet can I yield that it was not kept. For what if the keeping of
it be not mentioned? does it therefore follow that it was not kept? Were all
things that were done by the Fathers written by Moses? If they should, I
suppose the world it self would not have contained the books: but these
things which are written are written for our leraning, Romans 15. 4. And to this
end is the institution of the Sabbath recorded by Moses, that we might thence
learn the observation thereof, seeing that God did institute it to that end to
be observed; unless we will say that God did institute a day for rest, which
yet he would have no man to rest upon. But to take away all wrangling; the
truth is, the observation of this day is also showed by Moses before the giving
of the law, as well as the institution; and so showed, as that he shows it not
once to be kept by God himself in the creation, Genesis 2. 2, but again in the
wilderness; in that he ceased to rain down Manna upon the Sabbath, Exodus 16.
15. Lo thus twice he observes God keeping of it. And to this he adds the
practice of man also: for Exodus 16. he shows how the Israelites kept it in
the wilderness, when as yet the ceremonial law was not given; by which it is
certain that this law was perpetual.

The reasons of the precept prove the perpetuity of the Sabbath.
where the reasons be general, do they not bind in general from one to every
one, even from the free denison to the stranger? And where the reasons be
perpetual, do they not implie the perpetuity of the commandment? otherwise
the reasons should persuade when the commandment were ended. Now the reasons
that here are used to persuade unto the keeping of the commandment being
perpetual; what shall we judge of the commandment, but that it is also
perpetual? and binds us as well as the Jews: for are not these reasons to
all men and at all times alike? Does not God give unto every one six days
as well as unto the Jews? and then is not every one bound to keep a seventh
as well as the Jews? Is not the Lord thy God as well as theirs? and must not
thou then keep his Sabbath as well as they? Or did he rest only for their
example, and not for thine also? Or have they need only to be blessed and not
thou also? Then these reasons persuading thee as well as them, and now as well as
then; do they not plead for the perpetuity of this commandment, and prove
that it is no vanishing shadow, but a lasting precept and to remain for ever?

The perpetual use of the Sabbath proves the Sabbath perpetual.
no more but this one reason, namely the continual use and need we have of
the Sabbath to persuade the perpetuity of the Sabbath, it were sufficient. For
if there were no time to call us back, how far would that corruption
wherewith we are warmed in our mothers wombes carry us, like a mighty
stream or current from all godliness? How deep would we diue into the things
of this world, if we should never be pulled out? If there were no time to
water that seed that is sown in our hearts, we should become as a garden
that has no water, Isai. 1. 31. where every thing dies. Yea how easily would
our hearts become like unto the sluggards garden that is ouergrowne with
thorns and nettles, which cover the face thereof? Pro. 24. 31. And if the best
men notwithstanding the best means be many times overtaken; Lord, what shall
we poor men think shall become of us? If there were no time set down by God
unto us for his service, and if it were left unto our own discretions, when
should we find a time? would we not plead as the Jews in the building of
the Temple, The time is not yet come? Hag. 1. 2. And therefore I say, being we
have such continual use and need of it, what does it else but persuade the
continuance of it unto us?

To conclude therefore this point; if this law The conclusion of all.
be the same with the law of nature; if established by the Apostle; if
confirmed by Christ; if instituted before the people was, to whom the
ceremonial law was given; if warranted forty years after the ceremonial law
was abolished; if the reasons be now as effectual to persuade us to the
obedience thereof as ever, and the use also now as great as ever: we may truly
conclude, that seeing in the institution it was not ceremonial; it cannot in
process of time become ceremonial; but as it came in with the world, so it
must end with the world. And from this must not a Christian be driven, no not
for all the world.

Arguments pretending to prove the law to be abolished, answered.
found out to weaken the truth thereof: some whereby they endeavor to prove
the whole law abolished: others, that if not the whole law, yet at least that
ye Sabbath is abolished. Now, to prove that the whole law is abolished, they
allege that 1. Tim. 1. 9. To the just there is no law; and that Romans 6. 14. We
are not under the law, but under grace. To which to answer in a word; it is
true that we are not under the correction of the law: For there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. Yet we are under the
direction of it. For ibid. ver. 7. the flesh is condemned as an enemy unto
God, in that it is not subject unto the law. Secondly, we are not under the
law as it was given by Moses, but as it is warranted by Christ. Thirdly, we
are not under the rigor of the law: for Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, Galath. 3. 13. from the curse of the law (says the Apostle) not
from the law. And thereby it is that now his commandments are not grievous
unto his, Ioh. 5. 3: but we willingly subject and give our selves servants
unto it; to receive direction from it, etc. But of this sufficient, it being
something besides my purpose.

Our rest from sin takes not away our rest from labor.
which this is one doubt, that sticks up like a thorn in a drunkards hand,
wherewith he hurts himself and others, namely, that every day is a Sabbath
or rest from sin; and that therefore now we are not any more bound to keep
any particular Sabbath. Now to prove that we must keep every day a Sabbath,
they allege that Heb. 4. 10. where it is said, that he that is entered into
this rest has ceased from his own works, as God did from his: and that
therefore we must every day keep a rest from sin. To which I answer: Were
it so that all they that urge this did it of a desire and love they have to the
Lords Sabbath, they were the less to be blamed: howbeit, it is certain that
they plead this most that least delight in the Sabbath when it comes; and they
do it not that they would have other days to be kept as the Sabbath; but
because they would have the Sabbath; to be kept but as another day. But
howsoever, yet I do not see how out of that place they may make this appear.
For first, I see not how Gods resting from his works, may be a figure of our
resting from our sinful works, there being no proportion between them, which
always is between the sign and the thing signified. Secondly, if this rest
were a sign or figure of our rest from sin, it must be so unto Adam also;
for the law was given unto him. Now how could that be a figure unto him of his
resting from sin, when as yet he had not sinned? Thirdly, be it that there
were such a rest, yet what does the keeping of this rest morally hinder the
keeping of that from sin? nay rather is it not a principal means for the
furtherance thereof? For does not rest from wordly affairs and employment in
holy duties take away all occasions of sin? Fourthly, were it granted that
we must rest every day from sin; yet this their collection, that therefore
we should not rest from labor to keep the Sabbath holy, follows not
thereupon; no more than because a man is bound to receive every morsel of meat
with giving thanks, that therefore he should say he were not bound to receive
the Lords Supper otherwise than as common bread; or rather not to receive the
Lords Supper at all, because he every day receives bread with giving of
thanks. Fifthly, that which in that place is made significant, was the seventh
day from the creation: for the text says, he speaks in a certain place of
the seventh day, not of the Sabbath. Whereby it is plain, that that which was
significant was the seventh day from the creation, on which God is there said
to rest; and it might be this was a sign that they should in the like manner
rest upon the seventh day from their works as God did from his; to which end
Gods example is brought as a reason to persuade us to rest, because God rested:
as also it might be a sign of our eternal rest in heaven. And that indeed
the Apostle means there, when he says verse. 10. that he which has entered
into his rest, that is into heaven, has ceased from his own works. What of
sin? No, but of his calling: for this rest Adam should have entered into
though he had never sinned. But (last of all) be it that in this place he
means this rest from sin to be shadowed out, yet that rest is in heaven:
but in this life no man has, or indeed can rest from his sinful works, as
God did from his works; which the Apostle affirms of those that have entered
into his rest. But this argument how wind-shaken it is, I hope every man sees.
I will spend therefore no more time to pluck this thorn out of the drunkards
hand. It rests that I should here answer that which is urged by some out of
the Epistle unto the Coloss. chap. 2. verse. 16, 17. Let no man condemn you in
respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbaths. But because we
shall have a more fit opportunity offered to speak of it in the next chapter,
I therefore thither remit the reader.

That which remains to be spoken of last of all, is the use of this, that
being the Sabbath is perpetual, therefore men take heed how they suffer this
truth to be wrested away from them by the cunning sleights of Satan, or be
drawn on by the alurements of evil men, to abuse it to their own pleasures
or profits, to run, ride, or sport themselves upon it, as if it were lawful
as upon another day: or as if God had never said the word, keep it holy. And
this much as touching the first point, namely that the Sabbath is perpetual.

CHAP. III.
The time of the rest not perpetual, Sect. 1. It was meet the Sabbath day
should be changed, Sect. 2. How the Sabbath is changed, and yet perpetual,
Sect. 3. The Sabbath changed from the seventh day to the first, Sect. 4. The
reasons of that change, Sect. 5. 6. 7. 8. Objections to the contrary,
answered, Sect. 9. 10. Whether we may call it still the Sabbath day, Sect. 11.
Whether the time of the Sabbath may not be changed again, Sect. 12.

The time of the rest not perpetual.
for if you mark God says not, remember the seventh day to rest upon it, but,
remember the day of rest; which is the second thing that we observe in this
commandment and gives us occasion to consider of another question. Which is,
whether the Apostles might change the Sabbath unto any other day then that
which the Jews kept. Which they might do: first, because the seventh day kept
amongst the Jews was ceremonial, and did shadow out unto us our eternal
rest, as appears Heb. 4. 4. 10. which was one cause that moved the Apostles
to change the day: As also they might do it, because they found no limited
day set down in the commandment. For as for that which follows afterward
the seventh is the Sabbath, it is no part of the moral precept, but only an
explication of it. For if that were a part of it, then this also must be a
part, six days shall thou labor; which to grant were absurd: because then
we should make duties betwixt man and man to be taught in the first table,
which only teaches man this duty to God: and the second the duty of man to
man, as Christ shows Matthew. 22. 38. as also they being two things so
contrary as rest and labor, I cannot see but they must also be two
commandments. Besides all this in the reasons, there be many things that
concerned only the Jews, as in the fifth commandment, Honor thy father and
mother; the reason is, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. Now it is certain that this promise had only reference
unto the Jews, whom the Lord brought out of the land of Egypt, and whom the
Lord would bring into the land of Canaan. But unto us it is as the Apostle
urges it Ephesians. 6. 3, that thy days may be long upon earth. So in the first
commandment, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the bondage of
Egypt: but we may rather say, which brought us out of the bondage of sin, or
out of the bondage of Popery. And Deuteronomy. 5. 15. he uses another reason to
persuade the Jews, which does not appertain unto us; which was, that they
should keep the Sabbath, because they were servants in Egypt. All which
reasons we see are urged in respect of them, as being the fittest to persuade
them, being taken from the present benefit, which either they had, or were
shortly to enjoy. And what lets but that the like respect should be had in
this commandment of the^ as in the former? You will happily say then, that
there is something in the commandment that concerns not us, but the Jews.
Not so neither: for though there might be some particular reasons used that
might more concern them than us, yet the commandments might concern us both
alike, they being the same with the law of nature written in our hearts, as
also they being warranted unto us in the Gospel to remain. Though neither,
yet if we should grant these words to be part of the precept, do they tie us
to keep that seventh day from the creation, but only require of us a seventh
to be kept, which we willingly embrace, as being the fittest time and the
meetest for Gods service. And the rather because the Apostles have retained,
and still kept a seventh day for Gods service; from whose example we may not
vary.

It was meet that the Sabbath day should be changed.
that it should be changed unto another day for these reasons. For first,
seeing the seventh from the creation was ceremonial, and did figure out our
rest in heaven by Christ, as appears Heb. 4 ver. 8; why should it not by the
same reason be thought meet to be abolished, by which other shadows are
abolished; namely, that the people might be thereby kept from Iudaizing; as
also they being shadows must necessarily give place when the body comes,
Coloss. 2. 17. Thirdly, seeing that when Christ rose it was a new world, Heb.
2. 5. and old things were past, and all things become new, 2. Cor. 5. 7: was
it not then meet that as the old covenant had the old day, and the old feales;
so this new covenant should have this new day and his new seals, especially
seeing that in the contracts and covenants renewed between man and man, we
require that as they be new drawn, so they be new dated and new sealed?

How the Sabbath is perpetual, and yet changed.
be perpetual and to remain for ever, and yet to be changed. For if it be
perpetual, how is it changed? if changed, how is it perpetual? For answer
whereunto, it is to be understood that there is a twofold consideration or
respect of the Sabbath; either as touching the substance of this commandment,
which is contained in these words, Remember thou keep holy the day of rest,
which is the same with the law of nature, and is so far forth warranted by
Christ, as I have already heretofore proved: or else, as it was given unto
the Jews by Moses, and had many ceremonies and shadows annexed unto it, both
1. in the manner, 2. in the end, and 3. in the time. 1. In the manner, first
they were to keep it with offering up of sacrifices upon that day, as two
lambs of a year old, two tenth deals of fine flower, etc. Numb. 28. 9.
Secondly, that they were more strictly to keep the rest, so as they might not
kindle a fire upon that day, Exodus 35. 3. nor dress their meat, Exodus 16. 23:
which strictnes of rest was ceremonial, and after the law was given, was added
by Moses, and therefore is abolished; the moral rest required in the
commandment notwithstanding remaining, as being a thing so unseparably joined
unto holiness, as that we cannot keep the day holy without it. 2. In the end
also there was something ceremonial: for the Sabbath was made unto them partly
memoratiue; as Deuteronomy. 5. 15. it was to be kept in remembrance that they were
servants in Egypt: and partly it was representative; for Exodus 31. 13. it was
to be kept as a sign of their sanctification. 3. And last of all, in the time,
as I have already showed, in that they kept the seventh day from the creation.
As also in that they kept their Sabbath from even to even, Leuit. 23. 32.
whereas the Church now keeps the day first, and the night following. Whereof
more hereafter.

Now all these additions concerned the Jews only, unto whom they were given
in charge to be observed; yet no longer neither than until the coming of
Christ, which was the body of all these shadows. And therefore as touching al
these complements of the Jews: significations of the rest, sacrifices of the
day, observation of the time from the creation; we know them not hence-foorth,
and therefore in respect of these let no man condemn us. Yet let no man so
much as imagine, that because that which was ceremonial in it is done away,
therefore the day, the rest, the sanctification of that day of rest, or any
substantial thing in that law commanded is done away. For as no man may say
the Sacrament is abolished, because the sign is changed; no more may any man
say the Sabbath is abolished, because the time is changed: for if every
commandment that has a ceremony annexed unto it, should therefore presently
be done away, or should with the ceremony become also ceremonial; it should
follow that most of the commandments should be done away; for they had
ceremonies annexed unto them. As the sixth Commandment had the ceremony of
things strangled and of blood: for as they might not kill, so they might not
strangle or eat the blood. The fifth Commandment had the ceremony of writing
the law upon their post, or of binding them upon their hands: for as they were
to teach the law, so by this ceremony to teach. And all the ceremonies in Gods
worship appertained unto the second, which commanding Gods outward worship,
must necessarily command these ceremonies by which he would be worshipped: yea
the whole law had the ceremony of the parchment lace. Now, will you therefore
say that all the law is ceremonial and done away, because these ceremonies are
done away? If not, no more may you prove that this commandment is done away,
because the ceremony is done away. And therefore as this law was kept
thousands of years before these ceremonies were added: so I see no reason but
that they may continue thousands of years after they be done away.

The change of the time of the Sabbath.
kept, unto the first day of the week. Which change of theirs appears in
their practice that upon this day they did usually assemble, as we may see
first, Ioh. 20. 19. that day upon which Christ rose they were assembled
together: then eight days after, which was the next first day of the week,
they were again assembled, verse. 26: and Acts 2. 1. when the holy Ghost
descended upon them, they were again assembled upon this day: where although
the first day of the week be not named; yet Pentecost is which fell upon the
first day of the week, as appears by that Leuit. 23. verse. 15. where they
were required to bring a sheafe of their first fruits the morrow after the
Sabbath in the Passover; and betwixt that and Pentecost they were to reckon
fifty days: so that the day of his resurrection falling the morrow after the
Jews Sabbath, which is the first day of the week; Pentecost must needs also
fall the first day of the week. And as the Apostles did practice this, so did
also the whole Church, Act. 20. 7. Yea and the Apostle himself does there
celebrate this day with the administration of the word and Sacraments. As also
1. Cor. 16. 1. he does upon this day ordain collections in the Church of
Corinth: like as he there testifies he had done in the Church of Galatia. And
last of all, to give the greater assurance of this, Romans 1. 10, the Apostle
calls it the Lords day: thereby as it were upon his new institution to grace
it the more, the time being changed: as he did the Sacrament, in the like
manner by calling it the Lords Supper, the sign being changed. 1. Cor. 11. 20.

The reasons of the change.
and the true Christian Sabbath. Secondly, because as God the Father did
sanctify the seventh from the creation, by his resting upon it from the work
of the creation; so did God the Son sanctify this seventh from the
redemption, by his rising again and resting upon it from the work of the
redemption. Thirdly, because that this work of the redemption being a greater
work than that of the creation; and his rest from affliction being a greater
rest than that from labor; it better deserved to bear the name and credit of
the day, than that from the creation. Fourthly, because Christ did vouchsafe
also to honor this day above all the other days of the week, by his several
appearings upon it, as well as by his rising again upon it. For upon this day
when he rose he appeared four times: first, to Mary Magdalen in the morning,
Ioh. 20. 1. and 14. Secondly, unto the other women as they were going to relate
unto the Apostles his resurrection, which the Angels had told them of before at
the sepulcher, Matthew. 28. 9. Thirdly, to the two Disciples going to Emmaus;
which also was the same day: for they said it was the third day since these
things were done, Luke 24. 21. And lastly, the same day at night he appeared
unto his Disciples, Ioh. 20. 19. but afterward though Thomas his faith wanted
confirmation in the matter of the resurrection, yet he did not again manifest
himself, until the return of the same day: which John notes when he says,
he appeared again eight days after unto them, when Thomas was present.
Fifthly, as Christ did vouchsafe to honor this day by his resurrection, so also
does the holy Ghost by his descention upon it; for Whitsontide or Pentecost
did fall upon that day, as before is manifest. And last of all, upon this day
began the creation of the world; so that upon this day we have to meditate
both upon our creation, redemption, and sanctification. Now upon all these
reasons the Apostles changed the Sabbath into the first day of the week.

Now had they done it because they might do it by their authority Apostolic,
for they were lead into all truth by that spirit which could not err: or had
they only done it because it was meet to be done, that the people might be
kept from Iudaizing, which in truth inclined too much that way: or had they
done it because happily the day was ceremonial; who could have justly accepted
against it? But now being they have done it upon such reasons as you have
heard, it were intolerable for any to call their doings again into question;
especially when as yet if we should go about to mend the choice, we should
certainly mar with mending, and put out a better and fitter day, than we
should put in the room thereof. For if we should place in the room thereof a
shorter time, men would cry out we cannot dispatch our business between the
Sabbaths: if a longer, then Gods business should be too much slacked; let us
therefore hold the mean which the Apostles have kept, and in truth which ever
has been kept, namely one day of seven holy.

Have you not read what David did? how that when he was hungry, etc. thereby
defending that his doing by the example of David in the like case: so may we
answer those that accuse us for the keeping of the Sabbath upon this day, Have
you not read what the Apostles and the Church did? how they did assemble upon
this day to hear the word and receive the Sacraments, I say have you not read
it? If you have, then what mean you yet to call for an institution, whose
practice already you see, and whose example being not against the word, is a
word? Although neither yet do I doubt but that they being lead by the spirit
into all truth, they had a warrant for their so doing; if not then from that
spirit, yet from him who was Lord of the spirits, and of the Sabbath too: who
had before his departing sufficiently instructed them what to do. Which I
rather think, because I see the practice of their assembling upon that day
before the holy Ghost was descended. Though in very deed I take this to be
very great curiousness to inquire for their word, when we see their practice
in assembling upon this day; and if not the institution, yet at least an
argument that there was such an institution amongst them, in that it was called
the Lords day.

Our translation justified.
Lords day in the Revelation is meant the first day of the week. That which
will be put unto me as concerning the translation, will be, how I can maintain
that in the Acts, chap. 20. 7. (...) signifies the first day of the week: and
that 1. Cor. 16. 1. (...) signifies every first day of the week. When the one
should rather signify the first of the Sabbaths; and the other some one of the
Sabbaths. For the justifying of our translation, thus I answer, that (...)
must be understood either properly, as the words themselves do signify, the
Sabbaths: or else they must be figuratively understood, and signify the whole
week: now the first I think they will be unwilling to grant, least these
places should speak too loud for the perpetuating of the Sabbaths that should
successively follow in rank and order the one after the other. It must
therefore be understood of the second, that is, of the whole week; which I
think they will not deny, in that elsewhere in the Scripture it is so taken,
as Leuit. 23. 15. Seven Sabbaths shall be complete, that is seven weeks. And
Luke 18. 12. (...), I fast twice in the Sabbath, that is in the week; for it
is impossible to fast twice in one day: so in this place I take it, that by
Sabbath the week is meant: though to retain the proper signification would be
more aduantagious for us. Yea, but yet the doubt is behind: for how come we
(say they) to translate it the first day of the week? when the words seem
rather to signify some one day of the week. First, we translate it so,
because the Apostle seems to note out some set time of the Disciples
assembly; which if it were so translated, some one day of the week could not
import that which the Apostle meant. Secondly, (...) is an Hebraisme: and the
Hebrews use often by one to signify the first; as Genesis 1. 5. the evening and
the morning are said to be (...) one day, that is the first day. And Genesis 10.
25. Heber had two sons, (...) the name of one, that is of the first, for he
names afterward his brother. So, one month for the first month is an
Hebraisme. And to translate it thus, we are lead by that Matthew. 28. 1. where he
says in the end of the Sabbath, (...), using the same phrase that here is,
which we must needs translate thus as we do, in the end of the Sabbath, when
the first day of the week began to dawne; for that day must needs be the
first day of the week ensuing, that dawneth first next after the week past:
and that this is out of question true, appears Mark. 16. 4. where that which
he calls verse. 2. (...), one day of the week; he calls afterward verse.
9. (...), the first day of the week. And thus I hope I have justified our
translation.

the Lords day was meant the first day of the That by the Lords day is meant
the first day of the week.
week, seeing that the Lord had so many days, as some say, as the day of his
birth, the day of his death, the day of his resurrection, and the day of his
ascension, etc. Therefore to make this appear; first it is most certain, that
as in general all the beasts of the field are said to be his, Psalm. 50. so
all the days of the week may be said to be his. But more properly that day
which is set apart to his service, is said to be his. And in this sense that
supper (wherein Christ departing did institute the Sacrament) is called the
Supper of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 20; the table, the Lords table; the cup, the
cup of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 21, etc. because they were all more specially
consecrated unto the Lords service. So must it also necessarily here be taken
that by the Lords day, the Apostle meant some one day that was famously known
in the Church, to be consecrated to his service, or else he would not so barely
and nakedly have passed it over; especially if that were true that there had
been so many Lords days at that time kept as they would thrust upon us; the
Apostle had need to have made his speech plain upon which of these he was
ravished in the spirit. But it is most certain that in the Scripture there is
not any other day mentioned than this; and therefore it must consequently be
understood of this. It being then kept (as I have showed) in the Apostles
times, and the other days then not observed, but brought in afterward: And
that it was so it will appear yet more plainly, if we give any credit unto
that which Master Beza notes, which is that he found in a certain ancient
Greek coppie these words, (...), that is, the Lords day added in the text, 1.
Cor. 16. 2. which words being added, the text must run thus, every first day
of the week which is the Lords day, etc. And so it is plain that by the first
day of the week, must be meant the Lords day. As also is evident by that which
Master Iunius observes out of the Syriak translation; which is, that whereas
it is in the Greek, when ye are come together in the Church; in the Syriak it
is, when ye are come together on the Lords day; which makes the truth of this
fully to appear, that this first day of the week, upon which we keep our
Sabbath, was the Lords day.

And further to make it evident that this day That the first day of the week
is the Lords day, showed also by the Fathers.
was the Lords day, the Fathers who came nearest unto the Apostles times, give
evident testimony. As Justinius Martyr in Apol. 2. who setting down first the
meetings of the Church. Secondly, the greetings of the Church, with an holy
kiss. Thirdly, their prayers. Fourthly, their administration of the
Sacraments. Fifthly, the reading of the Scriptures; then exhortation by the
Pastor. Lastly, delivers the time of all this their meeting, which was upon
the Sunday, as he calls it: first, because on it God began to create the
world. Secondly, because on it Christ rose again from the dead; by which it
evidently appears that this day was then kept. And Ignatius as ancient as he,
shows in his Epistle ad Magnesianos, not only that this day was chosen of the
Church, but also why it was done: namely, that all occasions might be cut off
from the Christians of Iudaizing. And August. tom. 2. ad Ianuar. Epist. 119.
says, that the Lords day was delivered to Christians by the Lords
resurrection, and thereof it began to be celebrated. And last of al, Cyril in
Ioh. lib. 17. cap. 58. says, it must needs be that the eighth day on which
Christ appeared to Thomas, must be the Lords day. Lo thus have you a cloud
of witnesses, all testifying this day to be the Lords day: but of the other
days which they call feasts, no such matter. Neither yet had these feasts been
so ancient, would any of them so justly deserved the name of the Lords day as
this: because in nothing he did so much show himself to be Lord, as in this
his rising again from the dead: for therefore he died and rose again, that
he might be Lord of the quick and dead, Romans 14. 9. And therefore as the Lord
would have the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt, there and then to
begin the account of their months in remembrance of their great deliverance
from their bondage, in which they were in under Pharaoh, Exodus 21. 2. so would
he have us, in remembrance of our great deliverance from the thraldom of
sin and spiritual bondage of the devil, by Christ's suffering and rising
again, there and then to begin our account.

The conclusion then of this point is, that seeing the seventh from the
creation was not commanded in the moral law, but was ceremonial, and
therefore meet to be changed, and being it might be done without any
prejudice to the commandment. The Apostles did well to change the time of the
Sabbath, which was kept every seventh from the creation, into the seventh from
the redemption.

Objections answered.
and clear such doubts, as may any ways seem to arise in the hearts of men,
whereby they might be hindered from admitting this truth. And here first may
these places of the Apostle, Galat. 4. 10. and Col. 2. 16, 17. incomber some,
whose minds are not so well established in the present truth: in the first of
which places the Apostle seems to condemn all set times; and in the second,
to clear men from any just imputation, or condemnation for the not keeping of
them, and by name of the Sabbaths; so that it may seem we are set free from
keeping any Sabbaths at all: for says the Apostle, Let no man condemn you in
respect of the Sabbath. For answer whereunto, as I will not greatly contend
for the time of the Sabbath, it being (as I have already showed) done away,
and the abolishing thereof may by this place justly be warranted; for he here
speaking against the observation of times, especially those that were Jewish,
it may as justly be extended against the time of the Jewish Sabbath, as any
other feast amongst them; especially being that the time of the Sabbath is
called the Sabbath, as in this commandment the seventh is the Sabbath; that is
the time of the Sabbath: and Leuit. 23. 3. The seventh shall be the Sabbath of
rest, that is, the time of rest, or the time of the Sabbath. As (I say) I will
not contend with them for the day which the Jews kept, it being abolished: so
by no means can I be drawn so much as once to imagine that therefore the
Sabbath should be together with the Jewish day abolished, being that Christ
has warranted the whole law and every jot or tittle of it to remain.

Yea, but you will say the Sabbath it self is ceremonial; for Exodus 31. 13.
it is made a sign of our sanctification. A sign; what then? Is it therefore a
ceremony, and shadow? Is there no difference (think you) between a sign and
a shadow? For my part I have ever held, that shadows signify things to come,
but signs things already come as well as to come. Again, shadows and the
body or substance of them can never be together, but when the one is come the
other is gone; and where the one begins, there the other ends: but the
sign and the thing signified never agree better than when they go together.
Indeed I confess the shadows may in some sense be said to be signs: but
that all signs should be shadows, that will never be made good by the dint
of any argument, be it never so sharp. As for example, the signs in Egypt
were tokens of Gods anger, yet they were not shadows: the Sacraments are
signs confirming our faith, Romans 4. 10. yet no shadows: the miracles that
Christ wrought were signs showing forth his glory, Ioh. 2. 11, yet no
shadows: the Rainbow was a sign, putting God in mind of his covenant that
he would not again the second time drown the earth, Genesis 9. 13. and 15; and
then may not the Sabbath also be a sign? that is, a document or instruction to
teach us our sanctification; or a sign memoratiue to put us in mind of our
sanctification, but that it must presently therewith become a shadow? Why then
become not all these signs shadows as well as it? Indeed I confess that the
strict keeping of the rest by the Jews, commanded Exo. 16. 23. was a shadow as
also was the seventh day: yet that the rest commanded in the precept was so, or
had any ceremony annexed, that I deny. But be it so, that the rest in the
commandment had also a signification added unto it; yet from the beginning it
was not so, but came afterward and was made so unto the Jews, (who were to be
lead on unto Christ by these things, as children by their A. b. c. and first
elements as it were of religion) and may not this that is merely accidental
and added unto it fall away, but that it must destroy that also with it which
is substantial? If this should be granted, I see not but that the whole law
must also be abolished, because there was no commandment but had some
ceremony or other (as I have already proved) added unto it. Yea and the
Sacraments must also be done away, because the outward signs were shadows;
and so we should be without either word or Sacrament, with which this would
suite well to abolish the time of them both, that there might not be so much
as any speech of God or godliness. But how far much better have the Apostles
done? who have abolished that which was ceremonial and added unto the moral
law, retaining and keeping still the substance and law it self: as also they
do in retaining and keeping the same Sacraments which the Jews had, 1. Cor.
10. 3, 4, though they change the signs which they had. And what I pray you
has this commandment deserved why it should not find the like favor with
the rest, to remain, although the day be changed; but that together with the
day it must be quite cashered from the rest of the commandments, as
unprofitable? This it is, the devil knows that by ye keeping of this
commandment, his kingdom is most of all shaken; and therefore he labors
above all to shake at least, if not to overthrow this time appointed for the
worship of God.

That of the Galatians falsely urged by some, answered.
in so much as he says, he is afraid that he has bestowed his labor upon
them in vain, because they observe days and times. But of those that urge
this, I would know whether they think that the Apostle in this place
condemns all set times, or some only: if they shall say all indifferently;
then it shall not be lawful for the Church at all to appoint any set times, no
not for the delivery of the word and Sacraments: which whosoever maintains
is an absolute Atheist, and seeks no less than the ruin of Christ and his
kingdom, and of all religion amongst men. How be it, this I know those that
urge this will not allow of it, to have a day set for Gods worship, being a
thing both tending to edification, and good order. Now if they will say, that
it condemns but some set days, then it either condemns those which the
Church then kept, or those which the Jews kept; for there were not a third
sort of days at that time. If they shall say those which the Church then kept,
I would know of them whether the Church might not then as lawfully appoint
days for Gods service as now, the Apostles being then of the Church, and lead
by that spirit that could not err. And secondly, whether they might not
appoint the first day of the week as well as any other, all days being (as
they say) indifferently alike. Both which things if they will grant, I see not
how the Apostle might justly blame them for using their christian liberty, in
making choice of some day for to keep the Lords Sabbath upon. Whom if he
might not justly blame for using their liberty, much less then might he so
sharply rebuke them, as to stand in fear of them for the keeping of such a
day, as if by it all his labors had been to none effect, or purpose. Yea, if
the keeping of such times had been so bad; he should have yet done much worse,
himself to have kept it with them, which yet he does Act. 20. 7. But this he
should have added above all, that he should speak against times set, and yet
should himself set times, as we see he did (in the Church of Corinth, yea and
in this very Church of Galatia) appoint collections to be made every first day
of the week, as we may see 1. Cor. 16. 1: all which things or any of them
once to conceive of so great an Apostle, were intolerable. It remains
therefore necessarily, that they must be understood of those Jewish days and
times and years. And that they were such, appears evidently Col. 2. 17, where
he shows that these days were shadows of things to come, which only was
proper to those Jewish days, and no other. And indeed the truth was thus,
there were crept into these Churches certain false Apostles, that labored to
join Moses with Christ, and to inthral their consciences with the ceremonial
yoke, as though they were in conscience bound yet to keep the ceremonial law:
the retaining of which was no less than in effect to deny Christ to be come,
who was the body of all those ceremonial shadows. Which he observing,
begins to be afraid of them, as he says, least they should by this means
have made his preaching of Christ Jesus to have been of none effect unto them.
Now as for our parts we are so far from Iudaizing, as that we retain neither
any conscience of their days, nor yet the days themselves. And therefore we
observe the Sabbath upon the first day of the week, whereas they kept it upon
the seventh (as has been heretofore sufficiently declared) that thereby we may
be sure to avoid all Iudaisme.

Moreover being the day is changed, it will. Sect. 11.
be demanded, and of some is, whether we ought not for the avoiding of
Iudaisme, to forbear to call it the Sabbath day? Whereto for my part I
answer, that although I know that all things ceremonial in the Sabbath be
abolished, yet I could never learn that the name was any ceremony, and
therefore I see not but that it may be used with that indifferency as we use
other names, it being fit and apt to express the nature of that which we would
signify by it. Secondly, being the rest is perpetual (as I have proved) why
should it not carry with it the perpetuity of the name of rest? But why then
were new names given unto it? Not because the old names were abolished, or
might not be used, but they were enforced to use other names for distinctions
sake: for if they had not called the Sabbath by some other name, they could not
have been so well understood whether they had spoken of the Jews Sabbath that
was to be abolished, or of ours; therefore to avoid this ambiguitie they call
it by another name, that they might thereby be the better understood. But now
being that the Jews Sabbath day is quite abolished, and that custom has made
it familiar, and use carried it unto our Sabbath: I see not but that we may
indifferently use the name of Sabbath, even as any of the rest of the names of
the day: especially then when we do desire most to express the rest of the
day, as when we would express the change of it, to call it the first day of
the week; and when the reason of the change, to call it the Lords day: so when
we would express the rest, to call it the Sabbath day. And this much as
touching the change of the Sabbath unto the first day of the week.

Sanctify a fast: or a feast, as Hest 9. The feast of Purim is instituted: or
to turn a fast into a feast, Zach. 8. 19. The fast of the fourth month and
the fast of the fifth shall be unto the house of Judah joy and gladness. Yet
to change this day, they may not: for this were to become as the Princes of
Judah to change the land-markes, Hos. 5. 10, and to pluck up Gods stakes and
bounds which he has set for his Sabbath: yea to take away his Sabbath, and to
appoint a day of our own in steed thereof, were yet to come near unto the
fact of Nadab and Abihu, who in steed of fire from heaven brought strange
fire, Leuit. 10. 1. which sin God punished with death; and may not we fear
the like at his hands, if in steed of that day which he has appointed, we shall
institute unto him a day of our own? for which if he punish us not, yet he
may justly return it upon us with this reproof; Who required this at your
hands? Isai. 1. 12. But be it granted, were it so that the Church might alter
this; yet they must be lead thereto by some great reason that may ouerwaigh
that, for which it was instituted to be kept upon this day: but greater
reasons cannot be yielded for any day than for this of which we have spoken
before, which being considered, there cannot another day be placed in the room
thereof; neither yet if another day might be placed could a fitter day be
placed, and therefore not another so well. And therefore being it is so that
this day is set apart by the church, I say more (though yet that were
sufficient) by the Apostles to be kept holy; let us be contented to keep it
holy, as the Apostles have left it: knowing that although we may sometimes
sanctify that which is common; yet we have no power to make that common which
is sanctified. For that is a destruction or a snare unto a man, to devour that
which is sanctified, Prou. 20. 25.

Now that which may seem to make against That place of the Romans chap. 14.
explaned.
this which I have written, is that of the Apostle, Romans 14. 5, 6; where he
seems to make all days alike, either to be observed or not observed. True
it is that he says some men count them so, but yet the Apostle makes no such
account: for the question moved there, being, not betwixt the Jew and the
Gentile, as some would have it, but betwixt the stronger and the weaker, as
appears chap. 15. 1. about eating of herbs and keeping of days, which
arose as may seem upon this occasion, that forasmuch as the restitution of our
former estate was now wrought by Christ: therefore we, as in the beginning our
fathers did, should eat herbs, and no flesh. Now as in these controversies
he sets down their tenants on both sides, both what the stronger held, and
what the weaker; so he shows either of them their duties toward other. Now
the tenants were thus; The stronger believed that they might eat all things,
the weaker he eats herbs. He does not say believes, as to the former, but
eats, thereby distinguishing it from the other. So again verse. 5. This man
esteems one day above another, that is the stronger, which appears in that
there was a day both commanded, received, and approved in the Church, as I
have already showed: and therefore that must be the stronger, then the weaker
must needs be to hold every day alike. So then if men count all days alike,
it is an argument of their weakness: yet we that are persuaded that one day is
above another, as the Lords day above all the rest, ought not to despise the
weaker, but to bear with their infirmity, so long as it may be for their good
to edification, chap. 15. 2. And this is our mind toward those that through
ignorance or weakness account of the Lords day but as of another day. So long as
it may be for their good to edification, we will bear with their infirmity:
which yet if they shall hold obstinately and defend with an high hand, we are to
rebuke them sharply, that others may fear. Now if any man to avoid the point
of this argument shall say, that the Jews are they which are meant by the
weak, because they did eat herbs and observe days. First, I would have them
to show me, where it may appear, that they were restrained of eating flesh.
Secondly, if they were those whom the Apostle meant that kept and observed
days: I would know of them also whether they think they kept them to the
Lord, which the Apostle affirms; which if they say, I see not how the Apostle
might be afraid of them so far, that he might think he had labored
amongst them in vain, in that they kept a day holy unto the Lord. And this
much touching this question, whether the day of rest may be changed again, or
not.

CHAP. IIII.
That the whole Sabbath day is to be kept, Sect. 1. And the night also, in a
sort, Sect. 2. When the Sabbath begins and ends, Sect. 3.

The whole day must be kept holy.
lead us beyond the mark, then he labors to have us come short of it. And to
that end he bears thousands in hand, that they are not bound to rest the
whole day and keep the whole day holy; but only the time of the public
exercises. But for this they are to know, that God requires in the
commandment that we rest the whole day, and that we keep the whole day holy:
for if he had meant but a part of the day, he could have said so much; but in
that he requires a day in the commandment he puts it out of question. If
thou thy self should hire a man to work with thee a day, would thou not
look that he should work with thee a whole day? Or a servant to dwell a
year with thee, would thou not look that he should dwell a whole year
with thee? How is it then that thou understand God to halfes, when his word
is as plain as thine? Do thou not think that Ananias was justly punished,
because he brought but a part, when he should have brought the whole? And
shall not God as justly punish thee, if thou keep but a part, when thou
should keep the whole? Indeed this word whole is not expressed, but yet it
is implied and necessarily understood, in that he requires a day. And that
his meaning is so, appears evidently also by the reasons he brings
afterward, to persuade thee thereunto. For first thou know the whole week
consists of seven days. Of these he gives thee six, and keeps one for
himself; now such days as he gives thee to do thy business in, such and so
long a day he reserues for himself; but every one of thy days has four and
twenty hours: and therefore he must have so many to his day, or else thou have
more than six days given thee; or if not given, then thou take it as
Hophnie did the flesh: and then thou robbest God of part of his day, and so
thou committest theft; which, were the case thine own, thou would not
endure. For if thou having seven pounds in thy purse, should give six of
them to some debaushed soldier; if he should wastfully spend that thou gave
him on harlots, and then afterward should come and take from thee all the
remainder saving two or three shillings; would thou not think that he did
incroch two much upon thee? would thou not say he has robbed me? And be
not these as great thieves that rob God, as those that rob men? Doubtless they
be greater; and therefore take no part of this day from God to spend upon thy
lusts; for it is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; and take heed how thou wrong
him, and curtoll his day, as Hanun did David's servants garments, 2. Sam. 10. 4:
for he will not take this wrong at thine hands. Again, in the third reason
where God proposes himself unto thee for an example to follow; look how long
a time God rested, so long a time must thou rest. But he rested the seventh
day wholly, for he made nothing the seventh day, but finished all in six days:
and therefore must thou rest a whole day as he did. Lastly, in the last
reason, look what time God blessed and sanctified to be kept holy, that time
ought in right to be kept holy, (for this is the nature and property of
things sanctified, they being set apart from the common use, may not otherwise
be employed than unto his honor, as appears Leuit. 27. 28. Yea
Nebuchadnezzar as very a beast as he was, yet would not put the vessels of the
house of God to a common use; but put them in the house of his God, Dan. 1. 2.)
but now (I say) God blessed and sanctified the whole day which he rested on,
and therefore the whole day must be kept holy. And in very truth is not a
whole day needful for the performance of a whole service and worship of God?
to hear the word, and minister the Sacraments, pray, read, meditate,
confer, instruct? And why then do men think that they have sufficiently
kept the Sabbath if they hear divine service, as they call it, in the
forenoone, and in the afternoon? thinking that they may do all the rest of
the day what they list; as though God forsooth would take that at man's hands,
which a man will not at his servants; to work an hour or two, and to play all
the rest of the day. But the Apostle, you will say, wills that we should
condemn no man in part of an holy day, Col. 2. 16. True; neither in respect
of an whole holy day, such as he there means; that is, a Jewish holy day;
which, as I have showed before, you are not bound unto. But this is the Lords
day, and it is the Lords Sabbath which you must keep holy, and wholly holy
unto him; as you have seen already proved: for 1. the day, 2. preparation
thereunto, 3. rest, and 4. holiness; these four things being in the
commandment expressed, we must observe for ever, as being moral and not
ceremonial.

Moses Genesis 1. accounts the evening and the morning but one day: so that the
artificial day and the night make but one day natural, which is the seventh
part of the week, and is Gods: and therefore the night must be kept holy
as well as the day, for that is a part of the Sabbath. Therefore Psalm. 92,
which is called a Psalm of the Sabbath, David says, not only that he will
declare Gods loving kindness in the morning, but his truth also in the night.
And Paul being at Troas, taught until midnight, and then celebrated the Lords
Supper, which was a Sabbath days exercise, thereby showing that the night was
a part of the Sabbath also. Though neither yet do I speak it to this end,
that we should keep it in the same manner as Paul did, I know it well it was
extraordinary, but yet nevertheless in the nature of a night we are more
holily to repose our selves that night, than at other times. A fault in those
that other nights pray with their families, but this night ouerpasse it,
esteeming it sufficient that they have prayed at the Church.

from even to even shall you celebrate your Sabbath; but we begin our Sabbath
at the dawning of the day, for these reasons: first, because Paul preached at
Troas until midnight, being the next morning to depart, having stayed there,
as the text shows, verse. 6. seven days: but if the last night had not been a
part of the seventh day, then he had stayed at least a night longer than seven
days, and so more than seven days, for he should have stayed part of another
day. But that this night was a part of the Sabbath which they then kept, does
yet further appear, in that the Apostle keeps this night in the manner of a
Sabbath, with performing the exercise of holiness therein; as also in that
being to depart, he would not depart till the rest were ended. Which I observe
in that it is said, ver. 11, that he communed with them till the dawning of the
day, and so departed; both which circumstances concur well with this, to
prove that he held the night following to be a part of the Sabbath. Now if
any man will say, that by this reason we may justify the delivery of the word
and Sacrament in the night; I grant it, the time being as this was, a time of
persecution: otherwise not. But this, to keep the night of the Sabbath in the
nature of the night, I take to be no extraordinary, but an ordinary thing,
such as is now also required of us; and I press it no further than to show the
practice of the Church, from which we ought not rashly or unadvisedly to
dissent. And this has been observed ever sithence the Apostles times to be
just, who keep the day first, and call the night following by the name of the
day precedent. And so much for the day of rest.

THE SECOND BOOK, TREATING OF THE DVTIES OF THE SABBATH.
CHAP. I.
Of the preparation unto the Sabbath, by remembering it before hand, Sect. 1. 2.
The things to be remembered, are, to settle our affairs, Sect. 3. And our
affections, Sect. 4.

to remember this day: which words import so much as if he should have said,
Thou art by nature forgetful, and negligent in the performance of any holy
duty; and therefore thou had need to think upon this day before hand,
and to remember it, that thou Why the word remember is placed before the
commandment.
may be prepared to keep it holy. And me thinks God deals in this like a
Master, that giving many things in charge unto his servants, yet one thing in
special; above all (says he) remember this. So deals God in this case, Thou
shall have none other Gods, Thou shall not make any graven image, Thou shall
not take my name in vain; these commandments thou shall observe; but
especially remember this to sanctify my Sabbath. And although this word
remember be placed but in the beginning, yet it has a reference unto every
word in this commandment: for he requires not only that we should remember
the day when it is coming, but also we must remember to rest upon it when it
is come. Neither is it sufficient that we rest on that day, but we must
remember to sanctify that rest; and that thou must remember to do thy self,
and not that alone, but that thy children and servants also do it. Indeed,
were it not that we were more negligent in this than in any other duty, God
would not have used this special remembrance: but seeing in good things we
are like the Disciples that slept, though thrice admonished, when the Pharisees
could wake well enough without any admonition at all; God therefore wills us
to remember the Sabbath, thereby as it were stirring us up to the performance
of our duties. And as God wills us to remember in regard of our
forgetfulness in good matters; so does he will us much more to remember in
regard of the easiness that is in our nature, to be drawn away to that which
is evil, from Gods service. When Balaam heard a messenger sent with that
embassage, I will promote thee to great honor; what haste made he to be gone
to Balac, though he went upon the point of a sword: Numb. 22. 21. The young
man as soon as ever he heard that Siren in the Proverbs sing, Come let us
take our fill of love, he follows her straight way, though as an ox unto the
slaughter, Pro. 7. 12. Which easiness of ours to be ensnared and enticed, God
observing, as a most loving friend wills us to be advised, and before hand to
remember, that we who by nature are so facill and easy, be not abused.

lets which one once sported himself merrily with, as the couerlet, the
partlet, the phillet, and the frontlet: which things many times be lets unto
us; as when we lie too long in bed, or stand a good part of the day in
trimming; yet they be not the greatest lets. How say you to those lets which
kept those that were bidden unto the wedding, that they could not come? as
merchandise, a farm, five yoke of oxen, a wife, and such like? Are not these
things many times lets unto us that we cannot keep the Sabbath? Now for the
preventing of all these, God wills us to remember that it is his Sabbath;
thereby showing us that the very respect of the Sabbath must weigh down all
our worldly lets. O but faith the master (when he should go to Church) I must
needs go talk with my servants, and tell them what they shall do the next
week. Yea but thou must remember to go to Church; for God will talk with
thee, and tell thee what thou shall do the next week. I but (says the
servant) my master commanded me, and I must go do my masters business. Yea
but God says, thou must go do his business, he commands both thee and thy
master too: and therefore remember the Sabbath, says he. Yea but, will some
man say, I must needs go do a thing I forgot to do the last week. The more
shame for thee; for does not God will thee to remember it? Yea but I had
forgotten it, and therefore now I must go do it. Indeed as if because*
through negligence thou going from home, and leaving thy cloak behind, if it
should chance to rain, and thou wanting thy cloak, should therefore
meeting thy neighbor take away his; were it therefore lawful because thou
had forgotten thine? So, will thou because through thy negligence, thou
forgettest thy business, when thou should have done it; will thou (I say)
therefore take Gods time, and employ it about thy business? Well, I dispute
not whether it be lawful to do it; but this I am sure it is sinful for thee
to forget to do it before: for thou should have remembered it; and indeed
this does nothing but argue thy unto wardnes unto good things: for thou use
not so to plead in the week days, when thou should go about thy worldly
business. Sir, I have forgotten this day to pray with my family, to instruct
them, to read some part of the Scripture, etc. Thou never remembrest this in
the week; or if thou do, thou presently dispensest with thy self for the
omission of it: but on the Sabbath thou easily remembrest any of thy worldly
business, and thou will not omit to do them, though holiness it self attend
thee in the mean season. Which easily shows what it is that runs in our
minds, namely our worldly affairs, for these we remember at every turn: and
not only so, but we forecast all inconveniences before hand. As for example,
is a man going to a market or fair? before he goes, he sits down first and
forecasts what things he lackes, where and of whom he may buy them at the best
hand; yea he remembers all his wants, and rather than he will forget any of
them when he comes thither, he will set them down in writing tables; or bind
a thread about his finger, to put him in remembrance; or else command some of
his servants to remember him when he comes thither, that he may be sure to
dispatch all his arrands. But in Gods service no such care, it is the easiest
thing in the world to forget that, we are so slack, so cold, so frozen, that
we forget any thing. In regard whereof our memories may not unfitly be
compared unto siues, which easily hold the chafe, when they let the good
corn go by; which weakness God observing in us, wills

only so far they use them as their beasts to do their business, and no
more. But what shall the poor seaman do in this case? Surely, first to
importune the Merchant for instruction: which if it will not be granted, let
him not deprive himself of Gods blessing for a warm sun, let him tarry at
home. Or if it be so that he will needs go, yet let him have a special care
in some measure at least as he may, to sanctify that day unto the Lord. And
this much as touching the rest in general, that must be kept both at home and
abroad.

No breach of the Sabbath is to be counted small.
and some be beams; they being compared betwixt themselves; but yet the
majesty being considered against which they be committed, they appear in
their own shapes every one of them infinitely great: and they be not as they
seem unto us light (being waighed in the balance of our own private
conceit); but being waighed in the balance of the Sanctuary they are
infinitely weighty, every sin deserving death: and therefore we must not
account sin light, because it seems so unto us; but we must reckon and
account of them as God has taught us to account of them, in his word. Cast we
our eyes upon the Israelites in gathering Manna upon the Sabbath: what great
matter think you was it for them upon the Sabbath day in the morning to stoop
and gather Manna, that lay before them at their feet? they might have done it
and kept the Sabbath too; yet God takes this most heinously, How long (says
he) will this people break all my commandments? reckoning that breach of the
Sabbath, as the breach of his whole law. Again, what great sin was it for a
man to step over the threshold of his doors, and to gather a handful of
sticks to make a fire with? would any of these men that reckon sins small
have accounted him worthy of death, though happily he had done it
presumptuously? yet God adiudgeth him to dye for it; and therefore that work
which thou presumest to do, is it servile? is it forbidden? Count it not light
then, for the breach of Gods law is no small matter, especially if thou
presumest to do it because it is a small sin, or disorder.

No pretense of meetnes must make us break the Sabbath.
know not whether I shall again have a time to do it if I neglect this: as
for example, in the time of harvest, the weather is catching, the corn is
ready to grow in the gripes, and the hay to rot in the swath: and now the
Sabbath is a fair day, and is it not meet to gather it up? Yet I say for all
this, thou must let it alone; for in seed time and in harvest thou must rest,
Exodus 34. 21. Yea, but I know not whether I shall have another time so fit to
take it up. Why who taught thee to distrust? especially when thou see fair
weather coming. Does not the same God give the second day that gave the first?
and did thou hang upon his providence so long as it rained; and now it
shines will thou presently unclasp thy hold by thy carnal distrust? Yea but
the weather is very catching, and the scarcity is great; and therefore it is
best to take the opportunity. What? still, is thy soul buried under a loaf
of bread? and will thou have bread, or else thou will make it of stones? If
thou do remember what Solomon says of the bread of deceit, it is sweet, but
afterward it fills their mouths with gravel; Such shall this bread be unto
thee that is gotten with the breach of the Lords Sabbath. Yet it were better to
be without it than to have it in his anger, least he smite thee whilst the
meat is in thy mouth, and make it come forth again at thy nostrels, for thy
contempt of his law, as he did the Israelites, Numb. 11: yet rather so long as
it perishes not by thy default, throw thy self upon the Lord, and resolve
that as he gave, so if it please him to take it thou will be content, knowing
that he is able to give much more. If not, yet in thy obedience is his love,
Ioh. 15. 10. and in his love is life, Psalm. 35. And last of all, let this
rather make thee to erect a new Sabbath, than to destroy the old, as in Ioels
time in a great scarcity they did, as appears Joel. 1. 14. Sanctify a fast,
call an assembly. What is the matter? see before verse. 10. The field is
wasted, the land mourns, for the corn is destroyed. So that Gods punishments
must lead us to the keeping of his Sabbath, or rather unto the erecting of a
new: but by no means unto the breach of the old.

But, will another say, that which I do is a good No pretense of the goodness
of the work, must cause us to break the Sabbath.
work, and it tends to the glory of God, and to his service; and therefore I
trust you will not deny but that a man may do such works upon the Sabbath.
To which I answer, is it a work of thine ordinary vocation? and is it
servile? I say then for all this glorious show thou may not do it; for God
would not have them work about the Tabernacle upon the Sabbath day, Ex. 31.
13, though the business were no less than to make a house for him to dwell
in. And the women that followed Christ out of Galilie, would not imbaulme the
body of Christ upon the Sabbath, though it might have been thought a work of
great consequence; but how great soever in the eyes of men, yet they would not
do it; and least they should be blamed as being over curious and strict in
not doing of it, the holy Ghost defends them, and shows they did well in
forbearing; for they rested (says the text) according unto the commandment,
Luke 22. 56.

work at all. Which, that I may not be mistaken, I will now set down what
kind of works upon What works may be done upon the Sabbath.
the Sabbath be lawful to be done, and in what cases. For this we must know,
that there is no commandment so general but it has some exception;
especially those which are affirmative, for they are always more mild, and
bind not always and at all times; of which sort in the Decalogue there be
two, the fourth, and the fifth, both which have exceptions; as in the fifth,
Thou shall honor thy father and mother, this is generally true: yet it may so
fall out in some cases that thou may be exempt from thy duty, if the
honoring of them may dishonor God: and therefore thy honor is limited in the
Lord, Ephe. 6. 1. So here thou shall do no manner of servile work: yet (says
Christ) which of you is it that having an ox, or an ass, fallen into the
ditch on the Sabbath, does not presently help him out? Matthew. 12. 11. Where
Christ does not, as some foolishly furmise, abolish the Sabbath as a ceremony;
but shows that he did no more in healing upon the Sabbath, than they
themselves did in plucking the ox or ass out of the ditch: thereby indeed
making a tenise ball of their argument, and retorting it upon themselves which
they banded at him. But had Christ held the Sabbath to have been abolished,
when they charged him with the breach thereof, he might easily have answered,
it is abolished: but he shows quite contrary that he did no more break
the Sabbath in healing, than they did in plucking the ox out of the pit: so
that he does not here abolish the Sabbath, but rather establish it by showing
the right observation thereof. And to speak the truth, Christ neither did, nor
could abolish the ceremonial law, but by his death. Therefore he is said,
Coloss. 2. 14. in his cross to take away the hand-writting which stood in
ordinances, and to nail it unto the same his cross: but in his life he was
obedient unto it even in all things: which I think no man will be so impudent
as to deny. This therefore being plain, let us return unto the exceptions
which this commandment admits: for notwithstanding that the Lord
commands that ordinarily a man may do no servile work upon the Sabbath;
yet this commandment admits three exceptions.

First, if God extraordinarily command us to 1. We may work if God command us.
work upon the Sabbath, we may work: for he is Lord of the Sabbath, and
therefore may give a dispensation when he list. And therefore the man did well,
Ioh. 5. 11. that at Christ's commandment took up his bed and did walk. So
also did the Jews that compassed Jericho on the Sabbath: for they were
commanded to compass it seven days, whereof then the Sabbath must needs be
one, Josh. 6. 14, 15. This is the first exception.

The second is, that if the work be necessarily 2. If the work be necessarily
required for the performance of Gods service.
required to the performance of the service of God, servile or not, it must be
done. As Circumcision on the eighth day, if it fell upon the Sabbath it was to
be done, Ioh. 7. 22. And the Priests on the Sabbath killed the sacrifice, and
were blameless, Matthew. 12. 5. And in this respect the Minister on the Sabbath
is allowed to go to preach, as Christ did upon the Sabbath, Matthew. 12. and the
people are to go to hear. An example whereof we have in the Shunamite, that
went ordinarily upon the Sabbath and new Moon to the Prophet: For when she
demanded leave of her husband to go to the Prophet, Why will thou go (says
he) seeing it is neither Sabbath nor new Moon: intimating thereby that upon
those times she went to hear him. And in this regard was the Sabbath days
journey allowed, Act. 1. 12. And therefore whosoever shall break the rest of
the Sabbath in this respect is blameless. For, the Sabbath was made for man,
that he might keep it holy unto the Lord. Now, if it may so fall that the
rest it self should any way be a let to the keeping of it holy, then the
rest it self is to be broken: and they that so do are blameless. For the end
of the law in this respect is to be regarded, and not the letter. For the
Sabbath was made for man, that is, for the good of man; and not man for the
Sabbath, that is for the rest. And this is the meaning of that place, Mark. 2.
27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Thirdly, if it be a work of necessity; that is, 3. If it be of necessity we
may work upon the Sabbath.
a work which the time present does necessarily require to be done, and cannot
be deferred unto another day, without loss or hindrance; that same work,
whether it be for preservation of life, health, or goods, must be done upon
the Sabbath. All which I will show. And first, for preservation of life it is
lawful to break the rest of the Sabbath: for Elias continued his flight from
Iezabel many Sabbaths together, 1. King. 19. 8. And this was the fault of the
Jews; but afterward corrected by Judas Macchab. that they would not fight on
the Sabbath, for the preservation of their lives: for the Sabbath was not made
for the hurt, but for the good of man.

And as it is lawful to break the Sabbath for the Labor lawful for
preservation of health upon the Sabbath.
preservation of life, so is it for the preservation of health. Therefore the
Physician may go to visit the sick. Christ himself did so, Ioh. 5. 3. He
went unto the poole of Bethesda, where lay a great company of sick folks.
And it is not only lawful to visit, but also to cure; for he cured the blind
man upon the Sabbath, Ioh. 9. 14. The same is also warranted unto the
Surgeon by Christ's example to dress the wounds, and temper the salues, Ioh.
9. 6. He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed his
eyes. And as these things may be done for the recovery of health: so also may
a man do that which is convenient, for the preservation and continuance of his
health: for God would not allow that a man should live, but also that he might
live cheerfully: and therefore the ox was to be lead to the water, Luke 13. 15.
though he might have lived one day without water. Now if this may be allowed
for the good of the beast; then how much more for the good of man? In this case
therefore it is lawful upon the Sabbath for a man to do works of
comeliness, as to cloathe himself. Secondly, to do things for our present
use, as to dress his meat, which is also warranted by the Disciples pulling
and rubbing of the ears of corn. Wherein also respect may be had of his place
and degree, as Nehemiah had daily an ox and six sheep, besides birds
provided for him, Nehem. 5. 18. Now if every day, then on the Sabbath: yet here
we must take heed that we make not the Sabbath a day of feasting, as in many
places in the country they do, keeping their feasts not like Jobs children
every one his day, but every one his Sabbath day. A good rule therefore for the
ordring of this, will be upon the Sabbath not to exceed our ordinary.
Thirdly, this also gives liberty for the dressing of our cattle, milking of
our kine, and such like; without which things life it self is not so
comfortable unto them. Last of all, as all these things may be done for
preservation of health; so also may we labor upon the Sabbath for the
preservation of Labor upon the Sabbath for preservation of goods, lawful.
our goods, being in danger of losing them. Which of you is it (says Christ)
that having an ox or an ass fallen into the ditch, does not pull him out? All
which things as they may be done upon the Sabbath, so if necessity be, they
must presently be done; and the exercises of the Sabbath neglected for the
doing of them; for Christ will have the ox pulled presently out of the pit,
Luke 14. 5. And in regard of this it is that he requires mercy and not
sacrifice; not but that he will have both: but if the case so stand that he
cannot have both at once, but must content himself with one, he had rather
have mercy than sacrifice. And therefore Paul when Eutiches was fallen down
dead, left preaching to recover him to life: and the Israelites, though they
were commanded not to touch a carrion, yet they must take up Joseph's bones,
Exo. 13. 19. And Mat. 5. though he commands thee to offer sacrifice, yet if thy
brother have ought against thee, thou must first go and be reconciled, and
then come. So that in all these respects, howsoever the law commands a precise
rest; yet as we say, Necessity has no law; so truly may we say, it has no
Sabbath days.

Cautions to be observed in doing the works of necessity.
First, that we send not for excuses, and make matters of necessity, when
before hand we might have prevented the necessity. As for example, if a man
owe a sum of money upon a band, and neglect the taking of order for the
payment of it, until the day be so near that he must needs travail on the
Sabbath to discharge his band. Also when a man is served with process to
appear on such a day at Westminster, he having time enough deferreth it so
long, that he must needs travail upon the Sabbath to come there by his day,
and by this means brings a necessity upon himself, which God never laid
upon him; all which necessities, if men did well consider before hand, might be
easily avoided. Well, but when a man has negligently run into this
necessity, whether may he then travail upon the Sabbath? I say, if it be of
necessity to be done, thou may do it: but thou must withal remember to cry
to God for mercy for forgetting his Sabbath, which thou should have
remembered. The second thing that must be taken heed of is, that no recompense
be taken for the labor which thou do upon this day: for by that means thou
make it a servile work. Secondly, it will be a means to lead thee on to
this sin of Sabbath-breaking: for rewards do blind the eyes. And thirdly, be
well assured that God will never bless that hire, but it shall be unto thee
like the Manna that the Israelites gathered more than needed, that rotted and
stunke, Exodus 16. The last caution is, that when we are thus forced by
necessity to break the Sabbath, that then we have an especial care sometime
of the week to repay that time, which we took on the Sabbath, by employing so
much of the week unto holy exercises; so that although God has not the
precise time prescribed which he requires, yet he may have at least the
equity thereof; so much time.

Now there be, I know, that unto these works All works of mercy may not be
done upon the Sabbath.
which God has in his word dispensed with to be done upon the Sabbath, do
add moreover all works of mercy, which I take may no further be done upon the
Sabbath, than they come within one of the foresaid limitations, that is, that
they be either in special commanded, as 1. Cor. 16. 1. As first, collections
for the poor; of which kind also are visiting of the poor, and sick, and
such like: or such as godliness requires, as a man may travail to bring
others unto the exercises of religion, or necessity inforceth us unto; of
which before. But if neither of these lead us thereunto, though they be works
of mercy, yet they must be deferred. As for example, a poor man has an aker
of corn to be cut, who is not able to pay for ye cutting of it, neither yet
to cut it himself. Now to help such a man, there is no man but will say it is a
deed of charity to cut his corn; yet if his neighbors should, some six or
seven of them, every one take his sith, and cut down his corn upon the
Sabbath, they should break the Sabbath, and should clean contradict Gods
commandment, that forbids them to do any servile work upon the Sabbath;
for this charity to our neighbor must not take away our duty to God, nor
hinder it, unless as before.

The conclusion then of this point is this: That no kind of ordinary or
servile work may be done upon the Sabbath; neither in the house, nor in the
city, nor in the fields; nor upon the seas, be they never so small, or never
so meet, or never so glorious in show, except either God command it
extraordinarily; or that the work tend directly to Gods worship: or be of
necessity either for the preservation of life, or health, or goods; in which
respects God has given us allowance upon the Sabbath to work, and not
otherwise. And this much touching the first kind of works here principally
and by name forbidden.

CHAP. III.
On the Sabbath we must rest from recreations, Sect. 1. And pastimes, namely
dancing, Sect. 2. Also from wordly words, Sect. 3. And thoughts, Sect. 4. But
above all from sin, Sect. 5.

Pastimes upon the Sabbath unlawful.
are only forbidden, and no others? Surely no: for as I will never think that
when David prayed, Lord turn away mine eyes that I behold not vanity, Psalm.
119. 37; he meant that his ears should stand open to hear vanity: no more
will I think that when God did forbid works of our ordinary vocation; that he
meant to allow works of pleasure, such as are our works of recreations, and
pastimes, as we call them. Which will the better appear, if we consider the
reason why these works of our ordinary vocation are forbidden us upon the
Sabbath: which is, not that they are unlawful in themselves, but because they
destroy the rest, and take up the mind that it cannot be employed in Gods
business; now these doing the same things, are by the same reasons forbidden.
We must understand therefore that this commandment is of the same nature with
the rest, and as in them by one sin forbidden, are understood all of the same
kind: (as by murder is forbidden all cruelty, whether inward, or outward:
and by adultery all wantonness, and uncleanness: as offending against chastity,
Matthew. 5.) so by these servile works named, as breaking the rest of the
Sabbath, are forbidden al works that break the rest of the Sabbath: only
those excepted which God has dispensed with, of which before. And therefore
all such works as are done for recreation, as bowling, shooting, hunting,
hawking, wrestling, playing at cat, and such like; howsoever in the week they
may be allowed, yet are upon this day utterly unlawful and forbidden. Yea and
me thinks the reason stands more strongly against them; for as from that,
Leuit. 19. 15. Thou shall not favor the poor in judgment; A man may implie a
portion from the stronger, that he must then much less favor the rich. So
here thou may not do any work of thine ordinary vocation upon the Sabbath,
which yet at other times thou art commanded to do: then much less may thou
do the works which no where are required of thee, but only by way of
permission are at sometimes allowed. And surely if you mark it, you shall
find more danger in these of the last sort, than in the other: for that they
more carry away the mind from God, than these of our ordinary vocation do:
for who is it that had not rather go to Church, than go to work? but who is
it (I speak of the multitude) that had not rather go to play, than go to
Church? But when then (will some one demand) shall we have time for
recreation, if not upon the Sabbath? If thou will have time for that, allow
part of thine own, for that is thy work, and therefore thou must allow part of
thy time to do it in, but Gods time thou may not, for that he has reserved
for his own business. Let me ask thee one question; If thou should allow
unto thy servant of thy six days, five whole days to do his business and to
recreate himself in them, and should reserve unto thy self but one;
would thou take it well at his hands, if thou chiding him for neglect of thy
business upon that day, he should answer, when should I use recreation if not
now? Which answer if thou will not take at thy servants hands, do thou
think that God will accept of it at thine, that has dealt more liberally
with thee than thou with thy servant? And therefore out upon it, that thou
should offer this unto him upon his Sabbath, to plead thus for liberty and
recreation, when yet in truth all the recreations in the world cannot be
answerable unto the recreations of the Sabbath: for what can recreate or
refresh a man more, than to drink of the waters of life? What can glad a man
more than to hear of the forgiveness of his sins? To one that is in prison
fast bound in fetters, what greater recreation than to hear of his
enlargement? and what greater comfort than to come unto the sealing of his
pardon? And are these things offered unto us upon the Sabbath, and yet do we
like children run after butterflies, and let these things alone? If we do,
it well shows that since we were created we never were yet recreated and borne
again: for if we were, the enjoying of these things would be unto us above all
the recreations in the world.

But then here it will be demanded of me, Not al recreations at all times upon
the Sabbath unlawful.
whether I do utterly disallow all recreations upon the Sabbath. Not so
neither; for it may sometimes come so to pass, that recreation may be more
necessary for a man than his meat, (as also it may so fall in the week
days) yea, and sometimes the settling of a man's mind free (such is partly the
corruption and partly the weakness of our nature) may be a furtherance unto us
in the performance of the duties of godliness, as well as in other duties of
our own. And therefore so far forth as it is either of necessity for the
present preservation of our health, or of necessity for the present
furtherance and fitting of us unto the service of God, we may use it. But by
this allowance, will some say, evil men will take liberty unto themselves
under these pretenses to profane the Sabbath by their sports. Answ. It may
well be so, that they which stumble at Christ to their ruin; and they that
wrest his word to their own condemnation; will also wrest this liberty to
bring themselves into the bondage of sin: yet must not this let us, to give
that allowance unto Gods children which he has left him in his word. But as
for such as abuse their liberty, I admonish them in the fear of God, that
they make not Gods commandments like cheuerell laces, to stretch them every
way to their own bents and purposes. For if they do, I appeal unto the
highest Judge of all the earth, that they have no such liberty given them. And
therefore if they take it, their blood be upon their own heads, if they bring
themselves by their liberty to be the sons of bondage. But as for the
children of God, I know they will and shall finish their salvation with fear
and trembling. And thus we have seen how these works of recreations are also
forbidden us upon the Sabbath.

Pastimes unlawful upon the Sabbath.
call pastimes; which indeed though they be but recreations in their own
nature, yet as wine by his long standing becomes vinegar; so do these sports
and recreations by the excessive use, or rather abuse of them, become sinful:
that is, when we use them not to make our selves thereby fit to redeem time,
which the Apostle requires, but rather to spend time and vainly to pass it.
And therefore if the former were unlawful which did after a sort build up a
man; then how much more these that destroy a man, who by the excessive use of
them is made unfit unto the performance of any duties? of which sort of
pastimes are stage-plaies, cards and dice-playing upon the Sabbath; as also
Beare-baitings, Cockpits, and such like. All which in particular to confute
were infinite, the mystery of vanity is so large. Yet there is one above the
rest, (which because it so much troubles the ministry of the word, and
because it has gotten her a whorish forehead, so that though we have spit 7.
times in her face, yet she blusheth not, but walks like a daughter of Sion
with a stretched out neck, and a wandering eye, mincing it, and making a
tinckling with her feet as she goes) me thinks I have named her already (it
is wanton dancing); I can not choose but speak of it, the rather because she is
degenerated so much from that manlike kind of actiuitie, and nimblenes, into a
nice and effeminace wantonness; as also because she seems now to get her a
shelter and covering under the lap of David's garment: Did not David (say they)
dance? True, but yet David did not thus dance as they now do. For first, it
was in those times extraordinary, and not used, unless upon some great
deliverance, as when the damsels met David and Saul in a dance, 1. Sam. 18. 6:
or upon some great rejoicing, as at the bringing home of the Arc, 2. Sam. 6.
But as for our dancing, there is nothing so common as it: no sooner can the
fiddler sound, but straight we fall a frisking, as if we had never felt our
feet before that day. Secondly, David daunced before the Lord, 1. Sam. 6. 14.
that is, to glorify him; we before our mates, with whom we seek to grace our
selves. Thirdly, David daunced to abase and humble himself; I will yet (says
he) be more vile than thus, and low in mine own sight, 2. Sam. 6. 22. But we
dance to advance and set forth our selves. Lastly, David daunced alone, as
the manner amongst them was, the men by themselves, and the women by
themselves, Exodus 15. 20. First Moses and the children of Israel sang and
daunced, verse. 1: then verse. 20. Miriam the Prophetess came forth with a
timbrell in her hand, and all the women followed after her, with timbrels and
daunces, and they answered the men. And so 1. Sam. 18. 6. The women met Saul
and David singing and dancing. But we dance promiscuously men and women
together, nay good and bad together (if peradventure there be any good amongst
them.) These differences then I see not how any man is able to make to agree:
which if he cannot, he can no more justly allege his example to prove our
wanton dancing by, than if he should bring the conjunction of man and woman in
Paradise, to prove the conjunction of them in the stews lawful: and
therefore if any shall draw any dart out of David's quiver, I doubt not but I
shall be able to return the point upon himself; as Amos upon those that
alleged David's example for the inuenting of instruments of music to this
purpose, alleging that they did it like David, or as David did: but though
they held out David for a buckler in this case, yet it would not bear off the
woe he pronounced against them, Amos 6. 5. Yea but, will they say, can I show
any place in the Scripture where dancing is expressly forbidden? no more can
they show me in the Scripture, where it is expressly forbidden a man should
rob upon Salisbury plain: yet he which says, Thou shall not steal, does
consequently say, thou shall not rob upon Salisburie plain. And when as the
Prophet Amos says, that for three and for four abominations God would not
turn unto Damascus; he says as much as if he had said for seven
abominations; so when God forbids wantonness, Romans 13. 13. when he
forbids foolish, nay pleasant jesting, (...) Ephe. 5. 4; does he not then
forbid our wanton and pleasant dancing? You will say, dancing is not
wantonness, though wantonness be in dancing. Be it so, because it pleases you
thus to run between the bark and the rind; yet I perceive that the body
is sick that has such evils accompanying it, and I fear me when you shall
seek to sunder dancing from evil (I speak of it as it is commonly used) you
shall find them like thorns folded one in another, that will hardly be
sundred. But be it so that dancing is but a thing indifferent; yet for my part
I have always been of this mind in things indifferent, not to fetch the good
or evil of them from their nature, but from the use or abuse of them. I know
well it cannot be denied, but that wine is good in it own nature, but yet we
give it not to one that is sick of a fever, not for that it is naught, but for
that it agrees not with the body so affected. It is no good standing for one
that has a giddie head upon a pinnacle, that is no fit place for such a one:
Pleasure is not comely for a fool, Pro. 19. 10; and ambitious men we say are
not fit for honor, because after too much desire follows abuse; and a man
that is very thirsty oftentimes drinks till he be drunken: therefore in
respect of the great desire that is in many of this, so far as they know no
mean in it, on the use there follows abuse, and they add drunkenness to
thirst; as the Prophet speaks: And this (as I take it) was the reason why God
would not permit Lot to see the smoke of Sodom, because he delighted in the
soil too much; which yet he granted unto Abraham, a man not so addicted
thereunto. Young heads for the most part (which are the greatest dauncers) are
so unruly and waiward, by reason of the corruption wherewith they are warmed in
their mothers wombes, as that they turn grace it self many times into
wantonness; how much more will they turn this dalliance into further wantonness?
A safer way therefore shall be to keep them and it asunder. For, cast a coal
into flax, or a sparkle into tinder, or a burning match into gunpowder, bring
fire into the wind, and you shall see how easily it burns and blows up
all. Now as the coal is unto the flax, a sparkle unto tinder, a match to
powder, wind to the fire; so are these sports to their nature, which is as
soon set on fire, as flax, or tinder, or gunpowder. It is therefore the rule
which the Wise man gives to such as are wantonly given, Pro. 5. 8. that they
come not near the door of an harlot. He speaks, me thinks, as though the
plague or some infection were in the house, which we use to avoid: I say not
all that go unto them be naught; but yet let them take heed of the infection.
And I think verily that these Sommer-houses and May-poles may deserve more
justly to have plague-bils written upon them, than any house that is infected
with the plague: for the infection and plague of sin is greater in them than
in these. Said he well that said, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness? Ephesians. 5. 21. By works of darkness he means the works of
evil men, as appears verse. 8. Ye were once darkness. Now that it is a work
of evil men, appears, in that the worst men for the most part most desire
it, and that it is unfruitful (I mean as touching any fruit unto godliness)
who sees not, seeing no man is made the better, the wiser, the holier, or more
religious thereby. No man is drawn thereby to reform any evil in himself,
no corruption reproved, no sin abated, no repentance wrought, no fear: Seeing
then no grapes grow on these thorns, nor figs upon these thistles; but that as
the tree is, so is his fruit, and as his fruit is so is the tree: it
follows that as the Apostle wills, we have no fellowship with these
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Which we shall the
sooner do, if we consider how disagreeing they are with the profession of a
Christian, who is willed to be sober, to gird up the loins of his mind, Luke
17. to crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Galath. 5. 24. to seek those
things which are above, Coloss. 3. 2. All which, or any one, how does a
Christian practice in his wanton dancing? But were there no other reasons but
this one, that it is offensive unto good men, and especially unto Gods
ministers; it ought to be left. For as the Apostle would never eat meat
while the world stood, rather than he would offend his brother; so doubtless,
had they the Apostles mind that use it, they would never dance whilst they
live, rather than they would offend their brethren. Indeed were it a duty
that were commanded, then they were to do it whosoever said to the contrary;
and the offense was not given but taken, but being a thing indifferent, which
we may do or not, we ought to leave it, in that our brethren are offended at
it. And yet further to show the evils of dancing, I might allege the evil of
the punishment that is oftentimes upon them. First in their bodies, by their
unmeasurable toil, aches, surfets, and so consequently deadly fevers; are
engendered; in their souls, that whatsoever they have composed and ordered in
the day or time before, they shall find it all troubled and out of course; in
their goods, a thriftlesse and prodigal wasting and spending of them; as also
loss of their time, that can never be recovered. If they think that I speak
not the truth herein, let them no more but when they lie down upon their beds
examine their own consciences, whether it he not so. As also oftentimes, the
wrath of God lighting upon them in the midst of their sports. In a dance the
daughters of Shilo were all defloured, Judge. 21. 21. In a dance the men of
Siglag were all slain, 1. Sam. 30. 16. Whilst the Israelites daunced about
the calfe, the wrath of God grew hot amongst them, Exodus 32. And Job shows
how the wicked go to hell in a dance, Job. 21. Is not all this sufficient to
prove it evil* if not, yet it is certain that it has an appearance of
evil, and therefore we must abstain from it. For 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. the
Apostle wills us to abstain from all appearance of evil. But howsoever at
other times it may be held (circumstances considered) an exercise not so evil:
yet upon the Sabbath I will justify it to be a notable evil. First, because
by this the rest is broken, as far forth as by any other labor. Secondly,
the mind is distracted and lead away to pleasures, when as it should be wholly
intent to Gods worship. But they serve God (will some say) although they
dance. Surely no more than they can go two ways at once, or indite a letter,
and tell a tale: no more can they mind their pleasures and serve God too. It
is Christ's rule, a man cannot serve God and riches, no more can he serve God
and pleasures. Yet my soul weepeth in secret, to see, that whereas God has
appointed his Sabbath to be sanctified and kept holy, and his word then to be
taught; this wantonness has miserably incroched upon him, and taken his right,
and part, and given it to sports and pastimes; to kissings and imbracings, and
wrung his righteous scepter out of his hand, and given it unto Lords of
Misrule, even so far forth, that now the striving is for these things. For
this sin of wantonness has set up a monarchy in the minds of men, and
begins now to strive with God for his day: for when (say they) should we do
these things if not upon the Sondaies? But as for the preaching of the word,
catechizing and instruction, these are but the lesser things of the law, they
are but mint and cummin; but the great things of the Sabbath are their sports;
though God requires that his kingdom should first be sought, and that all
other businesses and delights too, should be set aside for his service. And
therefore as here he dispenses with our works for a day, so 1. Cor. 7. 4. he
dispenses with the very duties of marriage it self for a time, that the
married may give themselves to prayer: yea Joel. 2. 15. he calls the bride
and the bridegroom out of their bed chamber, who though he would not have
sundred the first year, for any affairs of war, yet they must come forth
into the assembly: and does he not then call us much more from these foolish
vanities? Will he restrain the bride, and the bridegroom, from delighting one
in another love for a season, that his service may be performed? and will he
then (think you) allow these foolish vanities upon the Sabbath? Of which I may
say as Jonah; They that wait upon them forsake their own mercy, Ion. 2. 8.
But you will say, all do not this. Tell not me what some do not, but tell me
what the most part do: to prove a disease contagious, it is sufficient to show
that many be infected by it, and in matters of peril what comes often, not
always to pass; though in this I dare say, it fares as in a common plague,
in which it is no wonder to see many die, but it is a wonder to see any escape
the infection. For show me almost one that is a common dauncer, that prefers
not his pleasure before Gods service. Yea but, you will say, be it that
dancing is evil, yet were not a man better to dance upon the Sabbath, than
to do worse? Answ. First, I would know of such whether there be a necessity
laid upon them to do naught? must they needs do this, or else will they do
worse? Are they Ieremies Negroes that never will be washed white? And have they
so accustomed themselves to do evil that they can do no good? Iere. 13. 23.
Secondly, if it be so, I would know of them because they will do bad, or else
they will do worse; whether the Magistrate must therefore suffer them to do
bad? were it not to give the way unto all sin and iniquity? But thirdly, how
in this reasoning is goodness and badnesse tied by the tails like Sampsons
foxes, to work mischief withal? Better (do you say) to do this, than to
do worse? Indeed I know that of evils some are worse than others; but for
their degrees in goodness I think of them as of the foxes whelps, there is
never a better: for there is never a good; but they be all naught. And
therefore this thou may truly say, it is not so bad to do this, as to do
worse: but this cannot justify the doing of either. Indeed we use to say of
evils, the least must be chosen; but if the evils be sins, then I say of
evils neither must be chosen. And therefore this is a foolish kind of
reasoning to justify evil by worse; as whoredom by the stews. Tell me if a
thief should set upon thee in the way, and should use this argument: Sir, it
is better to rob you, than to kill you, and therefore give me your purse;
would thou be so sheepish, unless he brought club arguments to beat thee
down with, to yield thy purse? or if thou did let him have thy purse;
might he not be hanged for all his Logic? But if this be a good kind of
reasoning, I dare undertake to maintain and justify any sin in the world by
that which is worse, the worst sin only excepted. But I am weary of turning
this dung, and therefore I end.

To come therefore unto a conclusion of this point, though dancing be not
expressly in the Scripture forbidden; yet if wantonness be, if foolish iessing,
if it be an unfruitful work of darkness, if not agreeing unto our Christian
profession, if dangerous in regard of the corruption of our nature that is
soon set on fire; if hurtful to our health, and to our wealth, a spending of
our time, an offense to our brethren, an appearance of evil, a breach of the
rest of the Sabbath, a destraction of the mind from holy duties, nay a fighter
against holiness; then I pray you leave it and plead no more for it: for will
a Christian plead Baals case, even against the ministers of God? who have so
often beaten your ears (I mistake) the air with these arguments that I have
now alleged against it, who although they have been heretofore unto you as
Physicians of no value, prescribe what they will, yet you will do what you
list; and you have snuffed in these words as the wild ass does the air, that
will not be taken; for who can turn her back? Iere. 2. 24. Yet my comfort is
that there are twelve hours in the day, and though you cannot be taken in the
first, yet you may in the last hour, which I now come unto you in, and that at
least for all your wildness, yet you may be taken in your month, ibid. that
is, when you shall find Gods hand heavy upon you. And then I pray you at
least think upon it, as Joseph's brethren, when they were in misery, remembered
that they had sinned against their brother, and there thought that that trouble
came upon them. For they said one to another, We have sinned against our
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us and we
would not hear him, therefore is this trouble come upon us, Genesis 42. So should
you say, we have sinned against God in breaking his Sabbath; and when we saw
his ministers in anguish of their souls, beseeching us that we would not
break his Sabbath, we would not hear them, and therefore is this trouble come
upon us. For even for breaking of the Sabbath in this manner, does God often
plague you. And this much of pastimes, and especially that dancing is
unlawful upon the Sabbath.

The Sabbath must not be broken by our words.
works of our ordinary vocation, or else the works of pleasures; so let us
now see how the Sabbath is broken by our words: for our tongues also are bound
unto the good behavior upon this day, that they speak not a vain word. And
good reason it should be so: for when as all the other commandments take order
for the tongue; as the first forbids Atheism; the second, making mention of
our Idols; the third, blasphemy; the fifth, cursing of parents; the sixth,
brawling; the seventh, wanton speech; the eighth, deceitful speech; the ninth,
false speech, etc: may it be thought that this commandment only gives the
raines unto the tongue? or may it be thought that when ye Lord gives a quietus
est unto all the members, as to the hand, and foot, yea to the whole body,
that it rest upon the Sabbath, that it gives liberty to the tongue, which
has more need to be restrained than any of the rest; because it is an unruly
evil, and therefore cannot be ruled unless he charm it; and full of deadly
poison, and therefore cannot be emptied unless he purge it, Iam. 3. The
Psalmist makes as it were a proclamation after a man that desires to live and
see good days. Then as if some man had answered him, that do I, he presently
directs him what he shall do; Keep thy tongue from evil, says he, Psalm.
34. And that which here he teaches others, Psalm. 39. he resolves to practice
himself, namely, to keep his tongue, and to hold it back as it were with a
bridle: and least he should not be able to curb the unruly beast, he prays
God to help him; Keep the door of my lips, says he, Psalm. 141. 3. And it
has indeed great need to be kept; for death and life are in the power of the
tongue, Prou. 18. 21. But as it must be kept in all the commandments, so above
all in this commandment: because in any one vain or sinful speech upon the
Sabbath, we sin twice: first, against the commandment that forbids that
sin: secondly, in that it is a breach of the holiness of the Sabbath.
Therefore Esaias, the best expounder of this law, when he shows wherein this
commandment is broken, among other things forbids a man the speaking of a
vaineword, Isai. 58. 13.

And therefore here are first condemned all such worldly men, who although upon
the Sabbath they will not for shame be seen to work, yet they make it an
ordinary day of accounts and reckonings with their workmen, and to direct them
what they shall do the next week; are there not six days allowed for men to
do these things in? and yet must Gods day be made a day of our accounts?

Under the like condemnation also come all those that upon the Sabbath talk of
nothing but their pleasures and sports, that rehearse and tell nothing but
gossips tales, and news, that love to have their tongues to run through the
world, and to be meddling in other men's matters; if any question shall be put as
concerning religion, they grow as mute as fishes. But let these men and women
know, there is a time when they shall answer for every idle word, especially
for those that they shall thus vainly babble forth upon the Sabbath. And so
much touching the outward breach of the Sabbath.

But yet here is not all for a man to cease from. Sect. 4.
these outward works, for these concern the very beasts as well as man: we
must therefore consider that as a man does consist of two parts, a body and a
soul; so God has a regard unto them both: and as he requires of the body an
external rest, that no labor may hinder holiness; so he requires of the
soul, an internal rest from all sin, and that rest indeed is proper to man;
and it is to rest from the works of the flesh, which Esaias. 58. 13. are also
called our ways or works, and these are properly and indeed servile; and the
worst kind of servile works of all others. And therefore as other thy works
are here forbidden which are servile, because they hinder holiness; so these
kind of servile works above all others are forbidden, because they not only
hinder holiness, but are opposite unto it, so far forth as he which is
subject unto them is free from holiness, Romans 6. 20. Against these therefore it
is that Esaias so bitterly inueigheth; I cannot abide your Sabbaths, etc. Esai.
1. 13. But why so? verse. 15. he gives a reason; for your hands are full of
blood. And Esai. 58. when they come unto him in hypocrisy, and seemed to find
fault with God that he would not accept their fast, which had the nature of a
Sabbath, and as appears in the end of the chapter is called his holy day: God
yields them a reason why he did not accept it; Behold (says he) ye fast to
strife and unto debate, to smite with the fist of wickedness, verse. 4. Having
thus showed their fast, then he rates them for it: verse. 5. Is it such a fast
(says he) that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for a day?
call ye this a fast or an acceptable day unto the Lord? etc. And having thus
rated them, then he shows them what a true fast is; to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, to take away the yoke, and
putting forth of the finger (understand, to any evil work) and wicked
speaking; if any man do these things, he keeps a true rest. I know well this
rest from our sins must be kept in the whole course of our lives; yet upon
the Sabbath above all we must take heed that sin enter not upon us, because
it is opposite unto the sanctity thereof.

kills an ox, is as if he slew a man, and he that sacrifices a sheep, as
if he cut off a dogs head, his oblation is as swines blood, and his incense
as the blessing of an Idol, Esai. 66. 3. And therefore Matthew. 7. Christ
calls such workers of iniquity, because though they did good works, for
they prophesied and cast out devils: yet they did them not well, but in
hypocrisy: for God does not only require at a man's hands that he do good,
but also that he do it well: for, if thou do well (says God to Cain) shall
it not be accepted? He does not say, if thou do good it shall be accepted;
but if thou do well, to show that good things must be well done. And that he
means so, appears in that which he presently adds. But if thou do not
well (says he) sin lies at the door: thereby putting it out of doubt, that
if a good thing be not well done, it is sin; and in regard hereof it is that
Esai. chap. 58. reckons the hypocrite a Sabbath-breaker, though he did
humble himself by fasting, etc. And therefore let the hypocrite and popish
meritmonger be well assured, that though they dig deep to cover their
sins, and dissemble deeply with God at the Church; yet let them be well
assured I say, that their own sin will find them out, Number. 32. 23. and that
it will wait and tarry them like their dogs at the door, yea and will hunt
them and never leave them, until it have brought them unto destruction, if
they learn not to serve the Lord aright.

And lastly, as the soul must keep this Sabbath or rest from sin upon this day
especially; so must we look also that our minds and thoughts be not carried
away with the meditation of worldly matters. For God requires not only thy
body, but thy soul, yea thy very thoughts, Luke 10. 27. And howsoever upon
the week it be lawful for thee to ponder these things, yet upon the Sabbath
thou must not think thine own will, Esai. 58. 13. A man must not therefore
busy his head upon the Sabbath about his worldly business, nor about the
effecting of his delights in the week following; but he must be wholly as it
were another man from that which he was in the week before; and he must upon
the Sabbath let fall the care of these earthly things, as Elias did his mantle,
when he was rapt up into heaven.

To conclude therefore this point of the rest, whosoever upon the Sabbath does
no servile work of his ordinary vocation, neither in his house at home, nor
in the city, nor in the fields abroad, nor at sea (saving only such as are of
necessity to be done, or are for the performance of Gods worship commanded, or
else warranted by his extraordinary command) and also forbeareth all
recreations, sports, plays, or pastimes, keeping his tongue from vain words,
and his heart from wickedness and worldly cares, he truly and in deed
keeps the rest of the Sabbath. And this much touching the first duty
required in the observation of the Sabbath, which is to rest.

CHAP. IIII.
The rest of the Sabbath must be sanctified, Sect. 1. What it is to sanctify
a thing, Sect. 2. The duties of the Sabbath are public, private, or mixed,
Sect. 3. On the Sabbath there must be a public assembly, Sect. 4. How we are
to behave our selves in it, Sect. 5. The public duties are, preaching and
hearing, Sect. 6. Administering and partaking the Sacrament, Sect. 7. Execution
of discipline, Sect. 8.

The rest of the Sabbath must be sanctified.
rest must be sanctified. For it is not enough for us to forbear our works
and so to keep it idly, but we must rest to keep it holily: therefore it is
called a holy Sabbath, and a holy rest: and here remember to keep holy the
rest. It is true that the first thing that is here commanded is rest: but it is
not the principal thing. Rest is but the husk, but sanctification is the
almond; rest is but the shadow, but sanctification is the body; rest is but
the means, but sanctification is the end; and if we do but cease from our
labors, and do no good, it is nothing but the oxes Sabbath; if we come to
Church for nothing but to sleep, that is Eutychus Sabbath; if we cease from
our labors and follow riotousnesse, that is worse, that is the golden calses
Sabbath; they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exo. 32; or
if we keep it only upon constraint, that is the Princes Sabbath and not Gods.
Lament. 1. 7. it is said that the enemies of the Church of God seeing their
Sabbaths, they laughed at them, how justly I know not; but this I am sure, if
the devil see us keep such Sabbaths he will laugh at them: but the Lord will
say, Go your ways I know you not, nor your Sabbaths: and, Who required these
Sabbaths at your hands? Esai. 1. 12, 13. It behooves us therefore to do that
which he exhorts us unto in so many places of the Scripture, namely to
sanctify his Sabbath.

What it is to sanctify a thing.
one has no more holiness than another, in themselves? The bread and the wine
in the Lords Supper have no more holiness in them, of themselves, than other
bread and wine; the water in Baptism is in it self but as other water: the
trees in Paradise, of life, and of the knowledge of good and evil, in
themselves were but as other trees; what is it then that makes them holier?
namely this, that they are put apart from other things unto a holy use; and so
are the bread and wine holy in the Lords Supper: so is the water in Baptism;
so were the trees in Paradise; so were the Priests holy; so were their
garments holy; so was the Temple holy; and so is this day holy.

But this way the day is rather said to be holy, in regard of the institution
which is from God, who has only power thus to sanctify; but there is another
holiness which is in the observation, and in that respect we are said to
keep it holy. The manner of which sanctification the Prophet Esaias expresses
thus: If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from doing thy will upon
mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious to
the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine
own will, nor speaking a vain word, then shall thou delight in the Lord, etc.
Esai. 58. 13. In all which words he does nothing else but set down the
keeping of the Sabbath. And first, to show the rest of this day, he calls it a
Sabbath. Secondly, to show it must be sanctified, he calls it his holy day.
Now as touching the rest of this day, first he requires a bodily rest of thee,
to turn away thy foot from it, that thou break it not, viz. by any bodily
labor. Secondly, he requires a spiritual rest from sin also, thou must
not do thine own will upon it. Having thus showed the rest, then he shows
the sanctification of this rest. First, it must be called a delight: so that
we must take comfort in the approaching of it, and our hearts must leap within
us, as the babe did in Elizabeth at ye approaching of Mary. For this is the day
of our provision; this is the market of the soul, wherein we must furnish our
selves of that spiritual Manna, the food of our souls, in the strength of
which we must walk all the week following, as Elias did after his refection
by the Angel. Secondly, it must not be our delight, as some delight in that
day to spend it on their lusts; but it must be a delight to consecrate it; and
that not unto our Whitson Lords, and Ladies; unto our groves, and hill-altars,
unto our May-bowers, and shreenes of pleasure; not unto our Theaters to gaze
in, nor unto our fields to walk in; but it must be consecrated as glorious
unto the Lord. And therefore as Hanna desired her son that she might offer
him up unto the Lord, 1. Sam. 1: so must we this day that we may consecrate it
unto the Lord. Lastly, because ye nature and property of things consecrate
unto the Lord is, that they may not be other ways employed than unto his
honor and use; therefore he adds, that thou shall honor him upon this day,
to serve him, and to give worship unto his name: and that we may the more
safely keep it, he shows how we break it. For danger is not well avoided,
unless it be foreseen, and known; he sets down therefore three things,
which must be looked unto that we break not his Sabbath, our works, our
thoughts, and words: and first, for our works, we must not do them; not
doing (says he) thine own ways. Secondly, for our thoughts we must not
think them: thought is not free, neither are our tongues our own; for we
must not speak a vain word. So then to conclude, will you know who keeps
holy the Sabbath; Esaias tells you, he that keeps the rest of this day, that
keeps it as the Lords holy day, that calls it his delight, that consecrateth it
as glorious unto the Lord, that does not his own ways, that thinks not his
own thoughts, that speaks not a vain word; he is the man that keeps the
Lords Sabbath, and he it is whom the Lord will honor and make to mount upon the
high places of the earth, and heaven also.

timely. Thirdly, our demeanor whilst we be in the assembly. And fourthly,
our continuance in the assembly.

We must upon the Sa^bath be assembled toget^er wi^h the congregation.
can be denied, the word sounding it with shriller trumpet, than that wherewith
the congregation was wont to be assembled every Sabbath day, and new Moon,
Number. 10. 10. For God himself requires, Leuit. 23. 3, that there be upon that
day an holy convocation. And Luke 4. 16, we see it was their practice this day
to assemble, and to that end they had houses built them which were called
Synagogues, borrowing their names from their assembling in them. And Paul
shows that at Antiochia he found the whole city assembled upon the Sabbath,
Act. 13. 43* 44: which assembly, Psalm. 110. ver. 3, is called Gods army, God
as it were taking a muster of them there: and as this was in the time of the
law solemnly assembled, so was it in the Gospel; when though the ceremonies
of the law were done away, and the Sabbath changed into the first day of the
week, yet they retained their manner of assembling as a moral duty to be
kept for ever. Of which meeting there is not only mention made, 1. Cor. 11.
17, 18, but also the time set down, every first day of the week, 1. Cor. 16.
1. Then, if this assembly be commanded of God, practiced by Christ, and the
faithful also in the time of the law, and since the law most religiously
observed; I marvel with what face these time-seruing, and place-seruing
Papists, and these statute-protestants (I may say Atheists well enough: for
they are without God in this present world, being without his worship) will
stand up before God to answer, whose feet seldom or never tread in the Lords
courts, or wear the thresholds of his Sanctuary: but only when the law binds
them thereunto. It was David's desire when he was banished, and that above all
things he did desire, Psalm. 27, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever. And Psalm. 87. when he shows it no^ his desire longing as of women, but
even fainting as of the hungry soul, or chased Heart, that is falling for
thirst: yea he thinks the sparrow in better case than himself, that might
lay his young near the Lords altar. The Jews came early unto Jerusalem,
though dwelling in the uttermost lists and bounds of the land. The Queen of
Sheba came out of her own country, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; yea the
beasts came to the Arc to be saved, but these will not come to the Church to
be saved. It was well wished of good Master Latimer that men would come to the
Church, though it were but to sleep, for these he thought happily might be
caught napping: but these men will not do so much. Well, let them know that as
Saul marked David's place when he was absent, 1. Sam. 20. 27: so will God much
more mark their empty seats, and solitary pewes when they are absent. But
they that are so cold when God and Prince require their presence; what would
they do, think you, if the line of France should be stretched over our land*
when men should be killed with Bibles in their hands, and their blood should be
sprinkled about the seats they sit on. Well, I desire not to be ominous; but
if it should come so to pass (which God forbid) how easily would they
conclude, as that evil messenger, 2. King. 6. 33. Comes not this evil of
the Lord, and do we wait on him any longer?

Though neither yet is this sufficient for them We must come timely to the
church.
that they come, but that their coming be timely, that they may prevent the
preacher, as Cornelius and his kinsmen did Peter, Act. 10. 33. Now we are all
here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God;
and that they might stay as the cripple waited for the moving of the waters at
the poole of Bethesda: considering that God has promised, that they that seek
him early shall find him, Prou. 8. And that it is a note or a mark of true
Christians, that they come willingly at the time of the assembling, Psalm. 110.
3: which if they did, they would as timely come unto it, as any should make
haste to see a show, or to come to a good market. But let them know that are
late comers, that as they come, so they shall speed: and as they do Gods
work to holiness, so they shall find comfort to holiness.

The next thing is, how we ought to demean our. Sect. 5.
selves when we be assembled, which consists in these three things,
reverence, attention, and consideration. Reverence, attention and consideration
required in hearing.
Reverence in regard of the majesty before whom we stand; attention in regard
of the thing which we hear; and consideration in respect of our selves, whom
those things so much concern. All which 3. things are taught Eccl. 4. 17. When
thou entrest into the house of the Lord, take heed unto both thy feet; there
is reverence. Secondly, Be more near to hear, than to offer the sacrifice of
fools; there is attention. Thirdly, Be not rash with thy mouth; there is
consideration. All which if they will not prevail, yet hear the reason; God
is in the heavens, but thou art on the earth: thou a base silly weak worm of
the earth, stand before the greatest majesty, which the world is not able
to comprehend. This should make thee to fear and quake, as it did Jacob at
Bethel, that is, at the house of the Lord, if thou did consider. How
fearful is the place? says Jacob. Surely it is none other but the house of
God, and this is the gate of heaven. This (I say) if thou did consider,
would make thee to be ready as Cornelius, to hear whatsoever is commanded
thee of God. But it befalls to the most part of men as it befell to Jacob
while he slept; The Lord was there, but he was not aware, Genes. 28. So the
Lord is there, but they wist it not: they stand gazing about the Church, as if
they should be asked that question when they come home, What went you to the
Church to see? and not what to hear: their eyes are on every one, save on the
teacher, on whom they should be fastened, as the peoples were on Christ, Luke 4.
16: but as for the Preachers, though they sit before them, yet as Phineas wife
they neither ask nor regard, though they speak comfortably unto them. But do
these men think that God is present? that they stand before his Angels? Surely
they wist it not; if they did, they would not do it. Neither would others so
soundly sleep, as though the Preacher came to make their funeral sermon, if
they wist that God were there; least in his wrath he should make them sleep
their last, and should make them fall down dead in the place, as he did
Eutychus, for their profanation of his Sabbath, Act. 20.

The next and last point is our continuance, We must not depart before the
public exercise be ended.
which the Prince himself is bound unto. For the Prince shall be in the
midst of them, he shall go in when they go in, and when they go forth,
they shall go forth together, Ezekiel. 46. 10. Neither yet was this a duty
other than became a King to do; which made David desire to be a doore-keeper
in the house of the Lord. Now a doore-keeper is first in, and last out. Such a
one (says David) would I be in Gods house. Neither was David alone in it, but
the people. When Zachary saw a vision in the Temple, though he stayed long, yet
they waited for him, Luke 1. 24. they would not depart without the blessing,
which the Priest was to pronounce, Numb. 6. 24. We see in the Court great men
will not depart without the Princes leave; but out of Gods court every whistle
of pleasure is sufficient to call us away: and it fares with the Preacher
oftentimes while he is in the pulpit, as with Christ while he wrote with his
singer on the ground; they go out one by one, till he be left alone:
especially if he chance a little to sting them (as indeed if he preach well
his words be like goades, Eccl. 12. 11.) then up they start as if their seat
had been shaken under them, and away they fling as if the stout had taken them.
One moves this question, what should be the cause a man should talk so long
about worldly matters and never be weary; but in matters of godliness should
so soon give over? As for example, let a man read a story he will sit up all
night to read it; and we can sit a whole afternoon and talk of nothing but
of worldly matters, and never complain of being weary: so can we spend whole
days and nights at cards and dice and never give over: But come we unto
matters of religion, come we unto a sermon, go we to prayer; good Lord what a
business is there to keep open our eyes one hour, it is even the very time
of tediousness unto us; and we think of such a time as those in Amos of the
new Moon, Amos 8, which was the first day of every month: which they
accounted as a whole month, When will the new Moon be gone, say they; as if
the day had bin unto the^ so long as a whole month. What is the reason of
this? Surely Satan knows well that if he let us alone in these things, down
goes his kingdom; therefore he sets upon us as soon as may be, and our
corruption, which unto good is less than a will, but unto evil more than a
will, presently like a traitor gives over any longer to resist. Now to stay us
against these temptations, let us bethink our selves when we are assailed by
them, as Peter; Lord whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal
life; and promise as David to go into the house of the Lord, and that our feet
shall stand in his gates, Psalm. 122. 2. yea that we will dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of our lives, Psalm. 27. 4. And this if we did once set
down with our selves, we should not so soon be weary of these things. And
this much touching these helps and means conducing to the keeping of the
Sabbath in public.

The word must be preached upon the Sabbath.
of the word, being sanctified by the public prayers of the Church. The
second, the administration of the Sacraments. And the third, discipline: of all
which in order. And first, that the word is to be preached upon the Sabbath is
evident, Act. 15. 21. in that Moses had of old time in every city those that
preached him, seeing he is read every Sabbath in the Synagogue. For it was
their manner after they had read it to give the sense, and cause the people to
understand the reading, Nehe. 8. 8. And at Antiochia after the lecture of the
Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue requested Paul and Barnabas
to preach, Act. 13. 15. If ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say
on. And after they had taught the Jews, the Gentiles requested them to preach
the same things the next Sabbath, which they did, verse. 44. Yea and this Christ
did ordinarily, for it was his custom, Luke 4. 16. Neither was it ordinary
amongst the Jews only, but at Troas the first day of the week (which is our
Sabbath) they came together, and Paul preached unto them, Act. 20. 7. And good
reason that it should be so: for if the word be the seed of regeneration
whereby we are begotten again, and we cannot enter unless we be borne
again, Ioh. 3; how can we be without it? If it be yt milk whereby we are fed;
how can we grow without it? 1. Pet. 2. 2. It is a question that yet in the
memory of man was never assoiled, how a man might be saved without the
preaching of the word. For, how can we believe in him of whom we have not
heard? and how can we hear without a preacher? Romans 10. 14. And therefore let
them that hold faith and deny preaching, answer the Apostle, and I will lay
my hand upon my mouth, and plead no more for preaching: otherwise I cannot but
hold it the ordinary means unto salvation; yea and such a one, as that the
world (though it count preaching foolishnes) cannot be saved without it, 1.
Cor. 1. 12. Indeed some say, is not reading of the Scriptures and Homilies as
good as preaching? Indeed they are good we deny not, and a good means also to
salvation; yet not matchable with the word preached: which if they might be
thought so in the judgment of men, yet must we not appoint God means by
which he shall save us. But you will say, the word may be preached at some
other time. I grant it; but then much more on the Sabbath, the day being set
apart thereunto, and his blessing being most upon his own ordinance; we ought
most to expect it upon that day.

But as by this it appears that the Minister is bound to teach, so on the
Sabbath the people are The people are bound to hear the word upon the Sabbath.
bound to hear. For he that says, the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge; says also that the people must seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2.
Yea the King himself is bound thereunto, although the distractions of his
affairs might seem to let him. And therefore away with these excuses; It is
too far, it is too soon, it is too late, it is too cold, it is too hot;
every excuse will easily let us; and we can better away with it to sit at
cards on the Sabbath by a hot fire, than to sit at a Sermon with God in a cold
church. Tush, it is enough to serve God in the fore-noone; but to serve him
again in the afternoon is too much: though in the law the sacrifices were
doubled that day, Number. 28. yet now to go twice to the service and sermon is too
much holiness. But whilst we will not be too holy, we are grossly foolish
and profane, keeping back half, as Ananias, when God requires the whole.

Yea but the world was never so bad as since Objections removed.
there was so much preaching, and there are none so bad as they that run
after sermons. Indeed these are the voices of them that have sold themselves
to work wickedness: and it is no marvel to hear them disclaim preaching;
for they whose eyes are sore cry out against the light; yet is there no fault
in the light, but their eyes be bad: so is it with these men, they are evil
themselves, but the word is good, Esaias 49. 8. And therefore they cry out
against it, because as the light it makes all things manifest; and therefore it
is as welcome amongst them, as a torch is amongst a company of the eues, which
they willingly labor to put out, least their dealings should be espied; so
true is that which our Savior says; Every one that evil does hates the
light, neither comes to the light, least their deeds should be reproved,
Ioh. 3. 20. And this is the cause why the Papists, and the Atheists are so much
against the word; because it makes their dealings to be seen: therefore they
put out the light, that they may sin the more greedily in the dark.
Secondly, I answer as the Apostle reasons; What if sin shall take an
occasion by the law to be more sinful; shall we therefore blame the law? God
forbid. So, if iniquity has never been so rife, as now it is in the rifenes
of the Gospel; shall we lay the fault upon the Gospel? we may not do it, no
more than the Apostle might upon the law; for it is most certain, the word is
as a light unto our feet, and it shows us what is the will of our Master.
Now whether think you is more likely to stumble, he that sees, or he that is
blind? and whether is likelier to do his masters business, he that knows
his will, or he that is ignorant of it. Thirdly, I see not how it may come to
pass that men should be the worse for preaching. For does the preacher teach
it? or does he not cry out against sin, against adultery, oaths,
Sabbath-breaking, oppression, and such like? These cockle and weeds are none
of their planting: they sow good seed, faith in Christ, repentance from dead
works, etc. But will you know how this comes to pass? look Matthew. 13. 28.
The envious man has done it; the Jesuit has done it; the Papist has done
it; the Atheist has done it; the Devil the father of them all has done it:
for this is their cockle and darnell that they have sown amongst the wheat;
and these are they that make men twofold more the children of hell than they
were before. Lastly, as for those that truly embrace the Gospel, howsoever
they may and do a thousand times condemn themselves of sin before the Lord,
and go mourning and hanging down their heads that it is so; yet they may
easily compare with these Blackamoores, these Papists, and Atheists, that have
nothing white besides their teeth. And therefore I conclude with Solomon, Eccl.
7. 12. Say not that former times are better than these, for then thou do not
wisely. Inquire, for it is certain that sin was as rife heretofore as now;
but not so much seen: for then they lived in blindness and ignorance, whereas
now they live in the sunshine of the Gospel. Now, let a man come into a house
at midnight, he sees nothing out of order: but let him come in at midday, he
shall epsy many faults. So in the time of Popery, we lived in darkness,
even as gross as that of Egypt, we could not then (as we say) see the wood for
trees, nor know sin for sin: all almost was venial, or rather commendable,
(for the Mass an abominable Idol was counted the highest point of religion:)
but now the Sun is risen, we see things to be as they are: and therefore
howsoever they blame preaching; yet must we lay hold upon it, as the light
that must guide us through this world full of dangers.

But, will some say, we have not the word preached where we are. The more is
the pity: but what shall we do in the mean time? we must do as beggars,
we must seek it, the law cannot restrain them but they will beg rather
than they will starve. Or else as it was said of the people of God in the
famine, that they sighed and sought their bread, and gave their pleasant things
for meat, Lament. 1. So must you, the soul being more worth than the body; ye
must do so much for the soul at least, as ye would for the body. Give then
your pleasant things for meat. How many Ministers stand idle, I say not in the
market place, but in the Universities, that no man has hired; send for them,
show your selves christians, honor God with your riches, Prou. 3. 9. let him
have the first fruits of your increase. The Israelites for their Calfe plucked
off their earings and frontiles; and Michah hired a Leuite for his Teraphim at
his own charge. And shall these Idolaters rise in judgment to condemn you?
But the cost would be great. But if it were a greater matter, were it to have
thy fourth, against thy neighbor thou would bestow it; and will thou not
bestow so much to do him good? no, nor thy self neither? Out upon that money
and that treasure that shall lie and rust by thee, when thou should dispend
it to the advantage of thy soul; the rust of it shall bear witness against
thee in the day of vengeance; and then what will it advantage thee to have a
fat purse, and a lean soul? Buy therefore (now whilst thou may) the truth,
but sell it not; buy the field where the treasure is. The good Merchant will
do so; be thou therefore the good Merchant, thou can be no loser by it: and
therefore buy it. And this much touching the first public duty, namely the
preaching and hearing of the word.

The administration of the Sacraments a duty of the Sabbath.
of the Sacraments, which being part of the Ministers duty, Matthew. 28. 20, is
to have a place in the Sabbath: and therefore when Paul preached at Troas, they
brake bread also. Yea and this is so set down that it is made the end of their
coming together; namely, to break bread, Act. 20. 7. And 1. Cor. 11. 18. Paul
reproouing their faults in their public assemblies has these words: When
therefore ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper. And hereupon does the Church define a Sacrament to be a public
action. And in the Primative Church it was usually delivered upon the Sabbath;
therefore it was called dies panis. In regard of this no complaint can
sufficiently bewail the backwardnes of this age whereinto we are fallen, that
some scarce once in a whole Iubile of Sabbaths; nay if law had not provided to
the contrary, scarce once in a whole Iubile of years would be partakers of
the Sacrament: which we see evidently in that they come no oftener unto the
Lords table, than they are compelled. Moses was like to have bin slain for the
neglect of circumcision. What shall we think the neglect of this will bring
upon us? And if unworthy taking make us liable unto judgment. 1. Corinthians. 11;
what shall we think of this not taking at all? When Christ talked with the
Jews of a bread from heaven, every man would have it, Ioh. 6. 34. This is so,
and yet no man calls for it, though the price be invaluable, and the virtue
no less than the communion of the body and blood of Christ. And if the very
hemme of his garment had virtue to heal incurable diseases; how much more
shall this his body heal us, if we be truly partakers of it? But surely for
such as take it only by constraint and compulsion, well they may find the
clothes where Christ his body was, but not his body. And because they
receive it not worthily, and with comfort, but of constraint, therefore in
steed of a seal of his mercy, they may receive a pledge of his wrath. And so
much for the second duty.

The execution of discipline a duty of the Sabbath.
etc. A public work also of the Sabbath to look unto the manners of men, to
admonish them that are unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. and to deliver the obstinate sinner
unto Satan, that his soul may be saved. And this the Apostle shows also to
be a work of the Sabbath, 1. Cor. 5. 5. where he wills them that when they
were gathered together in the name of the Lord Jesus, they should deliver over
the incestuous person unto Satan. Now their assembly was upon the Sabbath, as
before has been showed: and therefore that should then also be done as a work
of the Sabbath.

CHAP. V.
Of mixed duties, Sect. 1. Namely prayer, Sect. 2. Reading the Scriptures, Sect.
3. Singing Psalms, Sect. 4 Catechizing, Sect. 5. And showing mercy, Sect. 6.

As the harlot when she had paid her vows, she thought she might play the
harlot, Prou. 7. So do many, they serve God in the forenoone, and the flesh and
the devil in the afternoon. But they must know that God does require the
whole day to be spent in holy duties. And therefore as thou may in no part of
the day break the rest by labor; so much less may thou break the
holiness: for God commands the one as well as the other; holiness as well as
rest: nay rest should not have been commanded, but for holiness. And
therefore as I have showed before it was a sin to break the rest, so is it
much more to break the Sabbath, by omitting the duties of holiness. Indeed
thou art not tied to spend the whole day in the public exercises before
mentioned, neither were the Jews: for they had but their sacrifice evening and
morning, Numb. 28. and prayers with their sacrifice, as appears Luke 1. 10,
in that the people prayed whilst the incense was a burning. Then they had a
lecture of the Law and Prophets, Act. 13. 15: after that preaching. For when
they had read the Law, they gave the sense thereof, and caused the people to
understand the reading, Nehem. 8. 8; and then thanksgiving. All which continued
not the whole day, but the congregation was dismissed at midday, Nehem. 8. 10.
12. And they returned at three of the clock: at what time Peter and John went
up to pray; which is called the ninth hour, answering unto our third, at what
time also was the evening sacrifice. But yet the interim, before, betwixt, and
after, was spent either in private exercises of godliness, or else in these
which are both private and public; which are therefore noted and observed in
the practice of the Church, that we might draw them also into imitation: which
being at other times of the week to be done, so much more were they on the
Sabbath: and the exercises of religion being upon that day doubled, Numb. 28;
why should God be now less served under the Gospel, than he was under the
Law?

mixed; first of prayer. Which that it is an exercise The mixed duties are, first
Prayer.
of the Sabbath, is evident in that his house is called the house of prayer,
Ioh. 2. and the word cannot be without it. Therefore Neh. 8. Ezra before he
preached praised God. And though Christ would have us to pray in private,
Matthew. 6. yet God requires the same to be done also in the assemblies, Psalm.
107. 32: and that not alone by the teacher; as David in the midst of the
congregation would praise the Lord, when he did declare his name, Psalm. 22.
22. but by the people also. Therefore when Zachary was burning of incense
within, the people were in prayer without, Luke 1. 10: which as it must be
done in the morning; so also at night. For David would have his prayer as the
incense, which was the first thing the Priest did when he came into the
Temple: and the lifting up of his hands as the evening sacrifice, Psalm. 142.
which was on the Sabbath at night offered: so must our prayers be. It makes me
the more to marvel at some kind of men that think if they have been at
service (as they call it) in the fore-noone, that God is beholding unto them
for that; and that they are not bound to return again in the afternoon: but
that they consecrate unto some pastimes, as though they had been at Church in
the morning to ask God leave to go to play in the afternoon. Now as this is
a public exercise of the Sabbath, and must go before and after the word, so
also at other times; or else why are we commanded to pray continually? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. and in all things to give thanks. Yea God, to show how well he
likes it, compares it to incense. And least we should plead ignorance, that
we know not how to pray, he gives us his spirit to help our infirmities,
Romans 8. yea and promises that his ears shall stand open whenever we pray,
Psalm. 34. 15. This then makes against those that on the Sabbath, or else never
pray. But let such know, that it is a certain token unto them that they are
wicked men. For David going about to describe wicked men, gives this as a
special mark of them, they call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14. 4. Secondly, it
stirs us up to perform this duty, especially seeing Christ requires it:
Cant. 8. 13. My love let me hear thy voice. And so much for prayer.

2. Reading of the Sriptures.
appears in that Christ wills us to search the Scriptures: and Matthew. 12.
Have you not read in the law? as though we were bound to read it. And in very
truth the King himself is bound to do it, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Which we will yet
do so much the sooner, if we consider that he is blessed that reads, etc.
Reu. 1. 2. Which reasons lead the Bereans, Act. 17. 11. when they had heard
Paul, to see whether it were so or no. And as we must read the word in
private, so must it be read in public. Paul would have his Epistle read in
the Church of Laodicea, Coloss. 4. 16. And Nehem. 8. the Priests first read the
law, and then afterward gave the sense. So Act. 13. they had a lecture of the
law. And Act. 15. Moses was preached seeing he was read. Now, it may be, many
would read; but as the woman answered Christ when he would drink, thou have
nothing to draw; so they would read, but they have no books. Of those that
come to the assembly, how many can read? I mistake, I would say of those that
can read, how many have books? If a man have taken a piece of ground, he is
never quiet, til he have his lease or coppie or deeds. If he doubt in any
clause, he will either look in it himself, or go to him that can read. But
in these things we pass not; we think we shall stumble upon salvation well
enough, though we never seek it. It is reported of the Jews that they Josephus.
knew the Scriptures as well as their own names; but amongst us many scarce
know the names of the Scriptures. When a book is named they know not where to
find it. This was the policy of popish times, to keep the people in
ignorance; having herein followed the policy of the Philistines, who because
they would keep the Israelites in slavery, would not allow the use of any
weapons unto them, (Jonathan and his Armourbearer, and Saul, only excepted,
whom forsooth they would seem to grace) nor permit a Smith among them: the
reason was, least they should make them swords: and as for their tools they
must come down to the Philistines to sharpen them. So deal the Papists, they
claspe up the book of God in an unknown tongue, and wrest out of lay men's
hands the sword of the Spirit, which is the word. Only they vouchsafe it to
some few of their faction, for a mischief: but as for the people, they must
come down to the Popes Decrees, and Church-traditions, unwritten truths, and
untrue writings; and there they must sharpen their tools: but Smith must they
have none, no Preacher, least he make them swords.

Yea, but they will say, many grow into errors by reading of the word. Answ.
First, I know no greater heresy than Popery, that is an heresy of heresies.
Secondly, if this be a good reason, that because many abuse it, therefore
others may not use it; I see not but that men must forsake their meat and
drink also, because some be drunken, and some surfeit. So the Sacrament should
be banished, because some receive it to their condemnation. Nay, so the word,
yea Christ himself should not be received, because he is put for the fall of
many, Luke 2. They must therefore know, that in things indifferent in
themselves, though the abuse does take away the use; yet not so in things
commanded us: yea, but shall we give holy things to dogs? No; but will you
withhold the childrens bread, because the dogs catch at it? Should a Captain,
because some be always quarelling, stabbing and killing, therefore presently
command that all his soldiers should lay aside their weapons? No, but rather
that they take arms to beat down the quarellers. And so we say that the
wearing of weapons breeds peace, and so must we use our spiritual weapons:
but whereas they pretend a fear of running into errors, God has promised to
give his spirit unto his that shall lead them into all truth; and better they
cannot be lead than by the word: for that is a glass wherein a man may see
what is amiss. Friends dare not tell a man his faults, for fear of
displeasing. Enemies will not. But read the word, and thou shall see there is
no fault which thou have committed in all thy life, but either Moses, or David,
or Solomon, or Peter, or Paul, or one of the Prophets, or of the Apostles, will
tell thee of it. And therefore being that reading shows a man his error; how
can it be that it should bring him into error. And so much for the second duty
that is mixed.

The third is singing of Psalms.
that all are exhorted and stirred up thereunto: Kings of the earth and all
people, Princes and all Judges of the world, young men and maids, old men and
children, all must praise the Lord. And again, Psalm. 147. 1, 2, Praise the
Lord. Of which he gives diverse reasons. First, it is a good thing: then, what
better time than to do it upon the Sabbath? Secondly, because in good things
we are soon weary, unless we delight in them: therefore he says, it is a
pleasant thing; so that it is as it were the Sabbaths recreation. Lastly,
because there are many things pleasant, which yet are not seemly; therefore he
shows, that it is such a pleasant thing that is also comely. There are good
things that yet are not pleasing; as afflictions, which are grieu^us for the
present, Heb. 12. 11. And there are pleasant things that yet are not comely; as
foolish jesting, Ephesians. 5. 4. But this has all three; it is good, pleasant,
and comely. Good in it own nature; pleasant to the hearers; and comely to the
vser. It is good, there is no evil in it; it is pleasant, there is no harshnes
in it; it is comely, there is no affectation in it. In regard hereof Paul and
Silas sang in prison, Act. 16. 25. And Christ after supper sang a Psalm or
Himne, Matthew. 26. It was their exercise, and that in public, as well as in
private: as appears Coloss. 3. 16. and Ephesians. 5. 19. To that end also were the
Psalms made to be sung at any time. Amongst al others the 92. Psalm is called
a Psalm for the Sabbath. But in our congregations, for the most part, they sit
as by the rivers of Babylon hanging up their harpes, and holding down their
heads as in the days of mourning, not caring to sing these songs of Sion,
though we are in the midst thereof; we are not affected with the goodness,
pleasantnes, and comelines thereof; but a wild morris, or a wanton ballad
affect us a thousand times more, though neither good, pleasant, nor comely. And
this much for the third mixed duty.

4. Catechism
self is a wonder: yet in the word taught most plainly. Hebr. 6. 1, the first
principles of religion are called the foundation, and the teaching of them the
laying of the foundation, and there he rehearses up certain principles, as
repentance, faith, baptism. Now that to catechize is required, both privately
and publicly, and that as at all other times, so especially upon the Sabbath
I will make to appear. And first that it ought to be performed in private is
evident, because that all which have understanding are bound to teach others:
Heb. 5. 12. the Apostle blames them for that when as concerning the time they
ought to be teachers, they had need themselves to be taught the first
principles. And 1. Pet. 4. 10. Let every man as he has received the gift,
minister one to another: but yet more specially this is required at the
Ministers hand in the congregation; and at the parents and masters hand in the
house. That it behooves the Minister to catechize, appears in that he is not
only required to be diligent to know the state of his flock, Pro. 27. 23, but
much more to feed it, 1. Pet. 5. 1. and not alone to feed the sheep, Ioh.
21. 16. but first to feed the lambs, ibid. verse. 15. And that Christ
requires them to do even as they love him, verse. 17. which made Paul to do
it openly, and from house to house, Act. 20. 20. And this he did continually:
and therefore out of question upon the Sabbath. And to do this is the Ministers
duty; for the love of Christ inforceth them, 2. Pet. 1. 12, 13. And that this
duty may take the better effect, husbands and parents and masters must do the
same. The husband must do it: therefore their wives are sent to school unto
them, they must learn of their husband at home, 1. Corinthians. 14. 35: then their
husbands must teach them. Parents must do it; for they must bring up their
children in the nurtriture of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. And Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thou shall
rehearse these words continually unto thy children, etc. Continually, for it
must be precept upon precept. For children come not unto grace at an instance;
but by degrees. They are like narrow mouthed cups; a man cannot power in all at
once into them: but a man must teach them as Christ taught his followers, as
they were able to hear, Mar. 4. 33: or as Jacob drove his cattle according
unto their pace. And although I now said that wives must learn of their
husbands; yet wives must teach their children. Tit. 2. 3. it is required of a
woman that she be a teacher of good things. And Prou. 31. it is said, the law
of grace is under her lips. To what end (I pray you) if not to edify and
teach, her children especially, as Eunice taught Timothy, 1. Tim. 1. 5. And
the wisest child that ever was, only Christ excepted, was taught by a woman,
Prou. 31. 1. What my son, etc. Our children are models of our selves; and we
desire to leave them good portions: now what better portion than the Lord?
Kings rejoice in it, The Lord is my portion, says David, Psalm. 119. Let us
therefore labor with them so soon as ever God has given them for sons unto
us, to make them his sons: and so soon as they are come into the world, to
take them again out of the world by instruction. And what time can be fitter
therefore than the time appointed, which is the Sabbath?

Neither are we to think our selves free, if we perform this duty to our
sons only or daughters: but it must be done unto our whole family; that
salvation may not alone come unto us, but unto our whole household, Luke 19. 9:
which made Joshua to undertake for his household, I and my household (says he)
will serve the Lord, Ios. 24. And Cornelius feared God with his household, Act.
10. 2. It should seem he had taken good pains amongst them, in that they
wanting the ministry of the word (for they were Gentiles) yet were converted
unto the faith by his industry, and laboursome instruction. And lastly, this
is the cause rendered by the holy Ghost why God would acquaint Abraham with the
destruction of Sodom, for that he knew he would teach his household to walk,
etc. Now, are not these things written for our instruction, that we should do
the like? Why then do we it not? Indeed there be many that are careful to
provide meat and drink for their household; but what great thing is that which
they do? Do not the Publicanes the same? Do not the Infidels the same? Nay,
do thou not the same things for thine ox, and thine ass? I speak it to
the shame of many, they better provide for their dogs than their servants. And
if this be all, then as one said of Herod, when he spared not his son that he
might be sure to kill Christ, he had rather be his swine than his son,
because his swine he did not kill, but his son he did: so if that be all they
provide for them; better be their dogs than their drudges or servants;
because their dogs be better provided for than they.

But I now speak unto you children, and servants, and people: Must the
Minister, Master, and Parents teach, and you not regard or learn that which is
taught you? I take it yt he that said, the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, appointed the people to seek the law at his mouth also, Mal. 2. 7:
and yt not only to hear him, but also to answer him. For you must always be
ready to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that
is in you, 1. Pet. 3. 15. It suffices not to answer sometimes when we please;
but we must always do it. And that not to some special men whom we please to
make choice of in our own private affections; but to every man to give a
reason. And lastly, because he knows our untowardness unto these things,
that we come unto them as a Bear drawn and lead as it were by the nose unto
the stake; he therefore adds that we must be always ready to do this, etc.
which notably meets with the backwardnes of this generation, that hardly can
be drawn to learn that which in truth they cannot be without. And so much of
the fourth mixed duty.

the showing of mercy unto our brethren: for as this is a 5. Duties of mercy.
day wherein God shows the greatest mercy unto us, in that he bestows upon
us his word, a rare and singular blessing, and therefore a singular blessing
because it is so rare. For he has not dealt so with every nation, Psalm. 147.
20: As, I say, he has showed us this mercy, so should we show mercy one
unto another. And here first order must be taken in public upon the Sabbath,
that collections be made for the relief of the poor Saints, 1. Cor. 16. 1.
And as in public, relief must be made for them; so also in private it
behooves us to visit and to go unto them, as Christ did to the sick and lame
folks lying at the poole of Bethesda, Ioh. 5. that by that means we might
the better be acquainted with their wants; as also the more stirred up to
yield them some relief, and of our superfluity to send unto them, as in
Nehemiahs time, upon a Sabbath after they had heard the word they did eat, and
sent part unto them for whom none was provided, Nehe. 8. 10. But now upon the
Sabbath, what is our manner so soon as we have dined? No regard is had, but
presently we call for cards or tables, or else away we haste to bowls, or to
dancing, or some such like exercises: but unto the poor, whose bowels sound
like shaulmes for want of food, and whose faces gather blacknes through
famine, we have no bowels of compassion, notwithstanding the pitiful child
half starued and hanging upon the mothers breast cries out ready to give up
the ghost, where is bread, and where is drink? and that the hearts of the
parents fall in sunder like drops of water, because they have not to give unto
them. Be moved with this my brethren, you that are fed with the fattest of the
stall, and more than the flower of wheat; spare something of your excess to
relieve their penury. Behold, shall the mother eat her fruit, and child of
a spanne long? shall they perish and die at your doors, and in their houses?
(for some had rather starve at home, than go abroad to beg) shall they
perish (I say) without compassion? Will you spare no dishes from your tables,
nor morsels from your mouths, to relieve them? no not though Christ command
it, and reckons what is done unto them as done unto himself, Matthew. 25. Shall
he send them unto you hungry, pitiful, naked, and miserable; and will you do
nothing unto them for his sake, that did so much for yours? If he would, he
could have made you poor, and them rich, or provided riches enough for all, or
made no more than he had riches for; or he could have made that the Ravens
should feed them, as they did Elias; or that they should have needed no food,
as Moses in the mount. But he would have it thus, to try what you would do
for him: and therefore to this end he says, Ye shall always have the poor
with you; why then give them of your bread to eat, and of your wool to clothe
them. At least if you will not do it for the poores sake, yet do it for Christ's
sake. Lo he will accept it as done unto himself: for, Matthew. 25. 4. when the
righteous shall deny that they had either clothed him, or fed him, etc. what
is his answer? In as much as you have done it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

But, will some man say, I am a poor man, and I have nothing for my self; and
therefore nothing to give. Neither had the Apostle; Silver and gold have I
none, says Peter, Act. 3. 6. yet such as he had he gave: so, have thou no
silver nor gold; yet thou have instruction, admonition, consolation, and such
like; give these then, for they be alms and duties of mercy, and are most
agreeing to the nature of a Sabbath. The other do good to the body, but these
do good both to the body and soul; and this thou ought to do. For, if
thou must help up thy brothers ass that is down under his burden; then how
much more thy brother that is down under the burden of sin? And if thou
must pull a beast out of the mire; then much more a man out of the mire of
sin, 2. Peter 2. 22. And if it be a duty to make peace betwixt man and man
upon the Sabbath; then much more betwixt God and man. And therefore help thy
brother with this alms, and relieve his wants: but this if thou have not to
give, then thou art poor and need it thy self, and therefore must seek it
of others. And so much touching these mixed duties upon the Sabbath.

CHAP. VI.
Of private duties, namely meditation, Sect. 1. And conference, Sect. 2.

We must upon the Sabbath meditate upon that we hear.
and conference. That we are bound to meditate upon the Sabbath, appears by
the practice of one of the best Sabbathists that ever was, the Prophet David,
that professed it to be his exercise continually, Psalm. 119: and if
continually, then on the Sabbath much more. As also it appears in that God
enjoined it to Joshua, that he should meditate in the book of the law day and
night. I trust then that there is no man but will say that then he was
commanded to do it upon the Sabbath; and that we have need to do it, it
appears by the weakness of our memories, which may well be compared unto
ashes, as Job says, that easily lose any impression that is made in them; and
if we never rehearse that which we have heard, but suffer all to run out
like leaking tubs, as fast as it comes in, and that the Preachers words make
only a thorowfare in our heads, coming in at the one ear and going out at the
other: when shall we profit by it? No, no, it is the hiding and not the hearing
of the word that makes us wise. Otherwise, as it was said of the widows, 1.
Timoth. 5. that they were always learning, but never comen unto the knowledge
of the truth: so may it be said of many hearers, that they are always hearing,
and never profiting, because we meditate not on it. Well, the stomach that
receives meat, and presently puts it up again, we say is sick. As it
fares with the body, so is it with the soul: if it draw no nourishment out
of the spiritual food of the word, it is a sick soul.

Yea but, will some man say, my memory is An objection removed.
short, and I cannot remember what the Preacher said. I think so, unless you
meditate upon it. But sir, as short as your memory is, if a man anger you, you
will hardly forget it. But tell me (I pray you) this one thing, as short as
your memory is: did you ever forget where you laid your treasure? No, no, the
ass himself does not forget his masters cribbe, Esai. 1. 2. and these things
which we take care of we can easily remember, be they done never so long
since. And therefore blame not thy memory but thy will; thou give not thy
heart unto these things, as David that hid the word in his heart, Psalm. 119.
11. and as Mary that kept and pondred the sayings which she had heard of Christ
in her heart, Luke 2. 19. They kept it as it were under lock and key. But
did thou indeed desire to remember these things, thou would use all
means to conform thy memory, and to help it. Amongst the which there is not
a greater than this, oftentimes to meditate on it. For, as Solomon says, If
the iron be blunt, put to the more strength, Eccles. 10. 10. (he speaks as
if he saw a man cutting of a stick with a bad hatchet, that he can hardly
make to cut, he must strike the oftener or the stronger to cut off the logge) so
must we do when we feel the bluntnes of our memories, we must recompense
it by the diligence of meditation, often recalling and repeating the same
thing, by which at the last they will become unto us as the principles of
Grammar unto the schoolmaster, we shall have them by heart. Another means also
to help thy memory, will be to bring thy heart to the practice of that which
thou had floting in thy head; and by that means thou shall be sure to make
it thine own. Another is to take delight in the things we hear, as David
says, Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight in thy statutes, and I will not forget thy
word. We forget not the things we delight in. Last of al, if thou have found
thy memory so slipperie that it will hold nothing long, then set it down in a
note-booke, there laying it up as in a storehouse. For if we be careful in
our worldly matters, that we will not trust our memories with our accounts, but
will be sure to note them down to a farthing, yea and will keep servants to
that purpose: what a shame is it that we should be so negligent in better
things.

Though neither when we have done all this, is our meditation done, but we
must meditate We must meditate upon the works of God.
upon his works as well as upon his word. The Psalm. 92, which is entitled, A
Psalm of the Sabbath, is nothing else but a meditation of the works of God.
And this it seems that God would teach us by his own example; who when he had
finished his works in six days, in the seventh he rested to consider the
goodness of them, Genesis 2. Now this we may do, if we follow the example of
Christ, who drew every thing of which he talked unto a spiritual instruction:
Ioh. 4. 10, when he talks with the woman of Samaria that was drawing of
water, he falls into a discourse of the water of life. When the Disciples
talk of meat, he begins to talk with them of another meat, verse. 4. When
he sat at dinner, Luke 14. 15, he turned his speech unto a spiritual
banquet. So may thou in the beholding of any of Gods creatures, consider some
one thing or other therein. As when thou look upon the grass, consider thy
frailty that all flesh is grass. When upon the dust, thy baseness; that thou
art but as dust, and dust will return to the earth, Eccl. 12. 7. When upon the
darkness; the time of thy ignorance. Ye were once darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. When
upon the light; the time of the Gospel, and therefore ibid. walk in the
light. It is not so much as the Ant, but thou may learn something from her,
namely diligence: therefore God sends the sluggard to school to the Ant,
Pro. 6. 6. Go to the Pismire O sluggard, etc. And here I wonder how these
earth-wormes, whose mouldie souls are buried under their loaves, and whose
hearts are pinned and glewed unto the things of this life, though they nothing
but pore upon the things of this life, yet never make any spiritual use of
them, no not upon the Sabbath; does not the Lord see it, and will not his soul
be avenged for these things? But I had forgotten my self, I speak unto the
belly that has no ears. I will therefore ouer-passe them.

conference. For after meditation that must next We must confer^e with others,
especially those of our famil^e.
follow: for when David said he had hid Gods words in his heart, he adds,
that with his lips he declared his judgments, Psalm. 119. 11. So that as
Solomon says, If the clouds be full, they will power soorth rain, Eccles.
11. 3. And if our heart be inditing a good matter, the tongue will be the pen
of a ready writer; and it will fare with us as with the Bereans, Act. 17. who
when they had heard Paul, they sought whether it were so or no. And as with the
Disciples going together to Emmaus that conferred together on the way as they
went, about ye Resurrection, Luke 24. 13. And in the Prophet Malachies time,
though the words of the wicked were stout, yet they that feared God spoke every
one to his neighbor, Mal. 3. But were there not any scripture to enforce this,
yet very reason would prove this meet. For two eyes see more than one, and
many torches put together burn lighter, many hands make light work, and many
adventures a full fraught: even so also comes it to pass, that either
conferring with other, eithers portion is made others; and so one portion is
made a double, by making a double portion one. For as firebrands put together
either gives heat to other, and they burn the better, that the green wood
also may take fire; whereas if they be sundred they presently go out as
quenched: even so it fares with christians in this business. Though neither
yet do I speak this to this purpose that men should run into private
corners to make conuenticles, as the Brownists; but with their families and
household to confer and reason; or with the Minister that is able to direct
them in the truth; or with their neighbors that are better able to instruct
them, who thereby also themselves are bettered: for knowledge in a man is like
the widows oil, a man may power out, and yet the vessel will be never the
emptier. But is this lawful (will you say) for every cobbler or tinker, for
every botcher and butcher to talk and confer about the Scriptures?
Doubtless it is, God himself has commanded it. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. The words that I
command thee (says he) this day shall be in thine heart. Nothing else? Yes,
presently he adds, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou tariest at home, and go abroad,
etc. verse. 7. And so much touching the exercises of the Sabbath.

CHAP. VII.
Of those things that hinder the sanctifying of the Sabbath: namely sloth,
Sect. 1. Proud and curious decking our selves, Sect. 2. And the dumb
ministry, Sect. 3.

and prick, but also they are foulded one in another, Nah. 1. 10. As is sin,
which is the transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 3. 4: so is the law; a man can
hardly break one commandment and not all, Iam. 2. 10. And so although these
be sins directly forbidden in the other commandments, yet as they be
occasions of the breach of the Sabbath, they are here also forbidden.

And first of all, that sloth is an occasion of the Sloth a let that we keep
the Sabbath no better.
breach of the Sabbath, appears in that men cannot be plucked out of their
beds upon the Sabbath, but they turn themselves upon their beds, as the door
upon the hinges, Prou. 26. 14. and say, as it is Prou. 6. 10. Yet a little more
sleep, a little slumber, as though God had given us one sleeping day in seven.
And so indeed we account of that day as an idle day, and that then we may
sleep, because we have nothing to do therein. But Christ was of another
mind on the Sabbath; for he rose early in the morning before it was light,
and went forth to pray, and then returned again into the Synagogue to teach,
Mar. 1. 35. 38. And David says, that his eyes did prevent the morning watch.
It behooves us therefore more timely to arise upon the Sabbath, that we may
both prepare our selves to the exercises of religion, and come timely.

Pride a let that we keep the Sabbath no better.
up then they do better demean themselves then I speak of. Surely no: for
then another let does presently encounter them, and they be not ready to go to
Church; and this way the women especially break the Sabbath, in that they take
more pains in tiffing themselves on that day, than in the whole week besides;
their hair forsooth must be laid out like rams horns (I mistake, it was the
fashion indeed, but now it is like goats) their ruffes must be laid out upon
wiers, like post and rail; and their farthingales bearing up their cloth
like a round table. If God should see his creature, would he know it to be any
of his making? And I assure you their attire is so strange, that it puts sober
matrons to their wits how to go in their attire, and yet to go like women of
their sort and calling. Now all this while that these gallants are a trimming,
holiness it self must wait for them, for her devotions must not be
solemnized till they be ready. At last in comes Bernice and Agrippa with
great pomp to hear; and the^ must every bodies eyes be borrowed to look upon
these trim gilded weather-cocks. For this is their folly, or pride shall I
say? Surely it is their foolish pride, or their proud folly, to love to be
noted; and so they be, though it be but with a black coal: for whereas they
think others wonder at their beauty, because they stare upon them, they wonder
at their folly. Well, it was Salomons fault that he was fourteen years a
building of his own house, and but seven in building the Lords: but I think
when God shall come to examine them, they will not be able to give such an
account. I think he shall not have one of three, but scarce one of twenty
years, and hours. Well, these sails of pride they be too big, they will
ouerturne your barks; their philactaries be too broad, they hinder your
entrance; for the way is narrow, and the gate is straight. Will you stand all
day a trimming when God calls you to the sermon? Does he require these things
at your hands, to come thus guised, or disguised rather? No, no, it is your
hidden apparel that he requires, an vncorrupt heart, a quiet spirit, that is
it that before God is much set by, 1. Pet. 3. He looks upon the inside, and
not upon the outside. And therefore throw away these things, as David did Saul's
armor; he could not fight with it; no more can you well pray with this, yea if
you be truly touched with the zeal of religion, these things will fall from
you: but if they do not, there is one that has promised to pull them away,
Esaias 3. 18.

The dumme Ministry, a let that we keep not the Sabbath. Ioh. 5. 7.
better. Surely then that excuse of the lame man must serve them; they have no
body to put them into the poole when the water is troubled. Their Minister is
some hungry Legate, or wandering Leuite, that will serve for ten sheckles by
the year. For the most think if he be best cheap, he is best; and they
require no more at his hands but that he should say nothing: and this is an
especial cause of the breach of the Sabbath, in that the leaders are dumme,
and stand in their places only for a cipher in Augrum, and no number. Well
they may wear a black garment to deceive, but he is no Prophet. More than
read he can do nothing, and that peradventure the Clarke or his boy can do
better than he: It is well for them that the law has ordained common prayers
and chapters and Homilies to be read; but if these should be taken away from
them, they were no more able to go on in the work of the Ministry, than a
lame man were to go without his crutches: they are, or they should be, the
salt of the earth, but if the salt season not, you know it is good for nothing,
no not for the dunghill. What think you then of the Church? is the Church
worse than a dunghill, that you season it with such unsavory salt? The
Ministers should feed and give the milk of the word unto the people; but these
are more cruel than the very Dragons, for they give suck unto their young,
Lament. 4. 3: but these starve and famish them. Well, they are cruel Nurses
that take a man's child to nurse, and have dry breasts. But what are these
that take Gods children to nurse and have no breasts? What shall we do for
them when they shall be spoken for? There is no father but would say of such a
nurse, she has murdered my child. And doubtless God our father, when he
shall make inquisition for the blood of his children, will account them no
less than murderers.

I know what will be answered, they are men and they must live, they cannot
dig, and they are ashamed to beg: what then, must they rob? must they kill?
I say more, starve the souls of Gods people? Rather let them return to their
occupations whence they came, and let them that ways shift, if at least they
doubt of Gods mercy toward them, or think that he will not regard them: but
it were a thousand times better for them to dig, or beg, or starve, than
thus to starve the souls of Gods people, and to sell them for morsels of bread
and handfuls of barley, Ezech. 13. 19. But I know my words are too weak to
prevail in this case. Well, yet let them know, that their sins are written
before the Lord with the point of a Diamond, and that he will never forget
them, until he be avenged of them unto the full, unless they repent. And so
much touching the lets, by which we are held from the duties of holiness on the
Sabbath.

THE THIRD BOOK, TREATING OF THE PERsons that must keep the Sabbath.
CHAP. I.
We our selves must keep the Sabbath, and those that are under our charge,
Sect. 1. The father must see that the son keep the Sabbath, Sect. 2. And the
master that his servant keep it, Sect. 3.

thy self, or those that are under thee. And first he requires it at thy
hands: We must first observe the Sabbath in our own persons.
because he would have reformation always to begin where love does, that is,
with it self; and then with those that are at our elbowes. And of this there
is great reason. For if a man be not himself reformed, either he is remiss
in reforming of others, because they are like himself; or if he be forwards,
yet he shall be challenged, because he is in his practice unlike himself, and
is like the boate-man that fetches his stroke one way and looks another.
Therefore God speaks in the second person of the singular number; the reason
of which is, that every man may know that God speaks unto him directly. When
Princes make a law they use general terms, as no man shall do such a thing,
or every man shall do such a thing; but these laws we use to shift off, as if
they concerned us not. For say we, that which is spoken to all, is spoken to
none. This God wisely preuenteth and speaks to thee directly, thou shall do
no manner of work. The reason why God speaks in this manner is, because
sin has gotten her a whores forehead, Ier. 3. 3. it will not blush nor be
ashamed, unless it be pointed at, and unless a man speak unto it, as the
voice unto Nebuchadnezzar; To thee be it spoken. In deed a good man when he
reads any thing in the Scripture spoken in so general terms, does sometimes
apply it unto himself, as David, Psalm. 40. 7. In the volume of thy book
(says he) it is written of me that I should do thy will: which though it be
no where in particular written of David, yet he being a man applies it in
particular unto himself, as if it had bin spoken unto him. And there be (I
confess) some like David, but this sect has not many disciples. For the most
are of mind that it concerns any man rather than themselves; of which mind
David also was when Nathan came unto him with a parable: which stifnes of ours
God observing speaks in particular to every man, Thou shall not do any
manner of work. So that this every man when he reads it, must needs
confess as David, it is written of me; and so must the King say, this is
written of me, that I should keep the Sabbath; so must the master say, this is
written of me that I should keep the Sabbath: so the Minister, so the
husbandman, and so of the rest; for this is spoken unto every man of what place
or calling so ever he be, of what sex or age so ever he be. And unto that
purpose in the word we shall find precepts of every sort to enforce so much.
Isai. 56. ver. 5. the Eunuch must keep the Sabbath. Neh. 13. 15. the
victualler must keep the Sabbath. Exodus 31. 3, 4. the artificer must keep the
Sabbath. Nehe. 10. 31. the buyer and seller must keep the Sabbath. Ierem. 17.
the carriers and porters must keep the Sabbath. Exo. 34. the husbandman must
keep the Sabbath. Exo. 44. 24. the Priest must keep the Sabbath. And what
shall I more say? if any might except, then the Prince, either by reason of his
authority, or his distractions in weighty affairs; but the Prince himself
must be in the midst of them, Ezech. 46. 9, 10. And therefore we see none is
exempt from this duty; but thou, whosoever thou art, must keep the Sabbath.

Though neither yet art thou alone bound in Those that are under us must keep
the Sabbath.
thine own person to keep it; but also in thy place to see it kept. Art thou
a father? then thou must see that thy son keep it. Art thou a Master? then
thou must see that thy servant keep it. Art thou a Prince? then thou must see
that thy subject keep it: for the commandment runs thus, thou must keep
it and thy son, thou and thy seruint, thou and thy cattle, thou and thy
stranger. But why is not the husband also in joined to see his wife keep the
Sabbath? The reason is, first, because she is a part of her husband, and they
twain be but one man, Romans 5. 19. Secondly, she is a governor in the family
with the man, and therefore she is to see that others keep the Sabbath.
Thirdly, all are not mentioned in the commandment, but it is figurative, and
a part is put for the whole. For as the master is over the servant, or father
over his son; so is the husband over the wife, so is the Captain over the
soldier, and the master over the scholar: and so of the rest. The reasons
wherefore this is enjoined to the governor are two. First, because the
governor in his place should go before those that are under him in good
example, as Paul would have Timothy to do, 1. Tim. 4. 12. For as one coal
makes another burn, and wood a fire, Prou. 26: so does one man's good example
in religion bring forward another, especially if they be men of sort and place.
For, as the Loadstone draws the iron, and the Iet the straw; so draw they
others of all sorts to follow them. As when Josiah kept the Passover, all the
people would keep it with him, 2. King. 23. When Asa swear to seek the Lord,
all Judah swear with him, and rejoiced at the oath, 2. Chr. 15. 15. God would
therefore have them take on in a good way, least they turning aside to
wickedness they should corrupt others; as Rehoboam when he forsook the law of
the Lord, lead away all Israel with him, 2. Chron. 12. 1. And Jeroboam bears
the memory of his defection until this day, and shall be known by it while
the world stands, as a man is known by his surname; Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin. One therefore not unfitly compares them unto great oaks, that
when they fall, beat down all the under wood with them; so do these. And
surely there is no poison nor pestilence that so infecteth the air where it
is, as these great ones do the whole country, towns and cities round about
them where they are, if they be evil. Those therefore that are above others,
had need to learn David's lesson, to be wise. For if they be evil, they shall
not be evil alone; and if they fall, they shall carry a great number with
the^ to hell, as the great devil did when he fell, Iud. verse. 6. Therefore first
God would have those that are over others to keep the Sabbath, that by their
example others might be brought to do the like.

Secondly, he lays the care of those that are under them upon their
shoulders, that they might see them to keep the Sabbath, and if otherwise they
will not, to compel them. And so much the more need was there that this
should be put upon them, because of their backwardnes to do it; for they let
them run to all excess of riot, and to do whatsoever seems them good in
their own eyes: they think as Caine; Am I my brothers keeper? So they, Am I
my servants keeper? am I my sons keeper? am I my strangers keeper? Yea thou
art, and God will not alone ask thee where thou art, as he asked Adam: but
also where is thy brother, as he did Caine; where is thy son? where is thy
daughter? where is thy servant? for he requires at thy hand that they keep the
Sabbath also: the reason is, because in matters of religion there is no respect
of persons with God, Act. 10. 34. He will have all within the covenant, even
from the drawer of water, and hewer of wood, unto him that sits upon the
throne, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. And Iere. 17. 10. he requires all that enter in at
the gates should keep the Sabbath. And therefore as Moses when he went to
sacrifice unto the Lord in the wilderness, would not leave a hoof behind him,
Exo. 10. 26: so here also he requires not only thy son, thy daughter, thy
servant, and the stranger to keep the Sabbath, but also that thine ox and
thine ass keep it; he will not have a hoof to break it.

thy children and servants; or such as if they rest not, may be an occasion
unto thee, or those that are under thee, of breaking the Sabbath, as thy
cattle; or an offense, as the stranger. But of these in particular: and first
of the first sort. That the father The father must see that the son keep the
Sabbath.
is here charged with his children to see that they keep the Sabbath,
appears in that he wills thee to remember that thy son and daughter keep it
as well as thy self. And therefore thou can no more except against that part
of the commandment that concerns them, than that which concerns thy self.
Indeed if he had said, thou shall see that thou thy self keep the Sabbath,
and that thou warn thy son to do the same; then when thou had warned thy
son thou had discharged thy self, but now he wills thee to remember
that thy son keep the Sabbath as well as thy self, thou can by no means
avoid this charge. And in very truth of this there is great reason, because
many though they be ashamed themselves to go so far as in Iere. 7. 18, to
kindle the fire; yet they can be contented that their children should gather
the sticks, and that their women should kneade the dough to bake cakes to the
Queen of heaven; I mean they can be contented to suffer their children to
run into all lewdnes, though themselves be ashamed to be scene doing the
same things. But God to prevent this, charge thein here with their children
that they observe the Sabbath. And therefore as your selves do rest upon the
Sabbath, so must your children; as your selves do keep it holy, so must your
children: when you go to the sermon, they must go with you; when you repeat,
they must repeat with you; when you go to prayer, they must to prayer with
you. See not my face (says Joseph) if you bring not your brother: so, see not
Gods face, unless you bring your children: if they be wanting, God will ask
you as he did Caine; Where is thy brother? so, where is thy child? where is thy
son? where is thy daughter? What make they a dancing when they should be at
the sermon? why are they at play when I commanded them to rest? If God (I say)
should demand these questions of many parents, how mute would they stand?
Well, assure your selves there is a time of account, when (poor souls) they
shall stand shiuering before the greatest Majesty, and quaking not being able
to answer him these questions.

Yea, but what would I have you to do? your children (you will say) will not be
ruled. No will: then chastise them, and let not thy soul spare for their
murmuring, Prou. 19. 18: for if thou set them at liberty, they will shame
thee, Pro. 29. 15. Oh (but you will say) you are loath to beat them. Alas, and
are you so cockering? I perceive then you would be loath to cut their throtes,
if God should command you, as he once commanded Abraham. Yet Abraham would
have done it, rather than have disobeyed God; and had thou rather disobey
God, than chastise thy son? Yea, had thou rather let him stand under the
heavy wrath of God, which burns unto the bottom of hell for breaking his
Sabbath, than to correct him? then woe worth the time, may thy child say, that
ever he knew the, that let him thus to die for want of correction. And
this much shortly concerning the duties of parents toward their children, in
compelling them to keep the Sabbath.

The master must see that the servant keep the Sabbath.
their servants keep the Sabbath as themselves. For God will have them his
servants as well as theirs, and to do his business upon the seventh day,
as well as their masters upon the six days. And this in truth we ought to
do, if not in this regard that God commands us, whose command should be of
greatest authority with us; yet at least that we may show our selves good
governors, and that we govern them as tendering their good over whom we are
set: and wherein can we more tender them, than in bringing them unto the
knowledge of the chief good, even unto the saving knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ? And if we will not yet govern as tendering their good; yet at least let
us do it as tendering our own: for be ye well assured that he that is not
faithful to God, will never be faithful to thee; and that he that will not
serve God truly, will never ferue thee truly. Well he may serve thee so long
as thine eye is upon him, but when thy back is turned his service is ended.
But the servant that fears the Lord will be as faithful unto thee when thou
look off, as when thou look on; for he knows well that a greater than
thy self looks upon him; to whom he must answer for his service done to
thee. Let this therefore at least teach thee thy duty to thy servants.

Yea but, will some Master say, my servants will not thus be held in by you. No
will? who holds them in then to their work in the week days? If any shall
then start aside from your business, you will easily find means to enforce
him; and can you find no means to enforce him to Gods business? Yea but they
will not upon the Sabbath be held in, but they will then have their liberty.
Then let them have it altogether, and discharge them. For, will thou have him
that will not serve God to serve thee? thou ought at least to be as careful
for Gods service as for thine own. Now thou will not keep a servant that will
not faithfully do thy business; how much less then should thou keep one
that will not serve the Lord? David would never have done it: for, says he, a
wicked person shall not dwell in my house, Psalm. 101. Yea, but how shall my
work be done then? Get thee such servants as do fear the Lord; that was it
that David purposed first with himself; Mine eyes (says he) shall be unto the
faithful of the land: And, He that walks in a perfect heart he shall serve
me, verse. 6. ibid. And they indeed be the best servants: for they serve not
with eye service, but as the servants of Christ, as serving the Lord in thy
business, and not thee, Ephesians. 6. 6. Yea, but we cannot get such. It may be
so, because you do not walk, as David did, in the midst of your house with a
perfect heart, verse. 2. Therefore they will not dwell with you: which if you
did, you should not need to seek: for servants would seek you fast enough.
Yea, if you did so walk, by Gods blessing, though you did not find them such,
yet you would make them such: but this is the misery of it; our servants must
be sent abroad every Sabbath in errands and trifling businesses, riding, and
running, and posting as if it were for life, as if it were on other days in
the week, as if no commandment were from God to the contrary. So our own
turns be served, we care not how God be served, we show thereby that we
love our selves more than God. And our servants seeing us not to make
conscience of Gods business, they grow to make as little conscience of ours:
especially they being by this means deprived of the benefit of the word,
whereby they should be taught better to discharge their duties toward their
masters. And thus much for that that the master ought to see that his servant
keep the Sabbath.

And as this instructs the master in his duty to his servant; so also it
contains in it matter of comfort for the servant. For they may hence observe
the kindness and love of God toward him, that notwithstanding their servitude,
yet he is mindful of them; they think (poor wretches) that because God has
laid this state of servitude upon them, therefore he regards them not: no,
no, it is not so, but he thinks upon them, and remembers them every Sabbath,
vouchsafing as it were to look down from heaven upon them in giving them a
rest, promising them as it were in that rest, that one day they shall
thoroughly rest from their labors, and rest with him in heaven, where they
shall be no more in servitude, but shall be the Lords free men. Therefore you
servants think of this, and learn to serve him on his Sabbath, that has not
alone in his flesh served you; but will assuredly in that flesh save you, and
give you a perpetual rest if you serve him. And behold this he requires at
your hands, then do it, for you cannot serve a better master. Lay aside then
your foolish vanities, your idle delights, and impertinent sports: be no more
the servants of sin; but as in the whole course of your lives, so on this day
especially be ye the Lords servants: lo he offers it. Now who is it that
would not serve his Prince, if he might? but their service is nothing to this;
for even Princes themselves sue to be Gods servants; as David, though it were
but in a mean place, as to be a doore-keeper, yet he would think himself
happy: let this therefore be your resolution to serve the Lord. You will say
(peradventure) you would, but you cannot, your masters lay such burdens upon
you. And surely this I know, many masters lay greater burdens upon their
servants on the Sabbath, than in any days of the week besides; they deal
therein like Pharaoh, when the people desired to go to serve the Lord, then he
laid more work upon them, Exodus 5. 9: so when they should go to hear the
word of the Lord, then they lay more business upon them. In this case what
shall the poor servant do? shall he do Gods business or his masters? Surely
whether it be better to obey God or man, masters judge you? Act. 4. verse. 19.
Though neither herein do I intend to exempt the servant from being subject to
his master, in such works as upon the Sabbath be lawful to be done: but if he
shall ordinarily upon ^mall, or no occasions be deprived of the public
ministry of the word, let him in such a case rather venture his masters
displeasure than Gods. And surely in my judgment if he be beaten for it, he
suffers for well doing, and therefore let him take it patiently, for it is
acceptable unto God, 1. Pet. 2. 20. yea and let him in this put it up, not
answering again. For that is required at the servants hands, Tit. 2. 9: or if
he answer, let it be thus in the spirit of meeknes; for a soft answer turns
back wrath, Prou. 15. 1. Master, I pray you have patience this one day with me;
I have served you faithfully these six days; and I would also do your
business this day, but that my great Lord and Master commands me this day to
serve him; and therefore as you would not blame me if when my Prince commands
me, I should leave your business undone, to serve him; how much less should you
blame me if I let alone your business for a while, when God commands me to
serve him? Thus if servants would answer their masters, I doubt not but that
they would stay their wrath, and call back their sentence of displeasure gone
out against them. But if they will not hear this so reasonable a request, his
servant can judge no other ways of his master than Nabals servant did of his
master; Surely some evil will surely come unto my master, and upon all his
family, for he is so wicked that a man cannot speak unto him, 1. Sam. 25. 17.
And so may such masters think of themselves, if they will not hear their
servants entreating them for that which they should enforce them unto, if of
themselves they would not. And thus much of that the servant should do.

CHAP. II.
Our cattle must keep the Sabbath, that they be not an occasion of labor
unto us, Sect. 1. And the stranger, Sect. 2. The reasons why the strangers were
to keep it, Sect. 3. Diversities of religions not to be tolerated, Sect. 4.
All to be compelled to the true religion, Sect. 5.

The cattle must rest upon the Sabbath.
work, man must work also: or else an offense; as if the stranger should
work, he should be a stumbling block unto the keepers of the Sabbath; of
both which here we have occasion given us to entreat. And first of the cattle
that they must rest: for the Lord commands here that thine ox must rest.
What, has God care of oxen? 1. Cor. 9. Yes, he has. And mercy is to be
showed unto them; which the righteous man will do, for he is merciful unto
his beast, Pro. 12. 19. But that is not here commanded, but elsewhere in the
sixth precept; Thou shall not kill: where all cruelty is forbidden even unto
the creature. But the reason why here he commands rest unto the beast, is, not
for the beasts sake, but for the man's sake; least he should be employed in
setting the beast to work, and so should break the Sabbath. So that God
deals with us like as a loving father deals with his children, who forbids
him not only to hurt himself, but forbids him also knives and edge tools,
whereby he might chance to hurt himself. So he deals in every commandment.
And in the sixth and seventh commandment by name he forbids the means of
evil: as when he says, Thou shall not kill, he forbids anger, the
whetstone of cruelty: when he says, Thou shall not commit adultery; he
forbids wanton looks the stall of lust, Matthew. 5. And so here the ox is
forbidden to labor; to which there is no law; neither is it sin to the ox
to work on the Sabbath; but it is sin for man to set him to work; and in
that respect labor is forbidden the ox. Like as Exodus 21. 29. If the ox push
and kill through man's negligence, the owner shall answer for it: So here, if
the beast break the Sabbath through thy default, thou shall answer for it:
for God requires it at thy hands that he rest upon the Sabbath. To conclude
this point then, if any shall come unto thee upon the Sabbath, to borrow thy
beast to ride to a Wake, or Fair, or such like, wherein the breach of the
Sabbath is apparently seen; thy answer must be unto them, that thou art
commanded to see that thine ox and thine ass keep the Sabbath, and that
therefore thou may not lend them about such business.

The stranger must rest upon the Sabbath.
to thee: so also must the stranger within thy gates keep the Sabbath, that he
be not an offense unto thee. But here it will be demanded, what is meant by
this speech within thy gates? By it is meant those that are within thy power,
as Mat. 16. the gates of hell shall not prevail against the church; that is,
the power of hell: so then, so far as thy power and authority extends, so
far extend the limits of thy gates. As for example, the whole family is
Abraham's gates; the whole city is Nehemiahs gates; and the whole country is
Iehosaphats gates. And as the Master in the family, and the Magistrate in the
city; so is the King in the country, to see the Sabbath kept. And in very
truth this speech concerns Princes and Magistrates especially: for in this
speaking within thy gates; and not, within thy authority or power, he alludeth
unto their manner of sitting in judgment, which was in the gates, and does
thereby as it were secretly admonish them that sit in the gates, above others,
that they see that the Sabbath be kept. And that which we hence note, is, that
the Magistrate must not alone see that the home-borne and free Denison, but
also that the stranger keep the Sabbath.

But of strangers there were two sorts: some converted to the truth, and are
called Proselytes, Act. 2. 10: others, that were opposite unto the Israelites
in religion, but yet did traffic with them, as, Nehe. 13. those of Tire that
brought wares to sell. Now this commandment concerned them both, convert or
other. Was he a stranger? was he within their gates? they were to see that they
kept the Sabbath; or else to shut them out, as Nehemiah shut out those of Tire,
Neh. 13. But notwithstanding that both these sorts of strangers were to be
compelled to keep the Sabbath, yet after a different manner. For the Proselyte
was bound to keep the Sabbath as far forth as any Jew, Numb. 9. 14. there
was but one law unto them both: but the other sort of strangers, though they
were bound, I confess, by nature unto the moral law (which is nothing else
but the law of nature refined as it were by God) and they had the effect
thereof written in their hearts, Romans 2. 15: yet the Magistrate was not to
compel them unto the outward ceremony thereof, for that was left free Number. 9.
14.
unto them, but they were only to restrain them from practicing any thing to
the contrary; or if they would not be restrained, to punish them for the same
accordingly. And for both these points we have the word plain and evident.
For, that they were restrained in the outward ceremony, appears Exodus 12.
19. where the strangers were enjoined to have no leven in their houses; and
here they are commanded to see the stranger keep the rest. Now if this
inhibition would not be sufficient to keep them from the breach of this
commandment; then they were to be punished for their offense, according unto
the civil law of the Jews; as appears Leuit. 23. 16. The stranger that
blasphemed was to be stoned. And the Moabitesse suffered for her adultery
as well as the Israelite, Number. 25. verse. 8. And in this very commandment
Nehemiah (had not the strangers ceased to break the Sabbath) would have laid
hands upon them and punished them, Nehem. 13. 16. Which must teach the
Magistrate this profitable lesson; not to suffer or permit any thing to be
practiced or done, that is contrary unto religion or holiness, no not by
strangers. And if they may not suffer strangers; then much less their own
people. But of this more anon.

strangers were restrained. Which was, as I take it, for two causes especially:
first, in respect of the Jews: secondly, of themselves. In respect of the
Jews, lest the liberty of the stranger might have been an occasion of
stumbling unto the Jews, and so their manners corrupted. For it is the nature
of men, when they see others do evil, they presently plead unto it, Why may
not I do so as well as such a one? But in good things, they have not this plea:
for grace has not such force in them to draw them from evil, as corruption
has to draw them to evil. And hence it is that they are so soon drawn into
the imitation of evil in any, but especially in strangers. Examples whereof
we have in the Israelites: so soon as ever they saw the new fashions and
attires of the Galdeans, that were strangers unto them, they were in love with
them presently, Ezech. 23. 15, 16. As we here in England are in love with the
fashions of other countries, and we can no sooner see a new cut, but we must
have a new garment of the cut, or our garment cut anew, that we may be in the
fashion; which is hard to be and not to be in the abuse also. Which pronenesse
unto evil God observing in us, forbids the stranger to work upon the
Sabbath, least his children should take occasion thereby to grow into imitation
of them, and so should break his Sabbath.

And hence we are taught a profitable lesson, We must hinder the instruments
of evil.
by the example of God himself: namely, so much as in us lies, to hinder and
let such evil men (be they strangers or otherwise) as do by their evil
manners corrupt others. And therefore Asa was commended that took away the
Sodomites out of the land, 1. King. 15. 12, least by their evil, they might
draw others to evil. For this is the nature of sinners, they cannot be evil
alone, and their sleep departs, except they cause some to fall, Pro. 4. 16.
therefore they draw on others; as the harlot the young man in the Proverbs; Come,
let us take our fill of love, Pro. 7. 18. And the eues call their mates; Come
with us, Pro. 1. One sinner (says Solomon) destroys much good, Eccles. 9. 8;
then what do many, think you, especially if they be suffered? We see in a
city, if one house be on fire, if it be not quenched, it will fire the whole;
and one man infected with the plague, is enough to infect a whole town; one
drop of Colloquintida marreth a whole tun of oil; and a little leven sowreth
a whole lump of dough, 1. Cor. 5. All this we know as well as we know the
joints of our fingers. And we are ready enough to quench this fire, least it
burn our houses: and to shut up those that be infected. But this fire of
sin is not quenched; neither are men pulled out of it, Iud. 23. Nay rather
men become cole-carriers, like the Adulemite to Judah, Genesis 38. 20. and gather
sticks to kindle this fire; as in Iere. 7. 18. the children gather sticks,
and the fathers kindle the fire, the women make the dough, to bake cakes to the
Queen of heaven. Every one helps forward other to evil; and there is no
shutting up in this infection, nor shutting out these leapers out of the camp
that are infected with sin. Nay, we turn not from them; we avoid them not;
we pass not by them, which we should do, Pro. 4. 14. as we do by those
that are infected with the plague: but we take the most wicked by the hand,
although we know their sins as well as if they were stamped in their
forheads. And by this doing we strengthen them, least they should return from
their wickedness, Ierem. 23. 14. The brothell and the harlot have free scope
to allure and entice most flourishing and towardly wits; and no man says unto
them, what do thou? Upon the Sabbath, Lords of misrule, fiddlers, Iesters and
such like are suffered to profane the best day of seven, and to lead our
youth into all excess of riot; and no man lets; nay rather we thrust them
forward unto it. But if any man shall be more forward in restraining them, that
shall be turned upon him as a note of a Puritan, he is factious, he is
contentious, and he loves no good fellowship; as though a man could not love
good fellowship, unless he will suffer Gods Sabbath to be broken: or as
though that were good fellowship to break Gods Sabbath. But what do I
complain of these things? seeing it is the time that the Apostle speaks of
2. Tim. 3. 3. that men shall be despisers of them that are good, traitors,
headie, high minded, and lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. And so
they be; for they prefer their sports before the Lords Sabbath: and therefore
though they have a show of godliness (for they will be called Christians) yet
they deny the power thereof: for it shall not allure them to walk in the
obedience thereof. And therefore we pass unto the second reason.

Now as the former reason was in regard of the good of the Jews; so there was
another reason in regard of their own good; and that in respect of the
principallest part in them, their souls; of which (though they were strangers)
they were to have a care. For if a man must have a care of his enemies beast,
Exodus 23. 4; must he not much more have a care of his soul? And how could
they better show their care than in this, that they might thereby be lead
forward to the hearing of the law? For as we see many worldly men, when they
have nothing to do will go hear a sermon with their neighbors, when yet
they will not neglect the least wordly business, for the best sermon of them
all: so doubtless fared it with these strangers. And therefore in regard
hereof, God upon the Sabbath commands them a rest from all their labors;
and enioynes the Jews to look unto it that they keep the Sabbath, that at
least they having nothing to do, might go hear the word for company. And so
we see many of them did. For, Josh. 8. vlt. the law was read unto the stranger
that was conversant amongst them.

And from this reason we are taught another duty: namely, to labor to bring
others, so far We must labor to bring others to the knowledge of God.
forth as we may, to the knowledge of God. As Andrew brought Simon Peter to
Christ, Ioh. 1. 42. and Philip brought Nathaniel, ver. 46. So Matthew, when
Christ was to dine with him, had many publicans and sinners there, Matthew. 9.
And Cornelius, when Peter was to come unto him, called his friends and
kinsfolks together, Act. 10. 24, that they might hear Peter's sermon. And
herein should Christians be like unto those that brought the man sick of the
palsy, that could not go; that brought him (I say) upon their shoulders unto
Christ: so should we endeavor upon our shoulders to carry them, and to lend
them as it were our legs, to bring them to Christ that have no legs of
their own. It is the manner of men when they come unto any that is sick, if
themselves have been sick, and received health by the hands of any Physician,
presently to will the sick to send unto them, by whose hands themselves have
received comfort: or if they know any medicine that did them good, they will
acquaint them with it; and thereof grew that proverb partly, either a fool or
a Physician; because every one almost be he never so simple, yet will be
prescribing something to the sick. But in the sickness of the soul, why do we
not will them to come to our Physician Christ? to whom if they come, it skils
not how dangerous the disease be; for he will ease them, Matthew. 11. And why
do we not acquaint them with our medicines, and show them the tree of life,
which is our physic; the leaves of which tree will cure all diseases, Revel.
22. 2. Surely if we ever have been rightly touched with our own sickness, we
will be ready to help others. And in the mean time let us know it is a
duty. And so much for the reasons.

thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, the stranger; even all, must keep
the Sabbath; note Toleration of a false religion may not be suffered.
that diversities of religions are not to be suffered in one kingdom, city,
or family. For that were to make it to stand upon feet partly of iron, and
partly of clay, and to bring in such a confusion of religions, as there was of
languages in Babel; which God who is but one, cannot endure. For either we must
worship another besides him; or else there be more ways than one to worship
God aright by. But that a man should worship another, that he can in no sort
abide: for that were to dispoile him of his glory. For his worship is his
glory, Psalm. 50. 23. and therefore he will not part with it, it being one of
the three things which he has reserved unto himself: first, his vengeance:
secondly, his judgment: and thirdly, his glory. Now as for his vengeance he
craves that; vengeance (says he) is mine, Heb. 10. 30. So also is judgment,
he has appointed a day for that, and it is not in man to know the time, Act.
1. 7. But as for his glory, he will in no sort part with that; for he will not
give his glory unto another, Isai. 42. 8. and to ask it were to take from him
his kingdom. And what could a man desire more to be God? and therefore he
will not part with his worship. And to say that there be more ways than one to
worship God aright by, is most false. For as there is but one truth, so there
is but one faith, and one hope of our calling. The hope of our calling is
heaven; that is but one, the entrance is by the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.
18. which is the door, Ioh. 10. And there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
4. 5. And the means by which we enter is by faith: for we have entrance by him
through faith, Romans 5. 2. and that also is but one, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. Then if
there be but one heaven, and but one way into it, and but one means to enter
by that way; it cannot be that there should be more ways to serve God aright
by, than one. And therefore diversities of religion cannot be suffered:
unless also in his worship he will now endure that which in the time of the
law he would not; for then he would not endure them to plough with an ox and
an ass together, Deuteronomy. 22. 10. or to sow their fields with mingled seeds, or
to wear a garment of diverse stuffes: all which though they were ceremonies,
lead them directly by the hand to this that now we treat of, namely that they
should not endure diversities of religion. And if he did then dislike haulting
between two opinions, will he allow us now, think you, to profess Iudaisme
and Christianity, Gospel and traditions, true religion and Popery? No, no,
it cannot be. For betwixt the Arc and Dagon, God and Mammon, Sion and Babylon
there is no agreement: but they are like poisons in the stomach, the one still
sick of the other: and how then should that body be healthful that
contains them both. Revel. 2. Pergamus is blamed for maintaining the doctrine
of Balaam, ver. 14. Thyatyra for suffering Iezabel to teach, ver. 20; and will
not the same expositor even the holy Ghost carry the same with as ready a
hand against such as are Protestants and Papists, Vters and Neuters,
Omnifidians, Solifidians and Nullifidians? Or was it Paul that would not so
much as endure any copartnership in the Church of Galatia, not so much as to
tolerate Jewish ceremonies? Gal. 5. 2; and will he, think you, endure that
these beggarly rudiments of Popery (I say more) intolerable blasphemies
should stand up by the scepter of his word? No, no: his sheep will hear his
voice one degree further: and another they will not hear, Ioh. 10. And
therefore if we be Gods sheep, we will hear his voice: but another voice we
will not hear. And therefore as Elias said, Why halt you between two opinions?
if God be God, follow him; if Baal of Rome be God, follow him: but both you
cannot follow, for a man cannot serve God and Mammon, but he must forsake the
one, and cleave unto the other.

Wherefore we disclaim their opinions as pestilent, that would sow our field
with the mislen of Popery; and would mingle the pure wine of the word with the
water of their inventions. No, let them persuade this to their Catholic King
of Spain, as they term him; let him first practice this, yt will not now
endure so much as a book to be brought into his country by our Merchants; if
it stand any thing against their superstition; let them (I say) persuade him
that the Christians may have toleration of their religion, and then when they
have persuaded him, let them ask us that question afterward. In the mean
time, we will believe that then the body is strongest, when the multitude of
believers are of one heart, and of one mind, Act. 4. and not as the Jesuits
would persuade us, that dividing in religion would be an uniting in policy.
Yet least they should think we are not able now to return them an answer;
this I say that I see not but that they may with as good reason sue to have a
toleration to murder, commit adultery, and steal, as to demand this, for
then they should sin but against man; but this is a sin directly against
God, and against the good both of body and soul; this against the first table
to suffer any other religion than the true religion; the other but against the
second, and not so grievous. Yea but this would be a quieting of all stirs.
Nay, it would be a beginning of all strife; yea it were the way to rend the
kingdom in two. An example whereof we find in Solomon, who suffered two
religions, a true which himself professed, and a false which his concubines
held. But what followed? a rending of his kingdom, that as he suffered them to
be divided in opinion, so afterward by Gods just judgment, his kingdom was
divided and rent in two. And surely this is it that the Jesuits be sick of,
that either they might bring the Spaniard to be a lawgiuer in England, for they
hold him the Catholic King, that is by their own interpretation universal;
or else at the least that they might bring his triplicitie, I mean the Pope,
to share again with the Kings in England; and to ouertop them. And this is the
reason wherefore they so much labor this matter to bring in a toleration. From
which we ought to be so far and so wide, as that we must compel them unto
the truth; which is the second thing here to be noted.

thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, the stranger must keep the Sabbath, he
All must be compelled unto the true religion.
does therein manifestly inioyne thee to see that they keep the Sabbath. And
although I said even now that there were some strangers that were not to be
compelled unto the duties of Gods religion; yet that was in this respect, in
that they were without the covenant: for then the time was when God would be
worshipped but of whom and where he did appoint: then indeed he chose amongst
all the hills Sion, amongst all the rivers Jordan, of all countries Iewry, of all
cities Jerusalem, of all houses the Temple, and of all people the Jews: but
now every hill is Sion, every river is Jordan, every country Iewry, every
city Jerusalem, every faithful company, yea every body the Temple. And his
covenant is to all that are a far off, even as many as God shall call, Act. 2.
39. And we are to enforce all unto the service of the true God, and to go out
into the high ways and to compel them to come in; which yet chiefly is the
duty of the Prince or Magistrate, who is Gods minister to take vengeance upon
them that do evil, Romans 13. 4. And therefore Nehemiah, when he saw men of
Tyrus, which brought wares on the Sabbath, though first he reprooues the rulers
of the Jews, verse. 17. for suffering such an abuse; for they should have
looked unto it, that no stranger nor other should break the Sabbath: yet when
he had so done, he commands the gates to be shut against them, verse. 19.
Thirdly, he sets aguard at the gates of his own men to keep them out, ver. 19.
Fourthly, when he sees all this will not prevail, but that they stay about the
walls all night, then he sets down an order against them; that if they
tarried all night about the walls once again, they should be punished, for he
would lay hands on them, verse. 21. And this I take it must every Magistrate do
as well as Nehemiah; for he has the charge of both the Tables committed unto
him; of the first, as well as of the second. Which thing was figured in that in
the Coronation, the Testimony, and the Crown were given both together unto
the King, 2. King. 11. 12. that he might know the Crown was given him for
this end and purpose, that he might maintain Religion. And therefore we are
willed to pray for Kings, that we may live aquiet life under them in all
godliness, as well as honesty, 1. Tim. 2. 2. So that Kings must study to do
both these. They must not be like unto Gallio, which had no care of religion,
Act. 18. 15. Such are no better than beasts, and so the Prophet reckons of
those four Monarchies in Dan. 7. that cared not for religion, he compared
them unto four beasts. And David says, that man that is in honor and
understands not, is compared unto the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. vlt.
Neither is this alone for Kings, but also for our great Lords, that are (as I
may say) little Kings; these must be nursing fathers also: and that was
signified, as I take it, when the heads and chief of the Tribes were placed
about the Tabernacle, Numb. 2. As on the East side, were the rulers of Judah,
Isacher and Zebulon. On the South, the rulers of Ruben, Simeon, and Gad. On the
West, the rulers of Ephraim, Manashe, and Benjamin. And on the North, the
rulers of Dan, Asher, and Nepthali. Lo thus did the chief of the people
surround and hemme in the Tabernacle. But this is not it that is so much
striuen about, the question is how far Princes may meddle in matters of
religion to compel: for Papists say that the Pope has both swords; and that
Princes must not meddle in matters of religion; no not to punish any until
they be delivered over unto the secular power. So then they make belike Princes
nothing but the Popes butchers, to cut the poor lambs throat when he will
have it so; or rather the Pope is indeed the butcher, and the Prince but his
boy, to hold the sheep legs whilst the butcher cuts his throat. I will not
dispute this question neither; but I come unto that which I proposed: that is,
how far Princes may meddle in matters of religion to compel thereunto. First
therefore the Prince must especially see that his people be taught the law of
God, and that was the reason why Josiah caused the law to be read unto all the
people, 2. King. 23. 1. Secondly, in the same place (for that almost teaches a
King his duty) when he has caused them to be taught, he binds them by
covenant unto the same; yea and himself also, verse. 3. Thirdly, having thus
done, then he goes to reformation, and there he begins with the Priests.
First, he makes them bring out of the Temple all the vessels that were made
for Baal, verse. 5. Then he destroys their Idols, and their houses, verse. 6.
When he has so done (for this was not all, for he had a greater toil with
them, than ever King Henry had with the Abbeys in England) he comes to the
Kings houses, and there first he breaks down the Altars of the Kings of
Judah, ver. 10. He breaks down Manasses altar, verse. 12. Then the high places
that Solomon had built for Asteroth and Chemos. And lastly, the Calves of
Jeroboam, verse. 15. Now having taken away all these abominations; then
fourthly, he brings the people back again unto the observation of the true
worship of God, and commands all the people to keep the Passover, verse. 21.
Thus far went Josiah. But now, what if they had refused this, what then?
Surely he would then have ran a further course with them, he would no doubt
have enforced them by punishment, which is the fifth duty and the last in a
Prince, when no course will serve, then to enforce, by laying punishment upon
them, either in their goods, as Saul; Those that come not forth after me
(says he) thus shall his oxen be killed, 1. Sam. 11. 7: or else he would have
laid hands of them to have imprisoned them, Nehe. 13: or if all this would not
have served, he would have punished with loss of life it self. And so Asa
decreed that those that would not seek the Lord, that is, that were obstinate;
they should be slain, 2. Chro. 15. 15. And thus far, I take it, a Prince
has power to proceed against an obstinate contemner of Gods truth. And so
much for this that we are to compel others unto the observation of the
Sabbath, as well as to keep it in our own persons.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, TREATING OF THE REASONS MOVING TO THE sanctifying of the
Sabbath.
CHAP. I.
The first reason: because God has given us six days to labor in, Sect. 1.
Whether it be lawful to use recreation upon any of those six days, Sect. 2.
Whether it be lawful to consecrate any one or more of those six unto the
service of God, Sect. 3.

Six days The first reason of the keeping of the Sabbath.
shall thou labor, etc. and it is an argument a fortiori, persuading from the
greater to the less thus: If I have given thee six days to work in them,
then thou ought of conscience to rest one day: but I have allowed thee six,
and therefore rest the seventh. This is the manner of this argument: but me
thinks it is proposed by way of answer as it were, unto some question that
might be objected upon the former words: for where as God had in the
commandment required to rest the seventh day, some might object (as many do)
that it were very hard to rest a whole day. To which he answers, that they
ought at least to rest one whole day, being that God had bestowed upon them
six to their own uses. So that here I might take an occasion to answer those
that think it sufficient on the Sabbath if they come to the public exercise,
though they spend the rest in sports: but this nail I have driven before; come
we now to the words: Six days shall thou labor, etc. First, in that that he
gives us six days to do our business in, therein he lets us see that six
days are sufficient for us to do our business in, and for the dispatch of all
our works; and if that he had seen that we should have needed more, he would
have given them; but seeing six were sufficient, he gave no more, though in
respect of himself as he is Lord of the Sabbath (and so is he also of all the
rest of the days of the week) he could have given us more. And therefore as
he says, Psalm. 50. 10. All the beasts of the forest are mine: so may he say,
All the days of the week are his; by which right he might have craved of us
every second or third day. Yet he deals more liberally with us, and requires
but the seventh. Then hence to persuade you to keep this Sabbath, let me
reason with you as Naamans servant did with his master; What (says he) if the
Prophet had commanded thee a greater thing than this, would not thou have
done it? how much more then when he says, Wash and be clean? 2. King. 5. 13.
So I say; if the Lord had commanded thee a greater thing than this, would
thou; would thou (do I say) nay ought thou not to have done it? how much
more then when he says, keep the seventh? And if we refuse this to keep one
of seven, what would we do if he should require one of three or four? So that
Gods liberality in this case does much aggrauate the sin of man, when
restraining him but in one, and giving him plenty of others, yet he will not
be restrained from that one. This was it that made Adams sin out of measure
sinful, that having plenty of all the trees of the garden, both for variety
and sacietie, Genes. 2. 9. yet he must needs taste the forbidden fruit. So
was this also that which made David's sin a notable sin, that having many
wives of his own, yet he could not be content with all these, but he must
take the wife of poor Vriah, 2. Sam. 12. 9. Well, I know not how deep this
argument sinketh into the hearts of Sabbath Breakers, their consciences are so
seared and so hardened with the custom of that sin, and their hearts so
covered as it were with a shield of brawn, that they are grown past feeling of
it: but I am verily persuaded at the day of account it shall stick unto them
nearer than the marrow cleaves unto the bones; and it shall be more sensible
unto them, than the tenderest bile in the world. When (I say) they shall hear
God out of his law to reason in this sort against them; I gave you six days
to do your worldly business in, to labor, to ride, to run, to buy, to
sell, to sow, to reap, to solace your selves, to see your friends, to make
merry, etc. and yet cannot you be contented with them, but that you must
incroach upon me to take my holy day also, and to spend it, I say not upon your
labors, but that which is more intolerable, upon your lusts and delights.
This (I say) cannot but strike them thorough, and make their hearts to fall in
sunder like water, when they shall consider their great ingratitude toward
him, that when he of seven could afford to give them six, they of seven
cannot afford to give; (give do I say? out upon it) nay cannot suffer him to
enjoy one. The scarre of churlishnes sticks like a star in the forhead of
Nabal, and shall to the worlds end, 1. Sam. 25. 3. that David when in regard of
his kindness showed unto his shepherds in the wilderness, requiring him to
give him a present of any thing that came next unto his hand, the churl
refused to do it. Now Nabal how soever churlish, yet this was his own, it was
in his power, and it was provided for his shearers: yet for all this, is he
justly condemned for a chrule, in that he sent not a present unto David, that
had so well deserved it. With what words then may this sin of ours be
sufficiently aggrauated, that whereas God of his bounty of seven has given us
six, if we also should take away from him that one? If a poor man on the way
as thou trauellest should come unto thee, and crave of thee for Gods sake to
bestow upon him something to relieve him, and thou out of thy liberality and
compassion toward him should give him all the money in thy purse, reserving
only a very little for thine own use to bring thee home; if he (I say)
should catch thy purse and that also, and run away with it, would thou not
account him very ungrateful? Yet thy ingratitude to God is as great as his and
more; for in very truth thou art so bound unto God, as that if thou should
give half of thy days, yea all of them back again unto him, thou could
not sufficiently recompense him.

To conclude therefore this point, let that reason which moved Joseph not to
consent to his Mistress prevail with thee; My master has committed all into my
hand, and has kept nothing from me, but only thee, because thou art his wife;
how then shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genes. 39.
So should thou answer thy companions, when they shall allure thee on the
Sabbath to sin: The Lord has given me all the days in the week to do my
works in, saving only this one he has reserved unto himself; how then can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against the Lord in breaking his Sabbath?
And thus much for the manner of the reason, how it inforceth us to the keeping
of the Sabbath.

The doctrine that we learn hence is, first that the commandments of God
stand, all of them, and are grounded upon good reason, and therefore that all
his commandments are not only true, Psalm. 119. 86, but righteous also, verse.
106. Yea they are all most just, verse. 128. And there is nothing in the world
that stands with such reason as the service of God; which makes the Apostle
to call it our reasonable serving of God, Romans 12. 2. And therefore Ezec. 18.
25. God blames those that say his ways are unequal; and no less worthy of
blame are such as think that it is unreasonable to keep a whole day holy
unto the Lord. Why then how should their business go forward? why then when
should they have any time for recreation? What is all this but to find fault
with Gods law, as if it were not just, as if it were not equal. But what say
thou, is it not equal? and is it not meet that thou should have thy six
days to do thy business in, which God has allowed thee? And is it not as
meet that God should have one? Let this therefore cease thy murmuring against
Gods law, seeing it stands with such good reason.

The second doctrine that we note in these words, Six days shall thou
labor, is this, that as it is sin for us ordinarily to work on the seventh
day; so also is it sin for us through negligence or idleness, not to dispatch
our worldly business in the six days, seeing he has allowed them unto us
for that purpose. And therefore on them we ought to labor; and it behooves us
so much the more carefully to labor in them, seeing that God has enjoined
man to labor in the sweat of his brows, Genes. 3. Yea seeing, as Job says,
he is borne to labor as the sparkles fly upward, Job. 5. 7. And hence it is
that God has left him so many precedents of labor before his eyes; the ox is
made to till the land, and tread out the corn; the ass is to stand under the
burden; the heavens are still in their motion as it were still a working; the
Angels are ministering spirits, Psalm. 104. 4; and when man was in the state of
perfection God would not have him idle, Genesis 2. though God had no need of his
work, nor the garden; for it brought out all things without planting; yet he
would have man to labor, because man had need of it; and therefore sets him
his task to dress and trim the garden. Nay, God himself in his own person
wrought six days in making of the heavens and the earth. He could indeed
have finished it in one, or at a words speaking; but yet he would work six
days, to leave unto us an example to do the like.

Then here are those slow bellies and idle Abbey lubbers condemned, that spend
whole days in doing nothing; that are like paralitique and gowtie members,
loose and untied in the joints of obedience; that say unto the head command us
not, for we will not move, neither will we stir. But shall not God curse them as
he did the fig tree that bare no fruit? cut it down, why combreth it the
earth? And were it not that these words did stand up so pregnantly against
these men, yet the very evils that accompany idleness were sufficient to make it
to be detested: for what sin is it almost that grows not out of this, as
out of a nurcerie of all sin? Idleness causes to fall asleep, Pro. 19. 15.
then idleness is the cause of drowsinesse. So is it of beggerie; He that will
(...) in winter, shall beg in summer, Prou. 20. 4. Idleness is the cause of
ill husbandry, His land cries out against him, and the furrows thereof
complain, that have not their water courses, Job. 31. 38. Thorns and nettles
cover the face thereof, Prou. 24. 4. So is idleness the cause of drunkenness;
Amos 6. They live at ease: and what follows? verse. 5. They drink their wine
in bowls. Idleness causes wantonness: David after his sleep in the day time
lusts after Bathsheba, 2. Sam. 11. 12. Idleness causes tale-bearing; for they
being idle, go about from house to house, and become pratlers and busy
bodies, 2. Tim. 5. 13. like Bishops in another man's diocese. What shall I say
more? in a word, they are inordinate walkers, as the Apostle calls them, 1 Thessalonians. 3. and therefore what good may be looked for from them? Then to
conclude, seeing such a legion of sins wait upon this one sin, let us
shun and avoid it; and let us walk in that vocation wherein God has called
us; considering that as the iron that lies still, rusteth; the water that
runs not, corrupts; and the field that is not manured, brings forth
weeds: so it fares with the soul of the sluggard; in steed of the good
graces of God which rust and decay every day in him, there arises nothing but
the affections of an idle brain, as weeds in a land untilled. Let us
therefore betake our selves unto some honest vocation, wherein we may profit
either Church or Commonwealth; and let us know that it is not left in our
power to labor, or not; but let us assuredly know that God enioynes us labor:
for, Six days shall thou labor.



Touching the first, it is true which the Apostle says; Bodily exercise
profits little, 1. Tim. 4. 8. he speaks of fasting, the best of these
exercises: yet something it does profit, and for that profits sake we are
allowed at some time to use it, seeing that God allows a time thereunto; as
Eccles. 3. There is a time unto every purpose, a time to laugh, a time to
dance, etc. Yea, and if we consider the weakness and corruption of our nature,
we shall find that we have need of such times; for we are not of such a
temper as to hold out still, if our natures be not repaired and refreshed: but
it is like unto a bow, if it stand long bent, it will cast aside; and therefore
it is allowed unto us sometimes to unbend as it were our wits, and to refresh
our spirits; and as in a great combat, to breathe a while that we may return
with a fresh encounter. And to that end God has allowed us exercises both for
the body and mind; for the mind, as Sampson used riddles, Iud. 14. 12. and
David his Harp, 1. Sam. 16: for the body, as Jonathan his bow, 1. Sam. 20. and
Esau used hunting, Genesis 27. And this a man may do, if he consider these
things: First, that the mirth be allowable, or that it be not corrupt or
scurrilous: for foolish jesting is condemned, Ephesians. 5. 4: or dangerous, as Pro.
20. 18. The fool faineth himself mad, and casts firebrands and arrows and
mortal things, and says, Am not I in sport? Secondly, that we use them with
moderation. We must do as Solomon; when we give our selves to these things, we
must be sure to lead our hearts in wisdom, Eccl. 2. 1. And though we taste
of the honey comb with Jonathan, yet we must not eat too much, Prou. 25. 27.
And therefore if we much desire it, then we must remember Salomons watchword;
Put thy knife to thy throat, Pro. 23. 2. In the use of these things therefore a
man had need do as Ulysses, when he heard the Sirens, first to bind
himself fast unto the maine mast, that he might not be drawn away by them:
for though these be not the devils cart-ropes, yet they be made dangerous
cords of vanity oftentimes to draw a man to further mischief; especially if
he consider not the end of these recreations; that we use them in respect of
a greater good; and to make us fitter unto better things; even as a man uses
sauce to sharpen his stomach, because it is weak. But many men in their sports
know neither end nor measure; whole nights or days are not sufficient, but
that they must change and alter Gods covenant, and turn the nights into days,
to extend their sports unto the uttermost limits, yea and to leap from one
sport unto another, as the fly does from one scab unto another. When will
these men (I think) be weary? will they never have done? mean they to make
it the end of their life, to live to play? Woe worth such a life, ten times
worse than death; because living they die, as the widow that lived in pleasure
was dead whiles she lived, 1. Tim. 5. 6. And shall they not then dying die
eternally, as the rich man that went to hell, for all his pleasures? Luke 16.
25. But what speak I? I know my words are too weak to persuade these, they
are so deeply set. Well, yet let them remember the voice that will come at
midnight, and happily may speak unto them in the midst of their pleasures,
as the handwriting appeared unto Baltasher in the midst of his pleasures. I
say no more, but think upon it. And last of all, weigh well the circumstances
of time, place, and persons, with whom thou use these recreations: for there
is not the least of the^ but may make thy recreations sinful. As for example,
other things considered, it may be lawful for a man to shoot or bowl: but is
this lawful to do it when the preacher is in the pulpit? or is it lawful to
play in the time of prayer? or to use it with those whom a man would disdain
that they should sit with the dogs of his flock, they be so vile and
profane? But what power or force circumstances have in things indifferent to
make them lawful or unlawful, I have abundantly showed in the beginning of
the chapter of rest. Let this therefore suffice for answer to the first
question.

David did the show bread, Matthew. 12. yet he may consecrate upon a just
occasion that which is common, as appears every where. Yea even of these six
days we find some consecrate unto the Lord, as two days in Hester called
the feast of Purim, Hest. 9. And the feast of Dedication instituted by the
Macchabees, and observed by Christ himself, Ioh. 10. 22. So also did they
consecrate of these days unto the Lord by keeping their fasts upon this day,
as the Israelites kept a fast in Mispeh, 1. Sam. 7. And Hest. 4. 16. there is a
fast kept of three days long: yea Daniel keeps a fast of three weeks of
days, Dan. 10. 3. Neither in so doing is there any breach or alteration of
Gods ordinance, but rather an observation. For as Christ brake not the
commandment when he neglected his duty to parents to perform his duty to
God; so neither do we break this ordinance of God, when we on any of the
six days neglect our own business to serve God, the cause and necessity so
requiring: for if necessity may cause us to break the Sabbath for the good of
man; may not necessity as well dispense with our days, and cause us to
sanctify a Sabbath for the good of man? Nay further, I take it that this
commandment being a Synecdoche, and but a part put for the whole, (as are all
the other commandments) does warrant; yea and command such time convenient
in the week days to be set apart unto Gods service. And we see that Christ
and the Apostles preached on these days as well as upon the Sabbath; which
they would not have done if it had been unlawful for the people to hear. And
as I think that any of these days may by the Church be set apart to Gods
service, the cause so requiring; so also do I persuade my self that some part
of every one of these days should be set apart to holy exercises, as morning
and evening to pray with our families. And of these we see Isaac had one, he
went out in the evening to pray, Genesis 24. 63. Daniel had three, for he prayed
three times a day, Dan. 6. 10. And David prayed seven times a day, Psalm. 119.
164. And thus much as touching the second question, and so consequently of the
first reason to persuade to the keeping of the Sabbath: for as for such things
as be here observed about the rest, I have handled them before in the discourse
of the rest of the day.

CHAP. II.
The second reason; because it is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, Sect. 1.
Holy days are to be consecrated only to the Lord, Sect. 2.

It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. And it may be thus gathered: If the
Sabbath be consecrate unto the Lord, and his worship, then you must rest on it
from your works: but the former is true; for it is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, and therefore it follows that you must rest from your works. And here
mark with me, first the workmanship of this reason, how fitly it is framed:
for first, least any man should be so bold as to ask him for his commission,
as Exo. 2. one demanded of Moses; Who made thee a Judge? or as Mat. 22. 23.
the Priests demanded of Christ, By what authority do thou these things?
Therefore he shows his authority, namely that he is authority it self, and
he may command, for he is Lord, and no man will say unto him (unless he be a
devil) What have thou to do with us? Matthew. 8: for he has to do with us,
for he is thy Lord; and that diverse ways. First, he is thy Creator, he made
thee; and therefore look how the vessel is in the potters hand, so art thou
in his, Romans 9. This David knew well enough when he said; Come let us fall
down before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 95. 6. Secondly, as he is thy Lord by
creation, so also is he by redemption; He has bought thee with a price, 1.
Cor. 6. 20. a price not of gold and silver, but with his most precious blood,
1. Pet. 1. 18. And therefore this is rendered as a reason of his dying and
rising again, that he might be Lord over us, Romans 14. 9. Thirdly, as by his
redemption, so by his sovereignty, rule and authority, in that he is absolute
in his command, and does whatsoever he will both in heaven and in earth, Psalm.
115. 3. No man can stay his hand, neither dare any say unto him, what do
thou? Dan. 4. 32. for he is Lord of Lords, Romans 17. 14. and his hests stand
like the laws of the Medes and Persians that cannot be recalled, Dan. 6. 12.
Yea a degree further, he is the Lord of spirits, Number. 16. 22. and therefore
will command not as other Lords, thy body only, but thy soul too. Matthew.
21. 37. Thou must serve him with all thy soul; and if it please him he can
cast both body and soul into hell fire, Mat. 10. 28. Now then if he be thy
Lord and master in so full and so absolute a manner; what then? why then, where
is his fear? Malac. 1. 6. He calls for that, and good reason; for if there
be no master but will have some service; shall God, so great a Lord and
master, be without it? No, he will not, and therefore he here requires it of
thee on this day to serve him. Now there is one thing which the master owes
unto the servant, and that is protection, and every man harpes upon that
string; if he stands in need of his help, then Master save us, we perish,
Matthew. 8. 25. But there is another thing that the servant owes to his master,
and that is obedience; and there we break with him, He says go, and we go
not; come, and we come not; do this, and we do it not; we keep his
commandments with notes, as the Atheist beleene the Articles of faith. But may
it not be that there is cause, as that he is a hard man; or he will not stand
by his servants to defend them; or else he gives not so good wages as others?
Surely it is not so: for first David tells us, that he will not always chide,
nor keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. 8. Yea if he see us once to fall down
before him, and to crave him to appease his anger; he forgiues us all, Mat. 18.
27. then he is no hard master. And as for defense, he will suffer no man to do
us wrong, but will reprove eue^ kings for our sakes, Psalm. 105. 14. And as for
his hire; there is no service like unto his; no not the service of the King.
You cannot say of him as Saul said of David; will he give every one of you
fields and vineyards? will he make you Captains over thousands, etc? Yea he
will, and more than that, he makes all his servants Kings, Reu. 1. 6. and gives
every one of them a crown of life, 2. Tim. 4. yea an everlasting kingdom,
that withers not; reserved in heaven, 1. Pet. 1. 4. All this he gives; and
he gives it liberally, not reproching and casting men in the teeth with it, as
Saul did his followers; why then what shall let us to serve such a master? Yet
behold and wonder; let a flattering devil a little entice us, with a show of
any matter; or pleasure of sin, though it be but for a season; yet we are
presently in love with it, and forsake our old Lord and master to serve him;
like children, that though they have good things in their hands, yet they will
cast them away for toys and trifles; does not God behold this? and is not this
our sin of disobedience written even with the point of a Diamond before him?
Surely he will not forget it, neither shall it be put out until we die, if we
repent not, and learn to serve him better who is the Lord of all flesh by
creation, but by a more near band, the Lord of his elect even by redemption:
and therefore much more to be served by them.

And this is another motive to move us to serve him: for though as a Lord he
might only command, and we ought not therein to disobey him; yet as a
merciful God in Christ, he had rather persuade; and to that end he uses an
argument drawn from the covenant of grace that he has made with man, in that
he vouchsafes to be called (to be called do I say) nay in that he
vouchsafes indeed to be his God: for he says not that it is the Sabbath of
the Lord, but in a more particular sort he adds thy God, pleading as it were
thy possession in him, and his interest in thee; and indeed in this the very
bowels of Gods mercy and compassion are as it were wound up, in that he says
he is thy God. And it contains in it plenteous redemption; yea and assurance
also. He is able to save, for he is God; and he is willing, for he is a God
unto thee. Therefore he calls himself thy God. Were he a Lord, a God, a
Christ, a Jesus; what is that to thee, if he be not thy God, thy Lord, thy
Christ, thy Jesus? It would not much profit us to know that meat is eaten an
hundred miles off, if we perish for hunger. As little would it avail us to
know that Christ is a God and a Savior, unless he be thy Savior. And this
is indeed the very marrow and honey comb of the word, to know that the
promise is made unto us, and to our children, Act. 2. 39; that a child is
borne unto us, Isai. 9. 6; that Christ is unto us wisdom, and sanctification,
and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30; and that he died for our sins, and rose for our
justification, Romans 4. 25; and here, that he is not ashamed to be called thy
God.

But the greatness of a benefit can never be conceived, unless we conceive
first our great need, and our great unworthiness. And first for our baseness
and unworthiness, may we not say as David; Lord what is man, or the son of
man, that God should be mindful of him? Psalm. 8. that he should vouchsafe to
be called his God. Man is a very grasshopper of the earth, Isai. 40. 22. yea all
men together are but as a drop of water, and as the dust of the balance, Isai.
40. 15. and as little goodness have we as greatness. The best is but as a
brier, and the most righteous as a hedge of thorns, Mich. 7. 4. What were the
Israelites themselves? they were but brickmakers and pioners in Egypt; their
food was but onyons and garlic; their worship but Idolatry, Genesis 12. their
father but an Amorite, their mother but an Hittite, Ezech. 16. 3: then what are
we, who in respect of them are but the wild branches of the Olive, and they
the natural? Romans 11. verse. 21. Now, as David says, seems it a light
thing unto you to be the Kings sons, seeing I am but a poor man and of small
reputation? So may we a thousand times more justly say in respect of the
highest Majesty; Seems it a light thing unto you that God should vouchsafe
to be called our God, secing we are poor men and of no reputation? But this
was not all; we were not only mean, but miserable also: we were by nature
the children of wrath, Ephesians. 3. and the fire of Gods vengeance did burn
against us unto the bottom of hell for our sins. Yet then does he step in, and
becomes unto us a saving God, by his blood to cleanse us from all our sins.
And not only so, but in this that he vouchsafes to be called our God, to give
unto us the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, the assurance of the
resurrection of our bodies, the assurance of life everlasting; yea the
assurance of all graces whatsoever. That all this is promised in these words,
shall appear: first, that it contains in it the forgiveness of sins,
appears in that David says; The man is blessed whose God is the Lord, Psalm.
33. 12. Now there is none blessed but he that has his sins forgiven him,
Psalm. 32. 1. And therefore he whose God is ye Lord has his sins forgiven him.
Secondly, as it contains in it forgiveness of sins, so also does it contain
in it the promise of the resurrection of the body. And that Christ shows,
Mat. 22. 32. where he proves against the Saduces the resurrection of the body
by this; God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: now he is not the God of
the dead, but of the living. The reason holds thus; whose God the Lord is,
he is their God by an everlasting covenant, and they shall live for ever: but
he is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, therefore they shall live for ever:
and so consequently if he be thy God, thou shall live for ever. And that it
contains the promise of life everlasting in it, is manifest, Heb. 11. 16. God
was not ashamed to be called their God: for he had prepared for them an
heavenly city. The reason is thus concluded; If he had not prepared for them a
city to come, he should have been ashamed: but their God cannot be ashamed,
therefore he prepared a place for them; and so consequently he will for thee,
if he be thy God. In a word, in this one word thy God, are all the promises of
God, Yea and Amen: for as the Apostle reasons, He which gave us his son,
how shall he not with him give us al things also? Romans 8. 32. And if God
vouchsafe to give us himself, how shall he not with himself give us all
things also? Let us then seek to make this sure, that God is our God, and all
things are ours, whether Paul; or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
things present, or things to come; even all things are ours together with him,
and that shall we know by this, if we be his, 1. Cor. 2. vlt. And his we are
assuredly if his law be written in our inward parts, to do it, then I say are
we sure that he is our God, and we his people, Iere. 31. 33. So then to
conclude this point; if in thy baseness God advanced thee; if in thy misery he
relieved thee; if he forgiues thee thy sins; assures thee that thou shall
rise again unto life; and living to give thee everlasting life, and with it al
happiness, (all which he does assure thee of, when he calls himself thy God)
then I say keep his Sabbath. For this he requires at thy hands, who is thy
God, and has done all these things for thee in becoming thy God. And thus
much for the motives that this reason contains in it to persuade us to keep
his Sabbath.

holy unto the Lord; we are therein taught to whom to consecrate holy days,
namely unto the Lord. Therefore Isai. 56. he calls the Sabbath his holy day;
and Ezech. 20. 12. his Sabbath. So does he call the place of his worship his
house, Luke 19. 46. And indeed being his service is there and then performed,
and that he will have no partners therein (for he will not give his glory unto
another, Isai. 42.) ought not the day, and so the place to be consecrated only
unto him?

The more shame then for the Papists; that consecrate days and Churches, to
Saints, Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, men, women, of which their Callender
contains above an hundred; certainly they are herein worse than the
Israelites: for though they set up an Idol, yet they would not consecrate a
day unto it; but they said to morrow is holy unto the Lord, Exodus 32. 5. not
unto the Idol: but these institute days unto them; yea and power forth
prayers unto them: Hear us Mary, and pray for us Peter, etc. But doubtless
did these Saints know it, they would cry out, as in the Psalm 115. 1. Not
unto us, not unto us O Lord: but unto thy name give we the glory. Yea I say,
howsoever these men give this worship unto them, did they know it, they would
even rend their long white robes in an holy zeal, as Paul and Barnabas did
their garments: and they would cry out unto them from heaven, as those did to
the Idolaters upon the earth; O men why do ye these things? Act. 14. 15. But
what needed they when as their practice in the Primative Church stands up
against them? There were I am sure holy men in old times Patriarchs and
Prophets: yet did neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles ever institute any
day, or make any prayer unto them. Which doubtless they would have done, had
they held it a matter meet to be done: only when they did consecrate a day
they called it the Lords day, being lead thereto by this, in that it is called
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. And thus much as concerning the second reason.

CHAP. III.
The third reason is taken from Gods example, who rested the seventh day, Sect.
1. Wherein we are to imitate God, and wherein not, Sect. 2. How God can be said
to rest, Sect. 3. The use of these words, Sect. 4.

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, etc. And it persuades from
an example of the like, thus; That which I did for thine example, thou ought
to do the like: but I labored six days and rested the seventh for thine
example, and therefore thou must do the like. So that the force of this reason
stands in the example of God himself, the best president that the world or
word it self can yield. Now of what force examples are, we see in that men
are lead by example, rather than by law, and hold it a good warrant for the
doing of any thing for that others do so: but if they be great ones that do
it, then it is put out of question. For would such men do so, say they, if it
were not lawful? Now God seeing men so to be carried by example, and that this
commandment is so commonly broken by the example of great me^ especially, who
esteem of the Sabbath but as of another day; therefore he opposes against
their examples, his own example, who is higher than the highest of them, whose
breath is in their nostrels: and his example alone is able to weigh down all
the examples or reasons that can be brought to the contrary. And if a man
will be lead by example, it is meet he should be lead by the best example, and
if it may be by such an example that cannot err. Now all the examples of men
be they never so holy, have much weakness in them, and in one thing or other
they miss. Let us make proof of some of the best of them. As for example,
Solomon had a wise and an understanding heart, so that there was none like
neither before nor after him, 1. King. 3. 12. a very high commendation; yet he
had his blemish, he loved outlandish women, 1. King. 10. 1. Asa did right in
the eyes of the Lord: but will you know his fault? he put not down the high
places, 1. King. 15. 14. David was a man after Gods own heart, that did what
was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded
all the days of his life; yet in one thing he is challenged, in the matter of
Vriah the Hittite, 1. King. 15. 5. So then we see the best men come short,
and, in many things we sin all, I am. 3. 2. And therefore the best dare
propose themselves for examples to be followed no further than they follow
Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 1. If a man be just, another may be as just as he; if a man
be learned, another may be as learned as he; if a man preach well, another may
preach as well as he; if a man write well, another may write as well as he; and
often we see the scholar to exceed the master. Now if these be the best
examples we can propose unto our selves, then the best come short of that they
should be, and another man may possibly do as well as they, and so he may have
occasion of boasting: but God his example is an example propsed without
example; it is so exact, so full, and so absolute, that all the world cannot
yield the like example; neither can a man take any exception against it: and
therefore this is an example above all to be followed. And this his example
he so proposes here, as first setting it down for a law, and then afterward
keeping the same law in his own person: so that if either law or example will
do any thing with us, he would by both of them persuade us to keep the
Sabbath Nay further, whereas in the other commandments, you shall not see the
example of God observed in the keeping of them; yet in this one you may observe
a double example given by God. For twice in the Scripture his keeping of the
Sabbath is observed: first, in the beginning when he created the heavens and
earth, then he rested the seventh day. Secondly, when he rained Manna in the
wilderness every day, yet when the Sabbath came he ceased. Exo. 16. 26. 27.
Well then, has the lawgiuer himself gone before you in keeping this
commandment, let me then exhort you as the Apostle does, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be you
followers of God as dear children, and walk as ye have him for an example.
Now, loving children will follow their parents; then if you be children, I say
if loving children, you will follow him. Now I know in general that every man
will subscribe unto this, that they must follow God in keeping his Sabbath: but
yet come and press them to yield obedience in the particular duties, there you
shall have them as the young man in the Gospel; they then depart sorrowful,
that makes them to scratch where it does not itch. What must they do nothing
but hear, pray, meditate? etc. Nay, if it had been only to forbear the doing
of some worldly business, which they greatly cared not for the doing of at any
time, they would have forborne; but now upon this day to forgo their afternoon
sports, and plays, and to sit (as they term it) moping in a corner; this is
too hard. Well, but I say, if you be Gods children you will follow him; yea
and more than any son imitateth the father: for the father begets his
son but like unto him in substance; but God begets his children like unto
him in qualities: They be holy as he is holy, merciful as he is merciful, and
will imitate him in all his doings: and therefore in this they will keep the
Sabbath as he kept it; otherwise they are no children but bastards; I say
bastards on the mothers side, but not on the fathers; for were they his true
children, they would be also his dear children, as in this place, and would
follow him.

to give sight unto the blind, to fast forty days, to walk upon the waters,
to raise the dead, etc. Now these are to be wondered at, but not to be
imitated; because the gift of working miracles cease in the Church, and it is
a note of Antichrist now to work wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. The second sort of
works are works of our redemption, as the son of God to become the son of
man, to be borne of a virgin, to bear our sins, to die for us, to rise
again and to ascend into heaven. Now these are works to be believed, but not
to be imitated, unless it be in a certain similitude or resemblance; that as
Christ was conceived and borne, so he should be conceived and borne in us,
Gal. 4. 19. And as Christ died for sin, 1. Cor. 15. 3. so we should die to
sin, Romans 6. 2. As Christ in his flesh was crucified upon the cross; so
should we crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Galath. 4. 24. As Christ
being dead for our sin was buried; so we being dead to sin, should also be
buried with him by baptism, Romans 6. 4. As Christ being buried rose again; so
must we being buried with him by baptism, rise again to walk in newnes of
life, verse. 5. As Christ being risen did ascend; so must we risen from the
grave of sin ascend, by setting our affections on things above, Coloss. 3. 2.
And hereupon grew that rule, that whatsoever Christ did for us, the same he did
in us. Lastly, the third sort of duties are moral duties commanded in the
law: and these are the works wherein he is to be imitated by us. Examples
whereof he gives us, Mat. 11. 29. Of meeknes, Learn of me that I am humble
and meek. In John, of love and brotherly kindness, Ioh. 13. 15. I have given
you an example. And in this place of working six days, and resting the
seventh. Indeed he could have finished all his works in one hour, or with a
word speaking; but he would work about them six days, and rest the seventh
for our example. And therefore as Christ said, Have you not read what David
did? how when he was an hungered, etc. So, have you not read what the Lord did?
how when he made the heavens and the earth, he labored six days and rested
the seventh: have you not read it I say? if you have, then again I say, as
Christ in another case, Go and do the like, Luke 10. 37. that is, rest, as he
did. For not the work, but the rest is that which is proposed unto thee.

rest, that is a pure act in himself and always works; or how he can be said
to work that always rests in his action. The answer is, he always
works, and always rests in himself; but in this place he is said to rest
or to work in respect of his creatures. To rest, I say, in that he cease to
make any more creatures; yet not to rest from preserving them being made. For
God was not idle on the seventh day, but did sustain and preserve the
creatures which he before had made; otherwise they would have come to nothing.
And therein we are taught, that though on the Sabbath it be not lawful to
labor to increase that we have; yet it is lawful to save and preserve that
we have: and this he teaches us here by his own example. And so much touching
the sense and force of these words.

they do but as others do, and they that are better men, and have more
knowledge than they, do so; and, if it were not lawful they would not do it;
would such a Justice, or such a Preacher bowl or banquet, or ride about upon
the Sabbath, if it were not lawful? And when they have thus answered, they
think they have spoken to the matter passing well. But I wonder, seeing they
will be lead by example, why they do not look unto God, and follow his
example, which is the best of all: for I am sure that there is none of those
which they follow is worthy to be named the same day with him; none so
learned, none of such authority as he: may not a man then return this their
answer upon them, when they shall say, such and such that are learned, and of
authority do break the Sabbath? may not we answer them, I say, and that
justly that their betters do keep it; and that therefore they should keep it?
David kept it, the Prophets kept it, the Apostles kept it, Christ himself kept
it, when he was here in the flesh; nay God kept it, as here we see. Now if
they can bring examples for the profaning of the Sabbath greater and better
than these, let them show them: but certain it is they cannot; and therefore
hence forth let them be ashamed thus to reason; and to offer that measure unto
God, which they would disaine their servant should offer unto them. For let
the^ answer me in the like case; would they be contented, if sending their
servants in their business, their servants should neglect the doing of that
wherein they were employed, and spend the time at cards or dice, or dancing,
or serving their own turns; would they (I say) be contented? if when they
should expostulate the matter with them, they should answer, that they did not
play alone; but others did play as well as they. Or if thou should reprove
thy child for swearing, or lying unto thee, would thou take it well that he
should answer; others lie and swear as well as I? But thou art too cockering
of thy child: I propose therefore another case; If a thief should answer a
Judge thus, that others did steal as well as he; would not the Judge reply,
that therefore he should be hanged for example unto others. And how is it then
that we think so basely of God, as that the example of such profane men (for
so I may justly term them that profane Gods Sabbath) should be able to
match, yea and ouermatch the example of God himself with these men.

Secondly, this also serves for our comfort, that when others shall vpbraide
us as precise and curious, for that we will not do upon the Sabbath as others
of our neighbors do, as to go to bowls with them, or cards, or to dancing,
or such like vain sports; I say, when we shall be thus vpbraided, yet here is
our comfort, we are not alone in this, but God is with us, and he has trodden
the way before us in his own person, resting upon the Sabbath, that we might
do the like.

Thirdly, in that God wrought six days and rested the seventh, to teach us to
do the like, we are thence to learn this instruction, that the end of our
doings must not be our selves alone, but we must have regard of others also,
that they by our good example may be moved to well doing, Mat. 5. 16. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works. And for this
cause it was that Christ paid tribute, though he were free. And for the
example of others it was, that he went to hear John, he had no need to be
taught of any, for the spirit was given him above measure: yet he would go
hear John, to give an example unto us to embrace the gifts and graces of God
in our inferiors. But of this sufficient.

Fourthly and lastly, in that God within the compass of six days was able of
nothing to create the heavens, and the earth, and all things that are in them
contained; we may learn that God is able in a short time to bring wonderful
things to pass. When we read the acts of Alexander, we wonder to see how
that in a short time he did subdue the greatest part of the world: but what
was that to this? it is easier by far to pull down and to destroy, than to
build up; to take away life, than to give. And therefore that God should so
soon of nothing make a world, how great was this his power? The Jews thought
it an incredible thing that Christ should say, he would rear the Temple in
three days, that was a building six and forty years; they misunderstood
him I know: but if he had said it of the material Temple, it had been nothing
to this, to the frame and workmanship of the world; the Temple was but as the
rearing of a molhill, in comparison of the greatest mountain in the world. Yet
see how soon he dispatches this great work, in six days he dispatches the
whole frame, though he had not any matter wherewithal to begin to build: So
true is that in the Psalm. 115. 3. he does whatsoever he will. And therefore it
skils not how difficult the work be, so he be the builder; how troublesome the
seas, so he be the Pilot; how doubtful the conquest, so he be the Leader; nor
how dangerous the sickness, so he be the Physician. And as he is powerful in
saving, so is he also in destroying, it being as easy a thing: and therefore
let his enemies look unto the rod of his power, who is able at an instant to
destroy them all. At an instant he disgards Nebuchadnezzar, and turns him out
of his palace. At an instant he smites all the first borne in Egypt. At an
instant he ouerwhelmes Pharaoh and his host, rendeth ten Tribes from
Jeroboam, ouerturneth Sodom, makes a world, drowneth a world, and saves a
world again. What shall I say more? as he knows all things, so he can do
all things, both in heaven and in earth, in which he has all means to serve
his turn: the very Angels themselves are his ministering spirits, Psalm. 104. 4.
and the devils cannot go without his leave, Mat. 8. 32. And as for men he
commands them much more, for he is the Lord of hosts, Isai. 1. And he has not
only these of men and none other hosts, but he has armies of frogs and flies
and lice to fight against his enemies, Exodus 8. When he will, the heavens shell
take his part, 1. Sam. 7. and the Sun shall stay his course till he be
avenged of his enemies. So then he has all means at his command. And were it
so that he had but small means, yet he can make it serve and hold out. If
he say the word, the meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the
oil in the cruce diminish, 1. King. 17. 14. If he will have it so, one suite
of apparel shall last forty years, and yet shall not wax old. With five
loaves he will feed five thousand men, Matthew. 14. Were it so that means
should fail, yet he can work without them as well as with them. Asa had said
little if he had said it had bin all one to God to save by few as by many, if
he had not added, or by none, 2. Chro. 14. 10. For he is not tied unto the
means, as a Carpenter is unto his tools; but he can work as well without
them as with them. For when there was no rain, yet he made the earth
fruitful, Genesis 2. 5. when there was no Sun to shine, yet there was light.
Then God can work we see without means; and so he can against means. Who
would not think that clay put in a man's eyes should put out a man's eyes? yet
tempering it he gives sight thereby, Ioh. 9. 6. Who would not think that if a
man should strike a rock, that he should rather make fire come out of it, than
water? yet he strikes the rock and the waters flow, Exo. 17. 6. Who would not
think that Colloquintida should rather poison a man, than be healthsome meat
for him? yet he blessing it, there is no evil in it, 2. King. 4. 40, 41. Who
would not think that the fire should not burn? yet the three children put into
the furnace were not only not burned, but had not so much as any smell of fire
about them, Dan. 3. This therefore has this use, to comfort us, that when
comfort shall seem to stand a far off, like Abraham in the heavens, yet we
be not dismayed; for God is stronger than the Duiell: and therefore though we
be troubled, yet we may be still: comfort is on foot, and in the midst of
them we shall find help; in the midst of the wilderness we shall find
water, as the Israelites; in the Lions belly an honey comb, as Sampson; in the
prison an Angel, as Peter; and in the midst of the fire, one like the Son
of God, as the three children. And so much for the third reason.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth reason; because God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. What
it is to bless and hallow, Sect. 1. The use of this, Sect. 2. The sum of the
whole book, Sect. 3.

Therefore the Lord blessed and hallowed the Sabbath day. In which let us first
see what is meant by blessing and hallowing: which two words that I may speak
of them to our purpose, have a double sense and understanding in the Scripture.
For first, blessing is used to signify the setting apart of some thing to a
holy use, in which sense the wine in the Lords Supper is called the cup of
blessing, when it is set apart to that holy use; and the setting of it apart to
that use is called the blessing of it, as 1. Cor. 10. ver. 16. The cup of
blessing which we bless, etc. And to the same purpose also is this word
sanctifying or hallowing used, as Exodus 13. 1. Sanctify to me the first borne
that opens the womb: that is, set apart to my service. This is plain, I
need not to show it further. The second sense of blessing or hallowing is,
when as some gift is bestowed upon any one, he is said therein to be blessed,
and so gifts are called blessings, Genesis 33. 11. I pray thee (says Jacob to his
brother) take this blessing, that is, this gift. And Judge. 1. the daughter of
Caleb prayed her father to to give her a blessing; and what was that? springs
of water, Judge. 1. 15. The same sense also has sanctifying, when God shall
bestow some gift of sanctification upon us that day. Now both these ways God
does bless or hallow this day: first in instituting this day unto his service.
Secondly, in that in this his service he does effectually bless us; us, I say,
and not the day: for all days in their own nature are alike, and not one more
holy than another, more than in regard of the institution, in that it is set a
part to holy uses, or of the blessing that is this day bestowed upon us above
any other. Now God does consecrate it in the first respect; and we must in the
other, that the blessing may be upon us: but take it in which sense you will,
yet it stands as a strong argument to persuade. And if in the first sense,
then it is thus gathered: To what end God did bless and hallow this rest, to
that end it must be kept: but God did therefore bless and hallow this day that
it might be kept holy: and therefore so it must be kept holy.

The equity of this reason is grounded upon the right and authority that God
has to command or institute any law; which if he do, it is like unto the
laws of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be altered but by himself: for,
thou must put nothing to his word, Deuteronomy. 12. 31. The reason is, Pro. 30. 6.
Least he reprove thee, and thou be found a lier: neither must thou take any
thing therefrom: there must be no clipping. The reason also is yielded, Deuteronomy.
4. 2. That thou may keep his commandment; which thou can not do, if
thou take any thing there from: and as thou may not add, so thou must not
alter; but thou must keep his Sabbath as he commands, Deuteronomy. 5. 16. Yea thou
may not so much as vary from it; for thou must turn neither to the right
hand, nor to the left: the reason that is given is drawn from the benefit that
comes thereby, namely that thou may prosper, Ios. 1. 7. As who should say, if
thou turn either to the right hand, or to the left, thou shall not prosper;
but if thou keep it and turn not aside, then thou shall prosper; for he will
bless thee, as here thou see. For this is the second signification of
blessing or hallowing, and is the thing that God especially here intends, to
show, namely that he will power forth his blessing upon those that keep his
Sabbath. And that blessing he most fully promises, Isai. 58. If thou will
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking
thine own will, nor speaking a vain word; these three things on the Sabbath
must be avoided: but what follows to be done? First, we must call the
Sabbath a delight. Secondly, we must consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord.
And thirdly, we must honor him upon that day. But then what shall they have
that thus honor the Lord? Why God will honor them again, and make them to
mount upon the high places of the earth; and like a tree planted by the waters
side shall they prosper: and not only so, that they shall be blessed with
worldly blessings, which might persuade worldly men; but much more with
spiritual blessings (which may persuade Christian men) he will feed them with
the heritage of Jacob: as if he should have said; they shall enjoy all the
privileges of his Church; lo thus shall the man be blessed that shall keep
his Sabbath. And therefore Isai. 56. 3. Let no man that keeps the Sabbath
say, The Lord has separated me from his people. Why so? For he will feed them
with the heritage of Jacob, as now you have heard; neither let the Eunuch say,
Behold I am a dry tree. No, for if he keep his Sabbath, and choose the thing
that is good, and take heed of his covenant, he shall mount upon the high
places of the earth; as there he promises. Yea, and as it follows; he will
give him a place in his house, and a name better than of sons and daughters.
But can all this be true? Yea certainly make account of it, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, Isai. 58. 14.

meets with the error of the multitude, that think if a man serve God, he
shall never thrive; as though God were like an evil master that uses to
reward him worst that does him the best service. But these blind bayards that
thus beat their heads against the wall, little think upon this that God here
promises, that those which keep his Sabbath shall be blessed; if they did,
they would never go stumbling on. But to the keeper of the Sabbath this is a
most sure word, that if a man keep it, the Lord will make him to mount upon
the high places of the earth, and will feed them with the heritage of Jacob.
And therefore by this a man shall know when he is at the sermon how well he
thriueth at home: for if he truly serve the Lord in the Church, God will truly
bless him at home; for he has promised it, and he cannot go from his word,
no more than he can deny himself: happily he may sometimes deny some
worldly blessings, when he sees it not good for thee to have it; but then
assure thy self he will give thee that which is ten times better; and that
thou shall in this life find and assuredly know. And therefore think not that
if thou lose an hour, or a day, that thou shall be undone; but wait upon the
Lord, for it is his blessing that makes rich, and not thy labor. And if he
blessed the Manna that was gathered on the sixth day, that it should be enough
for the seventh also: and if he made the earth in the sixth year to bring
forth food sufficient for two years, Leuit. 25; why should thou distrust
his bounty toward thee? Therefore cast thy care upon him; for if thou will
keep his Sabbath, he will care for thee.

The second use is to inform the Sabbath breakers of their estate in which
they stand; (and I would to God they would take notice of it) that they are in
a cursed estate: for if the Sabbath keepers be blessed; then the Sabbath
breakers by the law of contraries must be accursed. And so they are indeed.
And Nehemiah is not afraid to tell them so much to their faces: Did not (says
he) your fathers thus? (that is, break the Sabbath) and did not God therefore
bring all these plagues upon us? and will you yet increase the wrath upon
Israel in breaking the Sabbath? Nehe. 13. And as Nehemiah told them what they
had already felt; so Ier. 17. vlt. tells them what they shall further look
for; If (says he) you will not hear me, to sanctify the Sabbath, and to
bear no burden; What then? then the Lord will kindle a fire in the gates of
Jerusalem. Yea but it shall not come into the high streets. Yes, (says he)
for it shall devour the palaces thereof. But we will quench it first before it
go so far. Nay (says he) it shall not be quenched; as though the fire
thereof should burn like wild fire, or rather like hell fire that is
unquenchable, Mat. 3. And of this there is good reason. For if for the neglect
of the building of the Lords house, the Lord cursed his people, so that when
they sowed much, they brought in little; that when they eat, they were not
satisfied; when they drank, their thirst remained, etc. If (I say) the Lord
cursed them thus for the neglect of the building of the material Temple; what
will he do for the neglect of the building of the spiritual Temple? which is
certainly neglected where as the Sabbath is neglected. And although happily it
sometimes come to pass that the Sabbath breaker may prosper in worldly
matters, yet they are but blessings of Gods left hand, Prou. 3. 16. which many
times he gives to the ruin of the owners thereof, Eccl. 5. 12. He gives them
as he gave a King to the Israelites in his anger, and in his wrath he takes
them away again. But how soever, this is certain, that though he gives them
their hearts desire, yet with the gift he sends leanness into their souls,
as Psalm. 106. 15. and they shall find one day the evil of their riches, when
they shall weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon them; when I
say their consciences shall cry out against them, We have gotten this money
by breaking the Lords Sabbath, and when the rust of the same shall testify so
much against them; then shall they find that true which even now I cited, that
their riches was given them for their evil.

second I have showed the duties of this day; which consist first in
preparation to the Sabbath. Secondly in observation, which contained two
things: first, to rest upon it when it is come, from all works, words or
thoughts that might be a let to the performance of the holy duties that were
required of us; which duties were of three sorts, either public, or private,
or mixed: and this was the sum of the second book. In the third I have showed
the persons to whom these duties do appertain; which were either unto us, or
those that were under our government. And last of al in the fourth, the reasons
that might enforce us to the keeping of this day holy; that which remains,
is, that every one of us in regard of the time past, fall down before the Lord
in the feeling and acknowledgement of this great sin of Sabbath breaking, and
that with purpose of heart hence-foorth we endeavor with all our might, both
in our own persons, and by all means we may, to provoke others also to keep
the Sabbath with us: and then shall the Lord even our God assuredly bless us,
with the riches of his mercies reserved from everlasting in heaven for us;
which the Lord grant unto us for Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.
The Errata.
Page 16. lin. 4. read which is one. p. 50. l. 10. put out not. p* 7. vlt.
read Reu for Rom p. 93. vlt. r. our. p. 99. l. 15 r. a fortiori. p. ^^1. ^. 9.
r. setting. l. 26. read them. p. 117. l. 3. r. not to commit any s^^ p. 126 l.
25. and 26. r. halues.


