THE METEORS. A SERMON PREACHED AT A VISITATION. By MICHAEL VVIGMORE, Rector of
Thorseway in Lincolneshire, and sometimes Fellow of Oriel College in Oxford:

Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. printer's device or cast
ornament of a head framed by two branches (not in McKerrow)

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Pyde Bull, near S. Austins Gate. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, THOMAS Lord Coventry, Baron of Aylesborough, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, etc.
Right Honorable:
SVch is the Leprosy of Ingratitude, that scarce Luke 17.
one in ten comes back to be thankful: and God seems to give a check to
man's nature, in placing Memory behind in the head, as being an Emblem of our
dullness, in rendering the Offices of Gratitude. I must, and ever will
acknowledge to Gods glory, and your Honor, that as I had my being from above,
so have I my been esse from your bounty, in so much that (as Saint Paul to
Philemon) I owe unto you even mine Philem. 19.
own self.

With that Samaritan in the Gospel, Luc. 17. 15. 16.
I am at length come back again to worship, and to present you with these
false fires, to make my Duty and Affection legible; ut Dei, ita est eorum qui
Dei in terris Rex Platon.
vices obeunt, pro sua immensitate beneficia largiri, sed hominum gratitudinem,
ex eorum modulo aestimare.

Long has mine heart burnt within me, Psalm. 39. 3.
with an earnest, Quid retribuam? In regard Psalm. 116. 12.
of those gracious encouragements, by your Honor conferd upon me. Nor have I
slept in the Land of forgetfulness, but waited opportunity to vent my self;
and now I have borrowed so much strength of boldness, as to lift up the eyes
of Hope, presuming to prefer these flashes to your view; in the which as the
bad-borrowers of these days, I do pay my great debts by small Pensions.

If this mine Adventure shall find such admittance, as to give the least life
to my riper studies, I shall not suffer my Temples to rest, till I be delivered
of a Psalm. 132. 4.
stronger birth.

Coelum quietem sortitur in motu, I shall ever account it my heaven upon earth,
to labor to show forth my thankfulness, and to pray with a flaming heart, that
Genesis 49. 22. 26.
the blessing of Joseph light upon you.

December. 15. 1632. Your Honors humble Eleemosynarie, MICHAEL WIGMORE.

Ad Lectorem.
CVm carpuntur vitia, and inde scandalum oritur, ipse sibi scandali causa est,
qui fecit quod argui debet, non ille qui arguit. Bernard. Epist. 78.

THE METEORS.
MAT. 5. 14. You are the Light of the World.
PRoems, they are like Cypress trees, long, but fruitless, and as he, 2 Macc.
2. 32. It is but a vain thing to make a long Prologue. and to be short in the
story it self: Then briefly to the matter we are to treat of.

As we find in Natural Philosophy, Lucem, Lumen and Illuminatum; the Sun
the Treasurer of Light and Time, the Light of the Stars derived from the
Sun, and the Light of the Air proceeding from them both: So she (being the
Handmaid to Divinity) holds out the glass to 1 Cor. 13. 12. 13.
show us the shadow of that we shall know, even as we are known.

First, Christ, to be that Sun of Righteousness, foretold unto Division.
Verse 2. V. 3. les. 9. 1.
us in the fourth of Malachy. Secondly, his Disciples to be those Stars
spoken of in the twelfth of Daniel. And thirdly, those people that walk in
darkness, and that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, to be that Medium
illuminatum, looking for the light to shine upon them.

For the First, as in the first of Genesis, the Light was created I Part The
light of Christ seen from the beginning.
before the Sun: so was Christ known in the days of Psalm. 18. 9.
Old, before the Sun of Righteousness was risen, before He appeared in our
Horoscope, before He bowed the Heavens and came down to cloth himself in the
flesh of Man; His light was then like the Birth of the Morning.

The Prophets, they beheld this Light, that a Virgin should conceive Ies 71 14.
and bear a Child which should be Emanuel, God with us: The Gentiles, they
beheld this Light, witness Zoroastes, Mercurius Trismegistus, the Sybils, the
Oracles of their own gods, and to make their ignorance inexcusable, they had
the Prophets of truth amongst them; Job knew that his Redeemer lived, and Job
19 25. Number. 24. 17.
Balaam could prophecy unto Balaak, that there should come a Star of Jacob,
and rise a Scepter out of Israel: The Patriarks they beheld this Light;
Abraham, he saw this day, and rejoiced and was glad and that Grandsire of all
mankind, was no sooner John 8. 56.
divested from his Robe of Innocence, But this Dayspring Luc. 1. 78. Genesis 3.
15. Ioh. 1 5.
from on high did visit him; With, the seed of the Woman, shall break the
Serpents head. And thus the Light shined in the darkness.

For, as the Israelites for their Convoy had a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar by
Night: so till the time of the coming of Christ, there was no Day without a
Cloud, no Night so dark, but had some light in it. God being known from the
worlds first being, by Visions, and Oracles, Revelations, and Dreams, Bulling
Decad. 1 Ser. 1.
Tradition of doctrine, from hand to hand, until the days of his servant
Moses, who was in the seventh generation from Adam, and yet the Penman of the
worlds History, for near 2500. years.

So that Adam and the Patriarks, the Gentiles and the Prophets, they had all a
glimmering of this light; they all foretold the coming of Christ, as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost; they 2 Pet. 1 21. Mat 11. 13. Ezech. 4. 1. Keck. Phys.
p 1. ex Virg. Job 36. 32. Galat. 4 4. The light manifested in Christ's
incarnation. Psalm. 19. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 14. 15. Heb. 10. 10. Heb. 7. 12. Heb. 10. 1.
all prophesied unto John who was the Precursor, that morning star that was
sent to bear witness of the Light.

And thus (as Jerusalem upon a Brickbat; or the Acts of the Romans on the
Shield of Aeneas) I have briefly set out unto you how God hid the Light in his
Fist, until he commanded it to break forth, until the fullness of time was
come.

Then came the Bridegroom out of his chamber, rejoicing as a Giant to run
his course. The Law that was the veil of the Gospel, was taken away by the
coming of Christ; The Sacrifice offered year by year, was abolished in His
offering once for all; The glory of the Priesthood was translated; All the
shadows of good things to come; they all vanish at his Luster; I am come
(says our Savior of himself) I am come a Light into Ioh. 12. 46
the World, that no Believer should abide in darkness.

Such is the glory of the Diety, brighter then the Lights of heaven; The glory
of this light. Ecclus. Joel 1. 10.
His eyes ten thousand times clearer then the Sun, and clothed with
unspeakeable Majesty; That the earth does quake before him, the heavens
tremble, the Moon be darkened, and the stars withdraw their light. Then how
shall sinful man behold him, whose foundation is but dust?

When Christ was transfigured upon the Mount, his Visage there Mat. 17. 2.
as glorious as the Sun, and his clothing as white as the Light, his
Disciples were afraid, and fell to the earth: When Acts 9. 8. Revel 1. 9.
he appeared in the way to Damascus, Saul was stricken blind with his
Brightness. And when Saint John saw him in the I Will of Pathmos, in the
likeness of the Son of man, with a garment down to his feet, his eyes being
as a flaming fire, his feet as moulten brass, and his face shining as the Sun
in his strength, he fell down at his feet for dead; In his presence shall the
people Joel 2. 6.
tremble, and the countenance of all wax black: so that we may say with
those men of Bethshemish, whom God had 2 Samuel 6 29.
smitten for looking in the Arc) who is able to stand before the Lord?

If those that have knowledge live two lives, whereas others live but one, then
doubtless every man is half dead (like him Luc. 10. v. 30.
that fell amongst the thieves:) our understanding is unsinewed, and the powers
of our souls are out of joint: so dimd, whilst we look through the cloud of
Nature, that we see no better then he in the Gospel, that could not discern
a man from a Mar. 8. 24.
tree.

But God who is rich in mercy toward us, frames his This glory opened in
parables and similies.
Greatness to our capacity, showing his Goodness in speaking to our senses,
and that Man may know him in some measure, He will be known unto us as man, by
his parts, as eyes, cares, and the like; his affections, as Anger, Love, and
Sorrow; his Titles, as King, Lord, and Father, whereas He is infinite,
incomprehensible, that fills full the heaven Ier. 23. 24.
and the earth; Totum quod vides, totum quod non vides: And Christ to insinuate
himself into us, to leave the deeper impression in our hearts, so often
opens himself in Parables, that, were they as strangers unto you, I could
lead you into acquaintance with them, throughout the whole course of his
Doctrine. Sometimes stiling himself a Sower, sometimes Mat. 13. Ioh 10. 11.
Mat. 9. 12. Ioh. 15. 1. Ioh. 10. 7. Ioh. 14. 6. Romans 1. 20.
a Shepherd, sometimes a Physitiar, sometimes a Vine, sometimes a Door,
sometimes the Way, the truth, and the Life: Notioribus ignota discuntur,
Spiritualia per similitudines; as Gods eternal power and Godhead are seen and
understood by his works.

David in the 68. Psalm, being there to make a description how God was praised
in his Sanctuary; the fuller to set it forth to the Life (as the troop that
leads before some Prince, This Glory resembled by Light. Ver. 25. 27.
awakens an earnest expectation) does marshall out the array thereof, with the
Singers going before, with the Minstrels following after, with the Damsels in
the midst, playing with Timbrels, with little Benjamin their Ruler, with the
Princes of Judah their Council, the Princes of Zabulon and the Princes of
Nepthalie. And Saint John in his first Epistle, intending to 1 Ioh 1. 1. etc.
comprize a brief abridgement of the whole scope and Doctrine of the Gospel,
to extract and sublimate the Quintessence thereof, ranks out a fair company
to walk before, and to rouse up dull attention (like the Chain that was tied
to the tongue of Mercury, and fastened to the ears of the people) with, that
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen, and our
hands have handled of the word of Life. And again, the Life was manifest, and
we have seen it, and show it unto you: And again, that which we have seen
and heard, that we write and declare unto you; until at length he opens this
rich Cabinet, and shows us this illustrious Gemme; That God is Light, and in
him is no darkness: And thus (as Solomon in his Temple) He presents you with
a fair and beautiful entry, as a preparative to your devotion, to stir up
a zealous admiration, and to wonder at the inward glory, That God is Light, and
in Him is no darkness.

Plato and the heathen Philosophers (that were directed by the eye of nature)
viderunt illi suisque literis copiosissime mandaverunt, hinc illos unde and nos
fieri beatos, obiecto quodam lumine De Civit. Dei l. 10. c. 2.
intelligibili, quod Deus est illis (as says Saint Augustine:) Hence the
Prophets were named Seers; and men's humana patibilis dicitur (as Zab. in his
tract de mente agente) because our Light Iam. 1. 17.
is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights: Believe Ioh. 12 36.
therefore in the Light, that ye may be children of the Light.

As Light was the first borne of all things visible: so was it Christ the Light.
not without a mystery, that for the distinction of the six first days, God
closed them up with this phrase of speech, The Evening and the Morning were the
first day; and the Evening and the Morning were the second day; and so on in
the rest of the days: whereas Nature gives the birthright to the morning. But
he foreseeing in his infinite prescience, that wretched man within few hours
should cast himself headlong into darkness, does intimate unto us thereby,
that first should be the Night of man's misery, and then should follow the Day
of our redemption by sending of his son Christ Jesus, God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God: And This light was that true light which lights
every Ioh 1. 19.
man that comes into the world.

Of all the Metaphors the world affords, none so fit an Emblem of Christ, as
Light, which is the joy of the eyes, and the Pro. 13. 30.
true comforter of the heart, although continuance and assiduity makes us
behold it with less admiration.

Amongst those four good Mothers that do nurse and Van. of the eye cap. 4.
The excellency of the Light
cherish up four bad daughters; as Virtue, Envy; Peace, I al^nesse; and Truth
Hatred; Familiarity brings forth Contempt. And hence it is (as one well
observes) that those things which we most fear and reverence, are most removed
from our sight: Perseverantia consuetudinis amisit admirationem. the daily use
of this glorious creature does make it the less to be admired. When King and
Kesar, old and young, high and low, rich and poor, all desire it alike.

Light, it displaieth it self to all creatures, and it is transfused in an
instant. It pierces every transparent body, and is not defiled with any
uncleanness: It is the conduit of all heavenly virtues, and is the quickner of
all that is: It actuateth all colors: It is the mother of all beauties: It
gives life to all the ornaments, to all the delights that the world affords
us. The Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eccles 11. 7.
eyes to look upon the Sun: And, si dulce est lumen hoc mundi, quanto erit
dulcius lumen gloriae. Si delectabile est videre solemn creatum, quanto erit
delectabilius solemn videre increatum, creatique solis Creatorem. I am the light
of the world (says our Savior) Ioh 8 12. And therefore it was (as some
observe) that Christ was borne when the days were at shortest, ut diminuto
noctis curriculo, defectionem sentiant opera tenebrarum.

From this comfortable nature of the light, upon any occasion of joy and
deliverance (to show how beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad
tidings of salvation) we deck it forth with her glory, naming the time pro
qualitate rei.

The Lepers (in the second of Kings, cap. 8. ver. 9.) in the Night that they
found the Assyrians were fled, we do not well (say they one to another) we
do not well to hold our peace, this Day is a Day to bring glad tidings: And
that welcome Luc. 2. 11.
Angel in the Gospel when he came to the Shepherds in the Night of the
Nativity, This Day (says he) in the City of David is borne a Savior which is
Christ the Lord. Then did the Night shine as the Day, because the Sun of
Righteousness Psalm. 139. 12.
was risen; as there was darkness at the hour of his Amos 8. 9.
death, for then the Sun did set at the noone-tide.

And yet Christ here (as Moses else where) has a veil Light but a shadow to
Christ. Psalm. 104. 2.
put over his face, to whom the Light is but as a garment, or as a curtain
drawn over his glory, to be a shadow of his essence and being. If the Light
be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? But when Light and Luster, and
Brightness, and Glory, and Majesty shall be but shadows; how great is the
Brightness, and the Luster, and the Light of the glory of that Majesty which
dwells in the light that none can attain unto. 1 Timothy 6. 16.


It is reported concerning Noah, that whilst the window of the Arc was shut,
he made use of some resplendent stone, by whose rays the objects of the sight
presented themselves to the organ of the eye. However the conjecture be but
curious, yet true it is that Christ is that Stone, which albeit the Mat. 21 42.
builders refused, is now become the head-stone of the corner; at whose
approach the light of the Moon became unto Ies 30. 26.
us as the light of the Sun; salvation became the walls of Ies 60. 18. etc.
our Church, and her gates the praise of God; the Lord our everlasting light,
and the Sun that shall never set, Lux Deus illustris illuminans omnia, aliae
luces tanquam micae.

And thus far of that Lux innata, that true Light, that Light Ioh 1. 9. and
8. 11. and 9. 5. and 1 Ioh. 1. 5.
of life, that Light of the world, in whom is no darkness.

I am now come to my second chapter, and to speak of that Lumen, that Lux
infusa, whereby we are enlightened 2 Part. The Light derived from Christ to his
Ministers.
from above (as the Stars do borrow their light from the Part. 2. l. 6. c. 7.
Sun.)

Zanchius in his work De operibus Dei, upon those words, Genesis 1. Sint
luminaria in expa^sione coelorum, observes that luminare differt a luce, sicut
candela a luce quam habet; and puts the nature of the Stars and the Light, at
as far distance one from the other, as the instrument that holds the light
differs from the light that it sustaineth. And as God is the light that
dwells in you, so you my brethren of the Clergy, you are Luminaria, the
Instruments of light to shine in the Phil. 2. 15.
midst of a crooked generation. Thus he which is the light of the world, John
8. 12. has appointed you to be the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14. and he
which is the bright morning Star, Revel. 22. 16. has given you the morning
star, as he has received from the Father, Revel. 2. 28. to be as that
star that Mat 2. 9.
appeared in the East, and that led to the place where the child lay. Christ
beholding from the height of his Sanctuary, the condition of his Church here
on earth, how that after the days of his flesh, they should be as sheep
having no Shepherd; Mat. 9. 36. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
he has given some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some to be
Shepherds and Teachers, to the gathering together of the Saints, to the work
of the Ministration, and to the building up of his body. And as the Israelites
when they came to Elim, found there twelve Fountains, and seventy Number. 33. 9.
Palm trees: so the Apostles as twelve Fountains, have flowed over all the
face of the earth; and the seventy Disciples as seventy Palmetrees, have
flourished, and spread over all the Luc. 10. 1.
the world, raising up new seed in the Church, by Commission from Christ,
Imposition of hands, and Succession Apostolical Acts 6. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
throughout all ages.

You, my Brethren, are brancht from these; you are the 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 3.
9. Luc 12. 42. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 2 7. Gal 4. 17.
Disposers of the secrets of God; you are his Laborers, and his Builders; you
are his wise and faithful Stewards, whom the Lord has made Rulers over his
household; Yea, you are his honorable Priesthood; yea, his Ambassadors; yea,
his Angels. You, even you are the Light of the world; Et sic dicebat Christ^^
suis, vos estis lux mundi, cum ipse solus esset vera lux, as Beza in his notes
upon the 2 Cor. 3 18.

Aristotle tells us in his Ethics, that Bonum is Verum, and Arist Eth. l 1.
Lights distinguished. Meteors divided.
Apparens: and there are certain Apparitions, which for the semblance that
they have with the Light, do seem to be of the same nature. These being
proper to the Air, some there are in the higher region as are Cometa, and
Caprae Saltantes; others in the middle, as Tonitru and Fulgur; and there are
walking in the lower region, Ignis Fatuus, and Ignis Lambens; Opposita iuxta se
posita magis eluce scunt, and therefore I Will begin with these, that those other
in their order may appear the clearer.

First of the Comete, that prodigious Light, showing commotions, Cometa.
and the death of Kings: such is the nature of the Laterane Jupiter styled the
servant of the servants of God, when he means to exalt himself as an Eagle,
and to tower amongst the stars nipping the Christian Princes in the crowns,
giving Obad. verse 4. K. of defen. of the right of Kings. Exodus 32 22. 1 Samuel
15. 30. 31. 35. Baruc 1. 11.
Cheque mate to the greatest Monarchs, and spilling their blood like water on
the ground. Whereas, Aaron submitted to Moses, Let not the wrath of my Lord
wax fierce. Samuel honored Saul a Reprobate, mourning for him at his funeral
Exequies. And the Captive Jews in Babylon, sent to the Brethren at Jerusalem,
to pray for the life of Nabuchedonozor, and for the welfare of Baltasar his
son; how then can that Church, that Body, choose but be full of mortal
diseases, when the Head is so full of peccant humors.

It was enacted by the Law of Moses, that a man that Deuteronomy. 21. 12.
would marry a Captive woman, should shave her head, and pare his nails, and
put away her old raiment from her. We will apply it to the Church of Rome; Let
her put away her superfluities, let her lay aside her old corruptions; Let her
leave off her superstitious Relics, and we two will be one flesh; she shall
be unto us an Israelite: And that great Monarch of great Babylon, Luminare
mains (as he styles himself) that Stella Crinita, that Blazing star, whose
hairs are grown like Dan. 4. 33.
the Eagles feathers, and his nails like the claws of Harpyes; let him lift
up his eyes to heaven, so that his understanding be restored, and we will
join our selves unto him, to bring him to his former Beauty.

Capraesaltantes are another kind of Meteor, struggling in the Capraesaltantes.
bowels of our own Church, like Jacob and Esau in the womb of Rebecca, or the
Hussits and the Thaborits amongst the Bohemians, only differing per magis and
minus: Men that for science, and for Conscience, might worthily shine as the
stars in the firmament. But that (as it is generally observed) Stellarum nulla
per se movetur suum dividendo orbem.

Oh, it might make us to mourn and bleed, to see how Judge. 5. 15.
for the divisions of Levi, there are arisen great thoughts of heart. To see
our selves to be parted into companies, like unto the Sheep and Goats of Laban,
some brown, and some bespeekled: Gen 30. 32.
to see how (like that Monster in Pliny, that Amphisbaena, that has two
heads) we strive one with another for Sovereignty, whilst our enemies stand by
and behold it with, Psalm. 35. 25. 2 Samuel 1. 20.
There, there, so would we have it; Oh, let it not be told in Gath, let it not
be published in Askalon, lest the Philistims do rejoice, and the uncircumcised
have cause to triumph.

Ecclesia est illud corpus Christi quod charius habuit, quam quod tradidit
morti; let us not lacerate, and tear it to pieces, with our unprofitable
litigations; let us not be of a viperous generation, to eat our way through
our mothers bowels; let us not rend Christ's seamelesse Garment, which must be
Vmea, or not Tunica; let us put up our angry pens, and as Curtius reports Q
Curt.
of those people that were ever in arms one with the other, yet when Alexander
came upon them, quos alias bellare inter se solitos, tunc periculi societas
iunxerat: so let us bend our swords and our spears against the breast of the
common enemy.

He, even he whose name is wonderful, the giver of counsel, Ies. 9. 5.
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, would not have us
awaken his Beloved, whilst he does rest his bedewed Can. 2 8. and 5. 2
locks upon the lap of the sleeping Church: Remember what Abraham said to Lot,
and remember that we are Brethren, Genesis 13. 8. Ephesians 4. 3.
and therefore bound in the bond of peace, for the keeping of the Spirit of
Unity.

It was the Ditty of our Saviors Birth-Song, peace on earth, Luc. 2. 14.
good will toward men; It was his Legarie to his Disciples, My peace I give
you, my peace I leave you: And it is the daily prayer Ioh. 14. 27.
of his Spouse, da pacem, give peace in our time O Lord: Contention (be the
Garden never so fair, be the Intention never so sincere) twill make the world
to be misdoubtfull, and to fear a Snake under every Leaf: Then let there be
no dissension amongst us, and let us proceed by one Rule, that we may be Phil.
3. 16.
of one accord; lest when that Great Shepherd of our souls shall 1 Pet 2 25.
and 5. ^ Mat. 25. 41.
come to separate the Goats from the Sheep, he brand us with an Ite maledicti,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.

I am next to speak of the Belly of that Image, whose Head is ambition, whose
arms, dissension; I am now in the middle region, Tonitru and Fulgur. Mat. 3.
17.
where I meet with Tonitru, and Fulgur, Boanerges, sons of Thunder; who though
they be of a lower Region, yet are they of a hotter constitution; well may they
be the salt of the earth, but of such a Peetrish and fierce nature, that touch
them Mat. 5. 13.
with the least spark of admonition, and they will be ready to flash in your
faces: These men inflamed per Antiperistasin, by seeing Judah frozen on his
dregs, may say as David in another kind, That to keep silence, it was pain
and grief, That Psalm. 39. 3.
their very heart waxt hot within them, That while they were thus musing, the
fire kindled, until (like so many Canons overcharged, or as Lightning choakt
up in a cloud of Thunder, they give a terrible crack about our ears) until
at length, they speak with their tongues, recoyling against order and
Discipline.

-- feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes. ^or.

They would have a spotless congregation, looking for a Moon, sine macula,
seeking a Church without a Blemish, and thus forgetting themselves to be
sinners, they do with Calisto in the Metamorphosis,

Saepe feris latuit visis oblita quid esset;
Vrsaque conspectos in montibus horruit urses. Ovid Met. l. 2.

Whereas the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit Gal. 5. 17.
against the Flesh, so that we cannot do what we would; we can but endeavor to
that which is before, we can no more Phil. 3 13. 14.
here but press toward the mark; perfectionem in hac vita sequimur,
assequimur in futura.

Being thus puffed up with an undiscreet zeal, their Pulpit Tacit.
like the Tribunal of Cassius, it does become scopulus reorum, a Rock, a
Shipwreck to a tender conscience; affording nothing but the cursings of Mount
Ebal, nothing but the thundrings Deuteronomy. 17. 13. Exodus 19. 18.
and lightnings of Sinai.

It is observed in the motion of the Sphaeres, if they should not be stayed and
slackned by the contrary course of the primum mobile. that they would set the
whole on fire. And it is true in the nature of zeal, not being moderated with
discretion, it soon sets all in a combustion, Fervor discretionem erigat, Bern.
and discretio Fervorem dirigat.

God that made all things with the breath of his mouth, and accomplished his
six days work in the temperate season of the Equinoctial, appeared to Adam
in the cool of the Zanch de oper. creat. part 2. l. 1. c. 2. Psalm. 104. 4.
Zanch ubi supra. Jonah 4. 1. etc.
day: He that made his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire; when
he made the Light and the Stars, tempered the Light with moisture, and made the
Stars of a watery substance. And though he be a God of vengeance, yet when the
rebellious Prophet Jonah had so much the overflowing of the Gall, as to be
angry with his dreadful power, he reprehends him with as much indulgence, as
if the tendrest father in the world were to deal with his dearest son; and
shall we bruise the broken reed, shall we quench the smoking flax? Oh let the
Mat. 12 20. Psalm. 141. 5.
righteous correct me friendly, but let not their precious balmes break mine
head; let us handle the wounds of our Brethren with gentleness, and the Bowels
of compassion: let us bring pity in our eyes and hearts, when we chance to see
their falls and infirmities: and let us remember the rule of Saint Paul, Gal. 6.
1 Brethren, if any man be prevented in sin, ye then which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted.

Now for the Snuffes of the former Lights, sending forth Ignis Fatuus.
an unsavory smell out of the lowermost Socket of the Air; First to speak of
Ignis Fatuus, or the Lay-Elder; here like unto some simple Swain at a
portentous and prodigious Meteor, seldom seen in the world of his Hemisphere,
so I cannot but stand at a gaze, to see the Stars to drop from the firmament,
to see the light to be turned into darkness, to see the Priests to be clothed
with shame, so many and so well nurtured, that have sucked milk with us from
the same breasts, to be misled into that discipline, by the which an Artificer
may be made an Elder, and of a Tradsman become a Churchman: We may lament them
with the wife of Phinees, when 1 Samuel 4. 21.
the Arc was taken by the Philistims, and she named her child Ichabod, The
glory of Israel is taken from them.

This Ignis Fatuus, this Lay Brother, by their Imposition of hands, shall have
the misleading of a Band of souls (as the Devil the lunaticke in the Gospel)
sometimes through fire, Mar. 17. 15.
sometimes through water; and yet (as Aventine once of some such) Si praelati
isti plebei essent, nemo facile ipsis haram Avent. de reb. Tur. par. 3.
committeret, in illo vero statu, and arae, et animae hominum ipsorum fidei
creduntur.

It was commanded by the Law Leviticall, that no blind Levit. 22. 22.
creature should be offered to God; how then shall the blind lead the blind,
unless it be in praecipitium? Like unto that Cretensian Berg. Hist and Fasc.
Temp.
Jew in the year of our Lord 450, who saying he was Moses sent from heaven to
conduct his brethren through the Sea into Jury (as before he had done out of
Egypt) caused them to commit themselves unto the waves, where they were all
drowned like Pharaoh and his host.

Yet these will torment a Text of Scripture, manage a long and monstrous
discourse (conceived and borne in the same instant) wrest and pervert the word
of God, and instead of the natural milk thereof, suck out the blood of
mis-interpretation, as far distant from the true meaning, as was that
ridiculous Actor in Smyrna, pronouncing O Coelum with his mouth, and with his
finger pointing to the ground. The Coppersmith will be bold to control Paul;
2 Timothy 4. 14. Act. 19. 24.
Demetrius the Silversmith will oppose the whole Church, and the Cobbler find
fault with the thigh of the picture.

Frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libelles, Mart.

Si dare sutori caloeus ista potest.
There is a Rout of their followers, a generation described The condition of
the Faction. Pro. 30. 12.
by Solomon, that are pure in their own eyes, and yet they are not washed from
their sins: Let me show you the pourtrait of them, as they are drawn out to
the life by another, and so printed to the view of the world.

They are (says mine Author) the scumme of the Commons, Doctor Wakeman, Ser.
True professor.
the tags and rags of the people, base mechanics, men of little knowledge,
less honesty, and no discretion at all: In their attempts pragmaticall, in
their humor fantastical, in their profession Pharisaicall, in their books
hypocritical, in their opinions Anabaptisticall, in their Doctrine
schismatic, in their words Angelical, in their deeds Diabolical. But what
should I tell you de asini umbra, or hold you in discourse of this Brainsicke
Fry; I Will only hail Ignis lambent, and so we will strike sail, and come a shore.

Such is the nature of many men, that having some secret Ignis Lambens.
and beloved sin, which is as near, as dear unto them, as was the son of
the Bondwoman to Abraham, when he prayed for his life and prosperity, Oh that
Ismael might live in Genesis 17 18.
thy sight. They can with Herod hear John Baptist so that he would not touch
upon Herodias: These men are likened to Apes and Monkies, which break the
glasses that they look into, because they show them their own deformities: so
that it often falls out with them as the Prophet speaks, Zach, 11. 8. Three
Shepherds I put out of office in one month, for I might not away with their
doctrine: And yet for all Michah will Iud. 17.
have his Levite.

Scit Comitem horridulum ^rita donare lacerna,
Et verum inquit amo, verum mihi dicito de me;
Qui pote? -- Pers. Sat. 5.

How can that be? when they say unto the Seers, see not, and to them that be
clear of judgment, Ies. 30. 10.
look not out right things for us, but speak (placentia) leasings unto us.

As the Devil dealt with Christ when he took advantage Mat. 4. 2.
of his hunger; so there want not unto these some that are left of the old
house of Eli, that will come and crooch for a piece 1 Samuel 2. 36.
of silver, and to be put in office amongst the Priests; these men may be
compared to Surgeons, that though they have not the hearts of Lions to put
their Probes home to the quick, yet they have the hands of Ladies enured to
Complexions and Paintings, and to daube with untempered mortar: to the Polypus
that is so Ezech. 13. 10. Aelian de var. hist. lib. 1. Eze. 13. 18. 19.
variable, taking the color from the rock he cleaves to: to those Daughters
of Jerusalem, (or to those roguing Gypsons of our times) that pollute the
people, and kill their souls for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of bread: to
those five and twenty men in the Prophet, that did turn their backs toward
the Temple, Ezech. 8. 16.
and worshipped with their faces toward the East, casting the word of God
behind them, and aiming at nothing but their Psalm. 50. 17.
own rising.

These are the Devil in Samuels mantle, Ignis Lambens, dissembling Parasites,
glavering Temporizers, Trencher Chaplains, that will lingere sputum, become all
things unto all men, so that they may please some men.

It is an observation of Ioab, that though he were a valiant Captain, yet was
he not reckoned amongst David's Worthies, 1 Chronicles. 11.
because he betrayed Amasa with a kiss: much less 2 Samuel 2. 9.
shall the Lord of David write those names in the Book of Life, that kiss,
and bite, and yet cry peace, like those Prophets Phil. 4. 3.
in the third of Micheas, ver. 5.

He whose Lip is full of indignation, his Tongue a consuming Ies 30. ver. 17.
30. 33.
fire, and his Breath like a river of Brimstone, shall cause his glorious voice
to be heard, and shall declare his stretched out arm against those that have
sweet tongues, and make the people err by their flatteries. Ier. 23 31. 32.


And this be spoken of those Meteors that do hang betwixt Heaven and Earth: I
should now come to the Angels of the Conclusion. Revel. 1. 20.
Churches, those Stars that are in the right hand of him that stood in the
midst of the Golden Candlestick; but then I should overflow my sands.

Like a Labourer I have dug the foundation, and I have 1 Cor. 39. 10. 11.
laid it upon Christ Jesus; I have removed all the Rubbish in the description
of these Apparitions; I have (I hope) made a fair way for some other (Aholiab
or Bezaleel) for the finishing of the rest of the Building. Exodus 31. 2.


Now being cut off by the tyranny of Time, I Will end as I began out of 2 Macc. If
I have done well, I have done what I Cap. 15. ver. 38
should; if otherwise, it is the best I could, (and according to the time
allotted unto me:) In the mean while consider what is said, and the 2 Timothy 2.
7.
Lord give you understanding in all things. Amen. *

FINIS.
December 16. 1632.
PErlegi hanc concionem cui titulus (A Sermon preached at a Visitation in
Lincolneshire, by Michael Wigmore, Rector of Thorseway in Lincolneshire, and
sometime Fellow of Oriell College in Oxford) una cum Epistola nuncupatoria ad
honoratissim. Dom. Magni Sigill. Custod. qui quidem liber continet paginas 15.
in quibus nihil reperio bonis moribus aut sanae doctrinae contrarium, aut
quicquam aliud quo minus cum utilitate publica Imprimatur, modo intra tres
menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Gulielmus Haywood, Episco. Londin. Capell. domest.


