THE LAWLESS KNEELESSE SCHISMATIC PVRITAN.

OR A CONFVTATION OF THE AVTHOR OF AN APPENDIX, concerning bowing at the name
of Jesus.

WRITTEN By GILES WIDOWS Rector of St MARTINS Church in Oxford, and late
fellow of Oriell College.

1 COR. 14. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let
him acknowledge, that the things, that I write unto you are the commandments
of the Lord. Printed at Oxford for the Author. 1631.

TO MY MVCH HONORED PATRON ENDYMION PORTER Esquire, and one of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, salvation, long life and happiness in the Lord Jesus.
SIR
YOUR noble intents, and ancient Real favors toward me, ought to be honored
with millions of thanks. And so thankful I am, as it is possible for me, so
far beneath your worth in terms of requital. I here present you with the
first fruits of my Autumne-vintage, with the best grape, that ever was pressed
into wine. The vine, whereon it grows, is the true vine: and the cup of
salvation is the benefit, which it brings to the worthy receauer. This makes
glad the heart of man, it cheares up the drooping soul, recreats the spirits,
quickens the senses, and raises up the whole man to the highest pitch of
happiness. And now give me leave, plainly to commend unto you the subject it
self, or rather the Lord, and Master of my ensuing labors, which is this
vine, this grape, and this wine, soprecious, so excellent, so everlastingly
saving. It Is Jesus the Author of salvation, that is his name above all names: at
the mention whereof S. Bernard in his 15. sermon on the Canticles was rapt into
admiration, St Hierome, and other of the Fathers, and ancient Christians of the
Primitive Church into amazement, and adoration. And well they might, for there
is none other means under heaven to attain to salvation: this saues from the
strength of death, from the pit of hell, from the tyranny of the Devil. But
being dishonored by a disgraceful pen, I am not ashamed to confess, that
Jesus is the Lord in the despite of his enemies, with heart, and knee, and
pen: and am likewise bold to commend this Apologetique, or schole-defence of
mine to your courteous acceptance, in token of my obliged thankfullnes. And
thus, till God shall add a greater blessing to my studies, now, and ever I
rest,

Yours at my hearty prayers, GILES WIDOWS.

To the True Protestant Reader.
A Confused Ropsody of vain, Idle conceits: this is the Authors of the
Appendix Benevolence, wherewith he has rewarded me, for writing the
Shismatical Puritan. I aimde at the conformity of the Factious Brethren, that
Gods name might be glorified by our Church through the godly practice of
Christian unity. I assure Mr Prinne, If he be the Author: that Causidicants,
should be better Subjects to God, and to his Immediate Vicegere^t in these
Churches, the King, than to be Prime defenders of Breaking the peace of
Orthodoxe Reformed Religion. But it is now, as our B. Lord and Savior has
prophesied, There must be offenses. Math. 18th, but woe unto the man, by whom
they Come. Ver. 7. And there must be heresies, that they with are approved;
may be known. 1. Cor. 11, 19. There shall be false Teachers, which shall privily
bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord, that bought them. 2. Pet. 2. 1.
There must be offenses, heresies, false Teachers. There must be, and are false
Teachers. But yet here is one comfort in so great a misery: The False Teachers
are not more learned, than Mr Ignoramus, a young scholar, a stranger to
Metaphysicall Divinity.

For his bold Censure of my Schismatical Puritan, I shall quickly prove, that
therein he proou'd himself to be very unlearned. Or else without the help of a
Conventicle he might have given a better Censure. For the Preface, the Identity
of a Puritan, that is not confused: but an infallible, and a perspicuous
knowledge concerning the Schismatique so that a man may but read, and know,
what kind of Puritan I understand. For the Equivocates; the good, and evil
Puritan, being distinguished, The Equiuocant, the Puritan, has lost his
amazing ambiguity; and then there is noe

Pulchrum digito monstrari, and dicier Hic est. Noe man will admire him for an
holy, godly, and religious Professor. The boys in the street may point with
their finger, which is the Honest, and which is the dissembling Puritan.
Secondly, my definition of a fallacious Puritan is not confused, but so
perfect, so distinct, so true, so intelligible, as an Essential definition
ought to be. There is the Genus Quid, What a Puritan is? A Protestant. There is
the essentialis differentia Qualis, what manner a Protestant, a Puritan is? A
Nonconformist. Thirdly the ten kinds of Puritans: this division is essential:
For there are ten several Puritanieties, by which one kind of Puritan
distinctly differs from an other, as you may read in my Preface. And my Sermon
is not confused: 1. The Command: 2. The things Commanded: 3. The observing of
the things Commanded: 4. The manner How, are without ambiguity, according to
the rules of explication, and confirmation. Thus my book is not confused And
vain, and Idle it is not, For the end thereof is necessary: viz: The
Reformation of non-Conformists to the glory of God, and Preservation of his
Church. This I intended though Mr Prinne does shut his eyes, and will not see a
truth manifestly visible. And a Rapsodie it is none, no song: no composure of a
song: no singing of a song. And I would to God, that there were noe canting
tunes among the Factious. The truth is, that the Essentialls Essentiats etc.
and their modalities have confoumded the fanatique Professor, and overthrowen
his Chair: and therefore he complains of that confusion; yet being unwilling
to forsake a Bafling Profession; to the Eye of the world He brags, that my
Schismatical Puritan is vain, and idle.

It seems that the Professor will never reform: or else why is a book written
against Bowing at the name of Jesus: an Appendix, a lean too, a similitude of
the House buylt upon the sands: Confused, vain, and Idle stuff. I Will assure
you, that this is very Confused. For whereas Mr Prinne should first have
distinguished the name Jesus to have begotten infallible knowledge in the
Reader: He contrarily strives to teach, that the name Jesus is so ambiguos that
sometimes it is not understood. It is strange that a Pretender to learning should
rather teach stumbling at a word, to cause confusion then encourage seekers
after actual knowledge to diue into the profound instructions of the wise: or
else the distinction of the Right reverend, and learned Bp. Andrews concerning
the name Jesus might have satisfied any rational capacity.

Secondly Mr. Prinne is not confused only at handling the name Jesus, but in
his materia Circa quam: in the substance of his book. For he has no
explication of duty toward Jesus, which he ought to have had, if he will
prove, ad parts, that Bowing at the name of Jesus is no duty of the text, and
he has no explication of the several kinds of Ceremonies, which he ought to
have had for his private friends sake, that they might understand, how that no
ceremony is a duty of the text. Certainly a necessary an universal ceremony
is a duty of the text; as a thing considered, bowing at the name of Jesus is
both a duty, and Ceremony; sed formaliter, for several respects: as it it is a
ceremony, it is not a duty; as it is a duty it is non ceremony, as you shall learn
hereafter.

He is not only confused in handling the name Jesus, and in the substance of
Appendix, but also in his Method. Let an understanding man observe his manner
of dispute, and he cannot but affirm that he is altogether unworthy to teach,
or to contradict the Learned, and Conforming Professors of of our Church. His
method is neither essential, nor demonstratiue, and then it is not necessary.
It Is fit that it be known, what it is. It is a Delemma, whose two general
parts are gross mistaks. First he charge Bishop Andrews, Mr. Adams, the
Sorbonists, and Rhemists, that they teach, that bowing at the name of Jesus is
nothing else but a duty of the text The opposition of the 2 parts does warrant
me, thus to write. Then He says that Zanchius Mr Hooker, Dr. Boys, and Mr.
Widows, defend this assertion, that bowing at the name of Jesus is but an
indifferent, innocent, harmeles Ceremony: yet all these Bishop Andrews etc.
Zanchius etc. do teach, that bowing at the name of Jesus is both a duty and
Ceremony, which, how this can be, he is not able to understand.

He is so ignorant that he cannot tell whether all things have their perculiar
times. Hence it is, that he confounds the time of divine service with the time
of swearing, and blaspheming with any sinful time, when Jesus is named. He
has not learned the difference between a categoricall, and an exclusive
sense, and therefoer he is not a shamed to infer; because the Council of
Basil enjoined Canonical persons to bow at the name of Jesus: therefore only
they did bow at the name of Jesus. He is so wilful in his opinion, that he
denies (in the despite of the Council of Nice, and Ephesus, that either
Primitive Church; or any Reformed Church ought to bow at the name of Jesus.

He perceiues not: that in or at the time, when Jesus is named every knee shall
bow, are promiseuosly read. So it seems that he is not a Grammarian.
Notwithstanding all this ignorance he so earnestly disputs, as if he would
talk him self out of breath, or else what means his zealous Tautologie? The
argument of Souereignty is disputed six times at handling the meaneing of the
text. The argument of preferring one name of Jesus before another is repeated 8
times six times in the third question twice in the fourth. The Arg of bowing
only to the name Jesus and not to the person is disputed six times. The
argument of preferring one person of the deity before the other is twice
disputed. The argument that Jesus is the name only of Incarnation etc. is
disputed 5 times. That Jesus is not Jesus to the Devils etc. is disputed at the
second and third Question. That bowing is only Metaphorical is disputed four
times. That Lord is the name above every name disputed thrice.

The metaphorical sense of bowing he has separated from the letter of of the
text, and makes that to be the only manner of bowing at the name of Jesus.
Philip. 2. 10. But he must Understand, that there is a real bowing, and more
moral, then to be only metaphorical, as it appears at the end of his
arguments answear'd concerning the meaning of the text: where he has
confounded an exclusive, with a compared sense. Thus: bowing at the last day
etc. is the only principal, and therefore to is the only bowing at the name of
Jesus: hence he has falsified 15. scriptures. many primitive fathers and
others: the number of them is but fourscore Istos modos dice^di: Per se: and
per accide^s those natural, and accidental manner of speeches he confounds.
Thus: some do abuse Bowing at the name of Jesus, as papists, and Ignorant
Protestants: Therefore it is no harmeles ceremony. And he is so decent, so trim
in his arguments concerning the decency of bowing, that he confounds,
Coordination, and Subordination with contrary opposition. Thus: Bowing with
the heart, and bowing with the knee (which are subordinate) do differ,
therefore they are so contrary, as two contrary masters. To read, and bow; to
hear, and bow etc, are Coordinate duties: yet these with him are so contrary,
as that they cannot be done together without confusion. Now behold the strange
learning of a monstrous learned Immethodist. Is he not rare for dispurations
being so ignorant of modalities? Is he not excellent to teach our Chutch being
so brave a Babe in understanding?

Again his Appendix is vain, and Idle. For in what the holy Ghost does
seriously commend Jesus, that he neglects to remember. The Holy Ghosts reason,
why all knees shall bow at the name of Jesus is: because Jesus took on him our
nature, and then did so humbly demean himself, that he died the death of the
Cross to save his Enemies To. 5. 8. For this cause God honored Jesus so much,
that he commands every knee to bow at his name. This is the scope of the text:
and then is not Mr. Prinne, vain, and idle in his conceit, to suppose
argumenrs, to contradict the good and just meaning of the Holy Ghost: who is
that True teacher, that God is the Just rewarder of Jesus his the greatest
Humility? Is it not vain, and an idle conceit, for to think better of Mr,
Prinns arguments, to cause no Bowing at Jesus his name. then of the Holy Ghosts
dictate, which is Jesus his merit revealed to be, and Gods Exaltation of Jesus
the causes, why every knee shall bow at the name of Jesus. It is vain and idle
to fight against God: this is the opinion of Gamaliel a Dr. of the law Act. 5.
34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. yet so vain: and so idle, the younger Lawier is, that
he would rather that his arguments should be beliued then the most credible
truth of the Holy Ghost. Here is a strange oppositio^. A Christian may and
ought verily to believe, that a man should not dare thus to dispute against the
Holy Ghost.

What may be thought to be the cause that a man should grow so bold as to
question the Holy Ghost for his doctrine? Certainly the mystery of iniquity
is working a new work. Thus. If this name (Jesus) were disrespected, not so
publicly magnified as it is by the outward man's Bowing in, or at the time of
divine service; then doubtless the Pure, Holy doctrine, and discipline of Elect
Geneua shall be taught every where, to reform this Church of Great Britain.
Do but dishonor the head of the Church, and then regenerate Geneuaters shall
govern the church, the King, the Realms, nay Jesus himself. If objection be
made, that the most Reverend Arch Bishop Cranmer, the Right Reverend Bishop
Ridley, Father Latimer, and other learned and Holy Martyrs were burned into
ashes, for their constant profession of the doctrine and discipline of this
reformed Church. Answer must be made, that the Holy Mother Geneua, has
better doctrine, and discipline, then Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer ever knew.
The doctrine and displine, of faithful Geneua, are all substance: they are all
gold. Oh if that Religion were here administered* every presbyter shall be
greater than a Monarch, and every Justice of peace above the Presbyter. And
were not this an Excellent Reformation; when the Children of the Church, her
Subordinate Members shall be made such Transcendent Princes? A daring
phantastique superstition! The Honor of Jesus exalted far above all Heavens
must be nullified, to make Schismatic Puritans, Kings. Imperious Holiness!

See a strange wonder: here is Lucifer-like pride in deed. The Devils were
cast out of Heaven Esaias. 14. 14. for their pride, because they would not
believe in the Son of God, the Confirming Mediator of Angels: so the
Schoolmen. And shall sly Professors then, be spared, seeing they will not Bow
at the name of Jesus, which is a sign, that they do not believe in the
Redeeming Savior?

If a Lawie^ shall industriously write against the law, is it credible, that He
is a Religious Obseruer, or a lawful Professor of the law? Where is the good
Conscience, the Necessary Subject of the higher Powers mentioned at Romans 13. 5?
This stands at the Bar, and alleges Gods Heavenly law: All knees shall bow
at the name of Jesus: and it is baffled with an Outery. A Reformation. A
Reformation. To bow at the name of Jesus is Superstition. To bow at the name of
Jesus is Superstition. The good Conscience desires a pacificall dispute, but
the violence of aspiring Spirits, will not endure to fear the truth:
therefore I desire the Christian Reader to observe the plea of a good
conscience. Thus: The tie of Gods law, and of the Kings laws derived from
Gods, is Obligatory to bind all good Subjects unto Obedience. First the text
binds all Christians in faith to believe, and in manners to Bow at the name of
Jesus: which I have proou'd at handling this Question. Whether Bowing at the
name of Jesus, be a duty of the text? To second the text, our dread Sovereign
Lord, the King, has four laws, to humble his Subjects in faith, and manners;
to Bow at the name of Jesus.

The first is the 20th article of our Reformed faith, which is the Authority of
the Church, to ordain Rites, and Ceremonies whereof Bowing at the name of
Jesus is one, though it be commanded by God originally, yet in application to
reform Non-conformists, it is the Churches Canon. Then by the Doctrine of our
Reformed faith, It Is plain, that we must bow at the name of Jesus. Because our
Church Authority has decreed this Bowing (as you see) according to scripture.
The second is the 34 Article, which is the Traditions of the Church, and bowing
at the name of Jesus being universal is more necessary then those being
particular and expressed thus; Whosoever through his private Judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the traditions of the Church etc.
ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear, to do the like) as he, that
offends against the Common order of the Church, and wounds the Conscience
of the weak Brethren. Then it is plain by the testimony of Orthodoxe faith,
that all must bow at the name of Jesus Sub paena publicae redargutionis under
pain of open Rebuke. The third law is the 6th Canon of our Church. The words
are these. Whosoever shall here-after affirm, that the Rites, and Ceremonies
of the Church of England by law Established, are wicked, Antichristian, or
superstitious, or such, as being Commanded by lawful Authority, men who are
Zealously, and godlily affected, may not with any good conscience approve them,
use them, or as occasion requires, subscribe unto them, let him be
excommunicated ipso sacto, and not restored, until he repents, and publicly
revokes such his wicked errors. Then by virtue of this Canon, he that writes
against Bowing at the name of Jesus, should be taught better manners. He should
be delivered to Satan by his Diocesan, for to tame his fleshly, and
diuision-making faction in the Church, to teach him, and his private friends
Canonical obedience. And it is very good reason so to do for transgressing the
18th Canon, which is the 4. law. The words are these. When in time of Divine
service, the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due, and lowly Reverence shall be done
by all persons present, as it has been accustomed: Testifying by these
outward Ceremonies and Gestures their inward Humility, Christian Resolution,
and due acknowledgment, that the Lord Jesus Christ the True, and Eternal son
of God, is the only Savior of the world, in whom alone all the mercies,
Grac^s, and promises of God to mankind, for this life, and the life to Come are
fully, and wholly Compris^d. And then is not he very worthily excommunicated,
that scorns to Bow at the name of Jesus, s^ing the fin^ll end thereof is to
testify his Humble, Cristianly R^solute, and due acknowledgement of his faith,
that the Lord Jesus is the Saving King of the Catholic Church?

And is this Christian Reader, Idolatry to be cried down^? To Bow at the name
of Jesus is Idolatry! To Bow at the name of Jesus is Idolatry! Is this
Religious Bowing to be b^fled with an outery? A Reformation! A Reformation!
Unreasonable Ani^als* Wilful Gainesaying Humonsts! He that peremptorily, and
impenitently teaches against this Rev^rend, and Honorable Bowing at the name
of Jesus, ^o^es not the Lord Jesus: and St. Paul^ would have such an ob^^inate
sinner rewarded according to his great stomack^. Thus: If any man Love not the
Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maran^atha. 1. Cor 16. 22. Let him be accursed
with a bitter curse, with the Greater Excommunication.

I must not say, that M. Prin^s heart does not ^o^e the Lord Jesus* only God is
the s^archer out, and the d^^ce^ning (...) of the secret court of consc^enc^.
But it is very cert^ine, t^^t M. ^rinns daring phansy has most vnsuff^rably
disho^o^red the exalted, the most honored, and the most glori^^s na^^ of
Jesus. His Appendix ^s wi^tnesse* which is a contradictorious suppose,
Ignoratio Elenchi, a ^a^e supposa^^^ That bowing at the name of Jesus is
nothing. His suppositious prooffes to defend this Erroneous despightfull
Hypothesis, are two. Thus: bowing at the name of Jesus is neither a duty of the
text, nor an arbitrary, harmless, and decent Ceremony.

If you will see Mr Prinne in full view of his colors you must observe these
four questions. First whether bowing at the name of Jesus be some thing?
Secondly whether bowing at the name of Jesus be a duty according to the letter
of Phil. 2. 10? 3ly. whether bowing at the name of Jesus be a duty according
to the Real meaning of the text? Fourthly whether Bowing at the name of Jesus
be an Arbitrary, Harmles, and Decent Ceremony? This is the substance of the
appendix. Here you shall see his Imperious, Daring boldness against our Church.

Difficile est Satyram non scribere -- -- Who can endure his High look, and
his proud stomach? although it is true, that neglect had been answer good
enough for his confused matter and method; for his vain, and idle
suppositions: yet the unlearned may ouervalue his Anti-Iesus-Appendix. But
reason there is none, why any one should regard such an irregular non-licet.
Missiue authority he has none to teach: for he is no public Ecclesiastical
Priest: and learned Judicious charity he has none: for learned and charitable
faith will not break the peace of established Religion; of Religion
established according to Canonical scripture. I would to God, that he had
taken counsel of his Colledg-moderator* then friendly Suppression should have
buried this untimely fruit. But to what purpose is it to wish him good, that
wishes so little peace to the Church? There is nothing to be done by me for
him, but to pray for him, and confute his arguments, that the weak in faith be
not shaken, nor troubled, and that he be not in love with his great sin
committed against the Lord, and his Church. So let the stiff-necked, and
stiffe-kneede be made to know themselves to be but men, but erroneous men: and
that Jesus is the Lord, at whose name their knees must bow, now in the time of
grace. I pray God, give all them, that love the Lord Jesus so much piety, as
that they ever worship him, not only inwardly with the heart, but jointly with
soul, and body* with heart, and knee that at the last day the whole church may
enjoy his Glorious Benediction. Thus I continue,

The Hearty well wisher of all humble Christians Giles Widows.

WHETHER BOWING AT THE NAME OF JESUS be some thing?
Certainly Bowing at the name of Jesus is some thing. For in genere Entis in
being it is an action. In genere moris, in being a duty it is an external
religious action. In signification, it is a Religious relation, or ceremony. It
is a Religious action, and a Religious subordination of the knee to a Religious
heart is its essential difference. Its Terminus a Quo is the name Jesus
rehearsed, and heard at time of divine service. Its Terminus ad Quem, or Finis
Cui, for whose sake it is done, is the Al-sauing, and Glorious person Jesus.
Its terminus ad Quem, or finis Qui for what purpose we Bow, is to testify
humbly, resolutely, with due acknowledgement, that Jesus Christ is King of
Kings. The deserver of this bowing, is Jesus in his humility. The Principal
commander of this bowing is the Holy Ghost. The subordinate commander is the
Church. The Immediate internal cause is faith, hope, and charity. The
Immediate external cause signifying, is the Preacher, or Reader of divine
service. The Immediate external cause signified, is the object, which is the
text. Philip. 2. 9. 10. and the 18th Canon of our Church. Its Radical Subject
is the Regenerate will: Its regenerate directer is the knowing faithful
understanding. Its Principal guide is the Holy Ghost. Its mystical Head
giving motion, and sense and life to Bow, is Jesus himself: Its Radical organ
is the Heart. Its visible Organ is the knee. Its time when, is Toties Quoties,
so often as the name Jesus is rehearsed in divine service. As the Bowing of the
knee at the name of Jesus signifies the Bowing of the heart: and as the Bowing
of the heart at the name of Jesus is signified by the visible bowing of the
knee. This outward bowing is the relate to the inward Bowing: and the Inward
Bowing is the Correlate to the outward Bowing, the signifying decency of the
knee: this is the moral Ceremonious Relation. Significabilis humilitas,
internal humility signified, that is the Real, Moral Correlation. But what
if Mr Prinne understands not Internal Relations, Entities, Causations,
Inherence, producted, and mutual Dependence herein? What does not he
understand, and yet presumes to confute Judicious BP Andrews, Zanchius, Dr
Boys, Mr Hooker, Mr Adams, etc. Then let him put of his hasty spirit, and
Learn true Christian humility: for he is to young to be a Judge in our Church,
and to condemn well deserving men, is not the duty of a Christian. Here are
25. arguments, which a Judicious intellect is able to produce, and thereby to
prove, that Bowing at the name of Jesus is some thing. But yet hear Mr.
Prinnes arguments, wherewith he would conclude that Bowing at the name of
Jesus is nothing.

Objection. 1.
If Bowing at the name of Jesus be some thing: then it is either a duty of the
Text: which is the Sorbonists, Rhemists, BP. Andrews and Mr. Adams doctrine:
or else it is an Indifferent, Innocent, Harmeles Ceremony, which is the
doctrine of Zanchius Mr. Hooker. Dr Boys, and Mr. Widows. A Ceremony which
no man is constrainde to use: so Mr. Hooker. But this cannot be: for thus one
doctrine confounds the other. Therefore Bowing at the name of Jesus is nothing.

Solution.
These are the words of the Right Reverend, and Orthodoxe BP. Andrews; What
way more sit to express our humility by, than by bowing at the name of Jesus:
this sign of humblenes? Thus the^ bowing at the name of Jesus is a Ceremony
according to BP Andrews: And he says, that Bowing at the name of Jesus is a
reward of Jesus his passion. ser. 9. on the Resurrection. page 475. Thus,
Bowing at the name of Jesus is a duty of the text according to the BP. Zanchius
says: that to Bow at the name of Jesus is a duty. Quod omne genu debet
flectere ad nomen Jesus: at Philip. 2. 10. page 124. That every knee ought to
Bow at the name of Jesus. Et antiquissima Consuetudo in Ecclesijs, vt Cum
nominatur Jesus, omnes aperiant Caput, in testimonium Reuerentiae, and
adorationis page 123 It was a most ancient custom in the Church for men to
veil, and bow at the name of Jesus, in toke^ of revere^ce and adoration of
Jesus. Thus Zanchius says, that bowing at the name of Jesus is both duty and
ceremony. M. Hooker does teach the cause, why Christian men anciently did, and
do, especially stand, and bow, when the Gospel is read: Because the Gospel
does contain, what our Savior spoke, or did do, or did suffer in his own
person. Then according to M. Hooker, the Church did acknowledge bowing to be a
duty due to Jesus, by reason of what Jesus said, did do, and by reason of his
passion: And he says that this Bowing was in token of greater reverence. etc:
lib. 5. of his Ecclesiastical Polity page: 248. Concerning that He says, that
no man is constrained to Bow: this is true in our days: for M. Prinne knows
that the penal law is not executed on all them, which do not bow, and but
only on them, which revile bowing at the name of Jesus. But yet the text, and
the 18. Canon tie all to bow. Here you may observe, that M. Hooker teaches
that to bow at the name of Jesus is a duty: because due by reason of Jesus his
passion, and that it is a ceremony, because it is a token of greater reverence.

Dr. Boys says that Bowing at the name of Jesus is a Reverend regard of the
Son of God above other messengers. And in this sense then it is a duty. And he
says, that it is a respect most profitable against infidels, Jews, Arians, who
derogate from the honor of Jesus. page 280. on the Gospel for the Sunday next
before Easter. And thus then it is a ceremony.

Mr. Adams says, that God has Created corporal Organs to express without,
the mental devotion within. Then bowing at the name of Jesus is a moral
sign, and so a ceremony. And that we must worship, and bow down, and kneel
before the Lord our maker page 1203. in his meditations on the ereede. Thus he
says bowing at the name of Jesus is a duty, required not on^y at Philip. 2,
but at Psalm. 95.

The Sorbonists Mr. Prinne has quoted out of Calvin on Phil. 2. But he makes
no mention of the Sorbonists: and he favors not there Mr Prinnes assertion.
These are his words non interiore modo Cordis affectu, sed externa quoque
professione Colendus est Deus, si velimus illi reddere, quod suum est. We must
worship Jesus with the heart, and we must worship him with the knee also, if
we give him the honor, that is due to him. The second quoted concerning the
Sorbonists is Marlorat: and he says that they believe, that this name Jesus is
magical, that it has tota^ vim in sono inclusam: a reail virtue being
pronounced. But these are Marlorats own words. Adoratio hic notatur, quae est
Dei propria: Cuius symbolum est genuflexio in Philip. 2. Here bowing is a token
of worshipping Jesus, of adoration, which is proper unto God. D. Willet in his
Synopsis does not mention the Sorbonists, but says that this Bowing is the
same, which God challenge^h to himself. page 1165. The Magdeburgians do
teach, that to Bow at the name of Jesus is the reward of Jesus his obedience.
Cent 1. lib 2. cap. 4 page 241. de doctrina page 252. and page 336. But in the
2. Cent. cap. 5. there is nothing concerning Bowing at the name of Jesus. no
mention of the Sorbonists. Adorabunt te, and in te precabuntur, quoniam inte
Deus est, and non est alius Deus praeterte. Margarinus de la Bigne ex alma
Sorbon^ schola. This bowing is an adoration of God, and we must worship Jesus,
for he is the one, and only God.

The Rhemists say that Bowing at the name of Jesus is religion on Philip. 2.
that it causes a religious remembrance of Jesus. They teach Bowing a duty, and
a remembrance. Dr Fulke on Philip. 2. against the Rhemists says, that Bowing
at the name of Jesus may be well used, and is not to be misliked etc. Mr
Cartwright is afraid to affirm, or deny this bowing at Phil. 2. Co^clusio
tua, qua infers etc. quod nome^ Jesus honor no^ colam, falsa and excogitata
est. Dr Whitaker, in his answer to Mr William Rainolds, refutation chap. 16.
page 442. But page 398. and 399. are false Quotations. Dr Whitaker did bow at
the name of Jesus not superstitiously, but religionsly, as it may appear in
his cited place, Giles Widows, says in his Sermon, the Schismatical Puritan,
that Bowing at the name of Jesus is express scripture. And it is true, for the
Bowing of all things is expressed: and therefore this bowing is expressed
enough for an obedient capacity: thus then it is a commanded duty. Every knee
shall bow etc. I say that bowing etc. is a moral decent gesture and so says
Luther at Esaias. 45. signifying the hearts worshipping of Jesus which is
external adoration and so it is a Ceremony.

The learned BP. etc. teach that bowing at the name of Jesus is both duty and
Ceremony: So Mr Prinnes division into a duty of the text, and into a Ceremony,
is but a false surmise to defend faction. But what dares not King Vzzias
Lay-Chaplaine do, to humor his private friends?

Objection 2.
A Ceremony, which has immediate reference to the very person of Christ does
differ really from a duty of the text. Bowing at the name of Jesus has
immediate reference to the very person of Christ. Therefore bowing at the name
of Jesus is no duty of the Text. This argument Mr Prinne has disputed against
BP Andrews, and Mr Adams. This is his Marginall note.

Solution.
The Mayor is not true: for bowing at the name of Jesus is a Ceremony and a
duty: How can that be? Thus: As bowing of the knee, signifies the religious
bowing of the heart at the name of Jesus, so it is a religious Relation, or
Ceremony: and essentially it has reference only to the signified humility of
the Heart, that this does honor Jesus by bowing at his name. But relative
obedience must have its Terminum ad quem, or Finem Cui: a Person, to whom it is
tied: so this bowing at the name of Jesus has the person of Jesus; for to him
we must bow. In signification then of its Correlate, which is the bowing of the
Heart, it is a Ceremony; In use, or practice it is a duty, due to the person of
Jesus. At the time of Gods rewarding Jesus, the Text not long after says:
Every knee shall bow etc. thus it is a duty commanded by God himself. At the
neglect of bowing at the name of Jesus, the 18. Canon of our Church says, that
all present at divine service shall bow at the name of Jesus. Thus it is a duty
commanded by the Church. We must bow to testify our humility of Heart, thus it is
a moral Ceremony. For Jesus his sake we must bow. So Bowing as the thing
considered is both duty and Ceremony: but for a diverse consideration, as it is a
Ceremony, you see it is not a duty, and as it is a duty, it is not a Ceremony. The
same thing bowing has a twofold respect: the one of moral signification, to
make it a Ceremony: the other of practice commanded, to make it a duty. Mental
devotion will not serve. God will have both corporal, and vocal to express
it by: so BP. Andrews. We must bow with our knees and confess thus
implicitly, that Jesus is the Lord. Thus the same BP. So know then that the
same bowing is both a duty, and a Ceremony.

Objection 3.
To omit a religious duty is a sin. To omit bowing at the name of Jesus is
noe sin. For at swearing by, and at blaspheming of the name of Jesus, we
ought not to Bow.

Solution.
Every time is not the measure of every motion, but of its own. The practice
of grace is a good motion, and the time thereof is good, very well imployde, to
a good purpose, to the honor of Jesus. The practice of sin is an ewill
motion, and its time is evil. But those motions have their own times: and so
have all things else under heaven. Eccles. 3. But I am sure, that swearing, and
blaspheming have noe appointed times. They and their times are forbidden, and
therefore away with such a blaspheming argument. Things forbidden are unlawful
for Christians; at no time they must be admitted. But bowing at the name of
Jesus is a commanded duty. And because the Church has seen the b^ffling of
Catchpole Scripturists, she has namde the time of bowing at the name of Jesus.
The time is the time of divine service, so we read at the 18. Canon. A very
congruous time. Every commanded thing has its commanded time, and therefote
bowing at the name of Jesus has its commanded time proper to it self, so
exclusive of all other times, that only a religious time must be, and is the
time of bowing at the name of Jesus. If Mr Prinne, be such a Borrower, or
exchanger of times, let him answer this argument for his own arguments sake.
Mr Prinne is M. Prinne at all times, and at all places, If at all times
therefore he was Mr Prinne before his father was borne: for that time is time,
for that time is subordinate to one of the species of time. And so he is a very
(...).

Objection. 4
Every religious duty is universal either in respect of person, time or place;
But bowing at the name of Jesus is not universal for person. For the Popish
Council of Basil prescribes it only to Canonical persons: so Surius Council.
Tom. 4 page 61. The council of Seine, or Sienna restraines it only to the same
persons. Concilium Senonense decreta morum. Cap. 18. Surius Tom. 4. Pap. 741.
The Synod of Augusta Anno Dom. 1548. Cap. 27. has decreed that
Ecclesiastical persons shall bow at the name of Jesus; and at the name of the
B. Virgin Mary, and at the mention of the body and blood of Christ. Surius Tom.
4. Page 810. 2ly bowing at the name of Jesus is not an universal duty for
time, and place. For men bow not at all times. Gregory the 10 (one of the first
Fathers of it) restrains it to celebrating the Mass. Sexti decretalia l. 2. T.
23. c. 2. The Council of Basil restraines it to Canonical hours in
Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches. In like manner the Council of Seine. The
Synod of Augusta restraines it to Sermons and Masses. M. Hooker confines
bowing at the name of Jesus only to the time of reading the Gospel.

Solution.
Here M. Prinne disputes against Protestants, and Papists: but being ignorant
of Modalities, De quibus non degustauit. He erres vnsufferably in his reports.
For the Council of Basil does not prescribe bowing at the name of Jesus only
to Canonical persons. These are the words. Statuit igitur Sancta Synodus, vt
in cunctis Cathedralibus, and Collegiatis Ecclesiis etc: Cum nominatur
gloriosum illud nomen Jesus, in quo omne genu flectitur caelestium, terrestrium
and infernorum, omnes caput inclinent: this is M. Prinnes note. All Cathedral,
and Collegiate Churches shall bow at the name of Jesus. But M. Prinne, where is
your exclusive term (Only?) You must plead A non est inventus. That word
Only is not in any Popish Council. Only they drink the holy wine at Mass, I
mean the Popish Priests, but that Only They shall bow at the name of Jesus: No
Protestant at any time as yet did justly charge them with. And what if the
Synod of Augusta has comanded Papists to bow at the name of the B. Virgin
Mary, and at the mention of the body and blood of Christ. what is that to this
purpose? That which is good in Austin the Popish Archbishop of Canterbury, we
embrace, and commend: but that which is otherwise, let it wither in the root,
from whence it sprang: so, M. Mason lib. 2. cap. 4. of consecration of Bishops
page 58. Our Church (Gods holy name ever be blessed,) is purged from popish
corruption: and the Lord Jesus preserve her from Imperious Puritans. What has
our Church to do with Popish religion? Read the 18. Article of our reformed
Faith, and so inform your understanding in the name Jesus. Once more let me
tell M. Prinne that he injured Pope Gregory the 10. His words are these --
Quod generaliter scribitur, vt in nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, singuli
singulariter implentes, (praecipue dum aguntur missarum sacra mysteria)
gloriosum illud nomen quandocunque recolitur flectant genua cordis sui, quod
vel capitis inclinatione testentur. Here M. Prinnes quotation is Sexti
Decretalia. lib. 2. Tit. 23. cap. 2. But it is lib. 3. de Immunitate Ecclesiae.
c. Decet. 6. Here Gregory the 10. commands all to bow at the name of Jesus: and
not (only) but chiefly at the Mass. But that Gregory the 10, who lived in the
year of the Lord. 1271. was one of the first Fathers of bowing at the name of
Jesus, this is fabulous: a part of the Puritans Legend. Had M. Prinne been
careful to have pervs'd Bishop Andrews his 9th Sermon on the Resurrection: He
had read these words. No writer (not of the Ancient) on this place, that I can
find, save he, that turned all into Allegories but literally understands it,
and likes well, that we should actually bow. page 476. there you may see
Authorities, that bowing at the name of Jesus did not begin at Gregory the
10ths. time. St Cyrill the Bishop of Alexandria, who lived in the year of the
Lord 430. says, that the Church then did bow at the name of Jesus cap. 5. Thus
numquid hominem communem, and nos, and vniuersu^ coelum hactenus percolimus?
Absit. Adoramus Emmanuele^ etc. Binius in his Coll: of Counsels Tom: 1.
Actoru^ co^ilij Ephesini oecumenici page 670. we bow at the name of Emmanuel,
because he being the son of God took on him our nature, died, by his own
power did rise again, and so made us the conquerors of death. And who is
Emmauel but Jesus? To this purpose Athanasius, who lived 326. years after
Christ, writes. Ideo adorauit, quia vidit suum opificem, Architectumque in
carne consistere Et in nomine Jesus omne genu Flectebatur, et in posterum
flectetur. In his Epistle to Adelphius page 69. Therefore the Church did bow,
does, and shall bow at the name of Jesus: because she has, does, and shall
behold by faith* Jesus in our flesh. Flectebatur: the Church then did bow at
the name of Jesus before that time of Athanasius. Thus then it is plain, that
Gregory the 10. was not one of the first Fathers of bowing at the name of
Jesus. Concerning Mr. Hooker: he says that we chieflly bow at the name of
Jesus, when the Gospel is read: but he says not, that then is the only time
of bowing. Mr Prinnes argument is enough to confound the law, if men were so
simple as to believe him. Thus, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. This is the chiefest law.
Then if Mr. Prinns manner of dispute be true, there is no other law. Then
honor thy Father, and thy Mother etc. the laws of the second table are no
laws. Then we need not love our neighbors nor the, Church. Is this
Schismatic divinity? The heart is the chiefest member of man's body; then
according to Mr Prinns argument: man has only an heart: then he has no
brains, no religion. The blind may follow the blind, til both fall in the
ditch: but let us follow the Churches direction, the 18th Canon, and
accordingly bow at the name of our Lord, and Savior Jesus.

Objection 5.
The primitive Church never used this bowing at the name of Jesus as a
religious duty. Therefore to bow at the name of Jesus is not duty of the text.
Then it was nothing at all among them.

Solution
But to bow etc. was the custom of St Hieromes time: these are his words on
Esaias cap. 45th: Moris est Ecclesiastiei etc. It Is the twentieth Canon of the
Council of Nice. Antiquissima consuetudo. Zanch: It was in the beginning: of
the Church. Arch. Bishop Whitguift. Was S. Cyrill of Alexandria a Primitive
Father? And so was Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria: and they teach that
bowing at the name of Jesus is a worshipping, and adoring of Jesus. Bishop
Andrews says, that all the Fathers, but Origin, do literally understand and
approve of actual bowing at the name of Jesus. The Council of Ephesus
consisting of 200. Bishops, against Nestorius has inserted, bowing at the name
of Jesus, amongst their Acts: so Binius Tom. 1. Collect. of Counsels Cap. 5.
page 685. The Council of Ephesus says, that we must adore Jesus with the
worship of God: so Crabbe at the 8. Act of the Council of Ephesus. And then
did not the Primitive Church bow at the name of Jesus? Si quis Crucifixum non
adorat, sit Anathema, and inter Dei. cidas censeatur. So Nicholinus in his
Collection of the Council of Ephesus, cap. 7. Tom. 2. page 1004. If any man
adore not Crucified Jesus, let him be accursed for the God-slaier. And so great
was the authority of the Council of Nice, Calcedon, Constantinople, and
Ephesus, that S. Gregory the Great said, let him be accursed that does not
esteem as well of them, as of the Evangelists: so Surius Tom. 1. page 254. on
the life of Theodosius Coenobiarcha.

Objection 6.
All the Protestant Churches have rejected bowing at the name of Jesus. For
they have frequently writ against it. For they do expound this bowing at the
name of Jesus, to be only the bowing at the last day.

Solution.
When Reformation of Religion in King Henry the 8ths Reign was striving in the
womb, then Thomas Cantuarien: Johannes London: Stephanus Winton: etc. Edvardus
Ebor. Cutbertus Dunelmen: Robertus Carliolen: with all Archdeacons, with the
Professors of divinity, and law did not write against bowing at the name of
Jesus: but did magnify Jesus vilified by the Jews. This is written in their
Exposition of the Apostles Creed entitled the Institution of a Christian man,
which King Henry the Eight commanded the two most Reverend Archbishops, and
all the Right Reverend Bishops of both Provinces to write, to suppress,
remove, and utterly take away all Errors, Doubts, Superstitions, and Abuses in
the Church to the Honor of Allmighty God, etc. to the perfect establishing of
his Highness subjects in good unity, and Concord, and perfect quietness, both
in their souls and bodies, Thus the Epistle Dedicatory to the High, and most
Excellent Prince etc. King Henry the 8th.

Again Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed Memory, commands thus at 52.
Iniunction. That whenever the name of Jesus shall be in any Lesson, Sermon,
or otherwise in the Church pronounced, that due Reverence be made of all
persons, young, and old, with lowliness of courtesy, and uncovering of Heads
of the mankind, as thereunto does necessarily belong, and heretofore has
been accustomed. This is the 52. Iniunction. The 22. Iniunction is, that
Ministers shall teach, etc: that no man ought obstinately, and maliciously to
break, and violate the laudable Ceremonies of the Church, etc.

In King James his Reign Blessed for memory to the worlds end, then in the
year of the Lord. 1604: The Answer of t^^ Vicechancellor, the Doctors, both
the Proctors, and other the Heads of Houses in the University of Oxford,
agreeable undoubtedly to the Joint, and uniform opinion of all Deanes, and
Chapters, and all other the Learned, and obedient Clergy in the Church of
England, and confirmed by the express consent of the Vniersity of Cambridge,
does testify thus: Reverence done at the name of Jesus is no superstition, but
an outward sign of inward subjection, to his divine Majesty, and apparent
token of our devotion. Cap. Concerning the matter of the complaint of some
Puritans. Par. 10. And by successiue protection our gracious King Charles his
18th Canon which is now in force commands all present at Church, to bow at the
name of Jesus in time of Divine Service. Then it is a manifest truth, that our
Church has ever since her Reformation, bowed at the name of Jesus. As
concerning other Churches reformed, I read that their teachers Preach bowing at
the name of Jesus to be necessary. For Calvin writes on Philip. 2. that God is
to be worshipped by external profession: And Jesus is God. He is God and Man.
Marlorat says on the same place, that it is a worship due to God. Zanchius on
the same place, that it is a testimony of our adoring Jesus. Musculus, that it is
a witness of our inward reverence, and worshipping of Jesus. That all shall bow
at the last day, Angels, Devils, Reprobates, and that now, the godly, and
faithful shall bow. Eilhardus Lubinus on Philip. 2. writes, that he is a
wicked man, that vncovers, and bows at the name of his Prince, and yet will
not veil, nor bow at the name of Jesus. For who is greater, God, or the King?
Or must not we honor God more, then the King? Or is bowing with the knee or
putting off the Hatt, too much honor for Jesus, the exalted Lord of life? The
Puritan picks a quarrel at the five letters (JESUS) So ignorant the captious
Schismatiques declare themselves to be. What if some write against bowing at
the name of Jesus? What must be done therefore? Let us be tried by the letter,
and meaning of Philip. 2: and then I hope, the Controversy shall be perfectly
ended.

Whether Bowing at the name of JESUS be a duty according to the letter of
Philip. 2. 10?

SPELL, and then it is Thus by articulation: At the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow: Read, or write, and still they are the same letters. And then seeing
that one not more learned than a writing Boy, nay then a Reading, or spelling
child can assure the doubting Questionist, that there are no more, no fewer and
that only These are the letters of Philip. 2. 10. how dares a Professor be so
bold, as to say, that to bow at the name of Jesus is not a duty of the Text
according to the letter? After the substance of the letter, examine the
signification of these words: whether Jesus signifies any person else at
Philip. 2. but the Lord Jesus: not Joshua who is called Jesus only twice in the
new Testament: once at Acts 7. 45. and once at Heb. 4. 8. Nor does this Jesus a
literal and personal name signify Iustus who is called Jesus. Coloss. 4. 11.
And as for Jesus the son of Iosedecke Agge. 1. 1. he is not read in the new
Testament, nor is Jesus the son of Sirach in any text of the Gospells, or
Epistles. So here is no ambiguity; for it is perspicuous, not is here any error,
for it is Certain, that the Lord Jesus is only Jesus written, and read, and
understood at Philip. 2. It is manifest that this is true by Mr Prinnes
Quotations: by these: Clemens Alexandrinus. Tertullian, St Cyprian loco 10, 20,
and 30. St Hilarie loco 10, Greg. Nyssen loco 20, St Ambrose loco 10, 20, 30
etc. St Cyrill of Alexandria loco 10, Fulgentius loco 20, and John the 2, Pope.
Therefore let no man doubt, but that only the Lord Jesus is literally this
proper, personal name Jesus written at Philip. 2. The 2. word in the text is
knee, (Every knee) at which Mr Prinne does stumble. The letters are visible
enough in his own English Bible: for substance one, and the same: for number
all equal with these (EVERY KNEE) and for posture not dislocated. And what
kind of knees all creatures have, this is not written in the letter expressly
literally: but those knees, which the creatures have, they shall bow: and they
shall bow every one their own knees, and that without proxies for every knee
says the text, shall bow: all Angelical, all infernal, and all corporeal
knees: The knees of things in Heaven, of things in the Earth, and of things
under the Earth. St Paul writes here true literal divinity: Mr Prinne will
grante this of all tongues in Heaven, because they shall all confess, that
Jesus is the Lord: For it is the tongue that confesses, and so he may say as
truly, that Angels, and other spirits have knees, for the same Author has
justified it in one, and the same Philip. 2. The 3. word is bowing, which
Calvin calls external adoration in us at Philip. 2. and we must glorify God in
our Body, and spirit. 1. Cor. 6. for that end He bought us with the price of
his invaluable life. Calvin says that now in this life we must bow at the name
of Jesus, not only inwardly but outwardly in his Commmentaries on Isay, 45.
Romans 14. and Philip. 2. and the same say Musculus, Aretius, Bullinger,
Marlorat, Zanchius etc. And rather at the name of Jesus, than at any other name
of God: because God in his 2. person, named Jesus only humbled himself, and
died the death, even the death of the cross. A good Lecturer, may find this
divinity in the very letter of Philip: 2. Must all knees bow at the name of
Jesus? Must all knees? Then I pray you observe with me hence this Doctrine. All
Christian knees in the Militant Church must bow at the name of Jesus. Is this
true doctrine, All knees must bow? But when? Then, when they must honor Jesus.
And now is a time, and appointed by the Lord to worship. Psalm. 95. no worship,
neither inward, nor outward, God by scripture has denied to be given to Jesus.
God has not said that we must worship him only at the last day. The Prophet
Isaiah has not writ it, nor St Paul: but the letter of the text is express;
that he has already merited all Honor: and that every knee shall therefore
bow at the name of Jesus: And is the time of our Christian life too sudden a
time, as that now we must not worship him? The 24. Elders have proclaimed the
contrary: Revel. 5. Observe this use. Did Jesus die for us? What? Did Jesus die
the death of the Cross? was Jesus so cruelly, so despightfully, so
disdainfully handled for his Church? Then in time of divine service let Jesus
have given to him, knee, and hat for a free will offering: nay more: Give him
heart, and soul, and body, even all Decent, and well ordered honor. Jesus
thought that his life was not too much to save miserable sinners: and therefore
it is an odious ingratitude to deny him knee-honour at the time of holy
worship, seeing by his promise he is in the midst of them, that are gathered
together in his name Jesus, to praise, and magnify him for all blessings
conferred on his People. But Master Prinne never thought of this: and therefore
he disputes, as follows:

Objection.
To bow in the name of Jesus, is not to bow at the name of Jesus. But the
letter of the text is: every knee shall bow in the name of Jesus. Thus all the
Fathers hereafter quoted. Thus all the Translations, but Bezas. Thus all the
Expositors on this Epistle, but those, who follow Beza: Thus all our English
Translations, but Geneuas which is Beza translated. The new translation is, In
the name of Jesus: so all ancient English writers, who quote this scripture.

Solution.
(...). The praeposition (...) signifies in, or at: so Petrus Gillius
Albiensis. Grammar learning does teach thus much. And it is very rational, and
as vulgar, as true. In Grammar we say in a place, or at a place. In a bill, or
a bond, Mr Seriuener writes, in or at the dwelling house of etc. at, in, or on
the 25. of March, which shall be in An. Dom, etc. Thus in, and at a place; in
and at a time are promiscuously used. So speaking of the time, when Jesus is
repeated, to put us in remembrance of bowing at his name, we do truly, and
properiy say. In the time or at the time of divine service, when Jesus is
mentioned, every knee shall bow. The 18th Canon is the same in sense according
to either of the acceptions. At Michaelmas Term, and in or at some other term
all Lawiers will follow their own vocation, and not continue bold, and
ignorant Immodalists in expounding Philip. 2. and other scriptures. But
howsoever remember, that in Michaelmas term, or at Michaelmas term aut eo
circiter, I thus answeard a lawier, translated into a Pastor, or Dr. of the
Church: that in a place and at a place: in a time, and at a time are not
formally differing expositions. But stay, Mr Prinne is in another error: he
says that all the Fathers write, in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow.
But yet this is not true Christo Jesus Domino nostro etc. omne genu curuetur: so
Irenaeus l. 1. c. 2. adversus Haereses page 51. Every knee must bow to Jesus
Christ o^r Lord. Donatur Jesus, vt Caelestia, and terrestria and inferna genua
Electant: so S. Hilary l. 9. de Trinitate page 135. God gave Jesus this honor,
that all knees in heaven, and earth, and hell should bow to him. But yet let
Puritans bow in the name of God, in the name of Jesus, if they will follow the
Fathers, and any expositors but Beza, and his followers. Let them bow in the
name of Jesus, who does hinder them? Beza translates, at the name of Jesus:
Iunius, and Tremellius, in the name of Jesus: These tra^slations are quiet
enough in the same testament: A Schismatique cannot make them differ. St.
Hieromes translation is, in the name of Jesus, and the translation of S.
Chrysostom, St Cyril etc. Surius, Binius, and Crabbe, in their collection of
Counsels render the Fathers speaking: Every knee shall bow at the name of
Jesus. The difference is so little, that a Schoole-boy scorns so silly an
Argument. But what does not our Church translation, the last render, every knee
shall bow at the name of Jesus. Consule Textum: Read. And do not our Ancient
English writers say at the name of Jesus? What say you to Queen Elizabeth's 52.
Iniunction: which says, that our Church has heretofore been accustomed to
bow at the name of Jesus, before that Iniunction was made? Does not Mr Prinne
know, that Bishop Andrews, Dr Boys, Mr Hooker, are ancient enough to be his
Tutors in Divinity? O but they are not Non-conformists? And shall
Non-conformists put down our Church doctrine, and discipline? Away rather with
such Lawless, and Headless fellows to Amsterdam, or to New England. In the
causall sense of these translations, in the name and at the name of Jesus, it
is thus. In the name: That is in the power, and authority of Jesus we bow. And
hence you may observe the original Efficient of bowing to make it a very
lawful bowing. At the name of Jesus: That is: Jesus is Finis cui, the all
glorious Person, for whose honors sake we bow, to testify that he is worthy
of all praise. Thus the end of bowing at the name of Jesus is to good purpose,
necessary, and noble. The authority of Jesus is lawful, therefore bow: The
honor of Jesus is the greatest honor, therefore they that love his honor
will bow at the name of Jesus. And are the authority, and honor of Jesus
nothing among Hypocritical Outside-conceptists? This imperious daring
generation does provoke authority to punish, and honor to reject such ignorant
coniecturall Divinity.

Objection.
The letter does not signify the name Jesus, but only his power, or person.
For Jesus is the Genitive Case, and the genitive case denotes only power, or
person: not Jesus his particular name. And the text Isay. 45. 23. Romans 14. 11.
says: Every knee shall bow to me.

Solution.
To bow to Jesus his name, and not to his person, no rational man can be so
ignorant: How basely does Mr Prinne judge of our Church-worship? To bow to
Jesus his person without a name, what is this, but to take away his name from
his person. And take away his name, and how then is his person signified or
honored? The Jews did acknowledge Jesus his name with scorn: these were open
and professed enemies: They bowed their knee, mocked him, vilified his name and
crucified him. The Puritans are sly sirs. They will say nothing, but holiness,
they will do nothing but holiness, they are professed Purita^s no where but
in Co^ve^ticles. If Chamelio^s had a religion (they are such Chainglings) then
a rational man may say with safety enough that there are the Puritans. They
are holy in their own conceit. They will not bow to JESUS. Not to his name
nor to his person. Grace has no knees: The time of Glory has knees in every
thing: Glory shall bow: Grace must be irreverent, and unmannerly: this is
their holiness. Here observe Mr Prinne, that Jesus his name cannot be the
Genitive case. Why? Only power, or the person of Jesus is put in the Genitive
case. This is easily to be refelled. Thus. In nomine Jesus. What part of speech
is (Jesus:) A Nowne: and a Nowne Substantive. Of what case? Of the Genitive.
Why? Because Jesus is the latter of two Substantives, Nomine is the former.
Jesus is the person here signified in the Genitive case: this M. Prinne
vndersta^ds. But what Nowne else, but Jesus signifies this person in the
Genitive case? It is against Puritanisme to answer. Is it possible if he did
honor the person of Jesus, but that thereby he must honor the name of Jesus.
For that which is honored as the Quo, by which Jesus is signified to be
honored, is his name Jesus. That which is honored as the Quod, as the thing
to be had in all honor, by our souls, and bodies, by our hearts and knees,
this is Jesus his almighty person, because he has deserved more the^ our
kneehonour by suffering all disgrace. So here is one reason more, then
Almightinesse, why we must bow at Jesus his name: More then the reason at Esaias
45. 23. Romans 14. 11. Holy and Reverend is the name of the Lord. Thus the
Psalmist. But Jesus Qua Jesus deserved more than by any other Attribute of his,
is signified. For all say, that greater is the work of Redemption,
restitution, salvation, than of creation. I will tell Mr Prinne one answer
more to this argument. Because Aristotle says cap. 2 page 4. lib. de
Interpretatione, that oblique cases are not nownes. Yet in a cadency they are
nownes; though only the nominative case be the original instituted nowne. This
I have said, because Mr Prinne may remember, that he did learn that
Sophistry-argume^t at Oriel College, when he was there a Freshman. You know the
law: Thou shall not take Gods name in vain. You must not say, that Gods name
is not honorable, that it is not to be honored. And is not Jesus God? Semper
vt Deus a Creaturis Colitur. D. Cyril: Thesauri lib. 8. page 99. The creatures
must worship Jesus as God. And thus the psalmist psalm. 98. psalm. 71. psalm. 28.
psalm. 19. These are St Cyrills Quotations.

Objection.
The letter of the text is that every knee must bow at that name, which is
above every name. But the name Jesus is not above every name. For it is not
above these names: Mediator, Savior, Christ, Lord, Son of God, Lamb of God,
Emmanuel, God etc. For all these do signify Christ so well, so properly, so
really, as Jesus does

Solution.
All these names, are the names of Jesus. They do signify Jesus well, and
properly. Mediator signifies the office of Jesus, that he is the only
reconciler of God, and man. Savior is the interpretation of Jesus. Matthew. 1.
Christ signifies Jesus to be the anointed of the Lord. Psalm. 2. Lord signifies
Jesus to have dominion over all the world. Psalm 95. Son of God signifies
Jesus in his eternal generation before all worlds. Ioh. 8. Lamb of God
signifies Jesus, the eternal sacrifice. Ioh. 1. Emmanuel signifies Jesus
incarnate, and so God with us. Matthew. 1. God signifies Jesus his providence,
Jehovah his infinite, incomprehensible, omnipotent essence, which is the
Godhead. All these names do thus signify Jesus. But was any name of God so
abused, as this name Jesus was? Signification is not the cause, why Jesus is
the name above every name. But the cause is, because God was most of all
vilified in this name. When his person was tied in covenant to God to be our
Surety, to fulfill the law, and to die for our sins, Matthew. 1 Luc. 2. Matthew.
3. Then the world did hate him. John Chap: 6. 7. 8. 9. Then he was called
Coniurer, and Beelzebub his familiar. So St Hierome, St Ambrose, St
Chrysostom, and St Augustine: This wilful abuse being the sin against the
Holy Ghost. Mar. 3. Was a vilifiing of Jesus. The Scribes and Pharisees did so
persequute him, as the Puritans do now neglect his name. They killed the
Prince of life Act. 3. Because Jesus, God and man the saving surety of the
Church was thus dishonored, more in the name of Jesus, then in any other name,
therefore we must bow rather at the name of Jesus, then at any other name of
God. Gods will is, that his Church shall honor him in that name most of all,
in which he was most of all dishonored by the world. The letter of the text is
thus: so Bishop Andrews out of St Augustine. Humana natura res humilis est,
ipsa quoque exaltari intelligitur. Nunquam de verbo Dei tale* quid in
scripturis invenies, nisi secundum quod factum est caro, and habitauit in
nobis. D. Cyril. Thesauri. lib. 8. page: 99. Because Jesus did humble himself
in our nature, therefore his humbled name Jesus is exalted, and is become the
Greatest name of God. Deificauit, quod induerat. Athanasius Contra Arianos.
Orat. 2a, page 101. Jesus is honored in his Deifying, and Deified nature, so
honored with double honor, at least in a double manner: with the same
undivided honor we adore the divinity, and humanity of Jesus: so the Council
of Ephesus, as Binius, Crabb, and Nicolinus have observed in their collections
of Counsels. And this is an honor above every honor. For as Jesus is God, so
he is the highest, and his honor above all honor. But yet this text says
more, that Jesus is the greatest name of God: the greatest in desert, and now
the greatest in Reward, in the glory of essence; the three persons are
coequall, but not in the glory of merit, or rewarded humility; which is proper
to the second person. If Mr Prinne would have disputed according to the letter
of this Text: obedience, and therefore the exaltation of Jesus must necessarily
have bin his argument. But his letters are in otherscriptures: in 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Luc. 2. 12. Math. 1. 16. etc. This is bafling, not disputing.

Objection 4.
The letter of the text is that Every knee shall bow. But the litterall
Expositors do bow their heads, and veil their hats. Therefore they observe
not the letter of the text.

Solution.
We must give Jesus all the honor, that we can. Our hat vayl'd; and the
bowing of our head are more honor than Puritans give to the Lord Jesus. Their
hats are nailed to their heads, when Jesus is nam'de, showing noe more manners,
and reverence, then children in understanding, which want discretion. The truth
is, that we should be uncovered in the house of the Lord 1. Cor. 11. 4. 5. 7.
It Is thus at the 18th Canon of our Church. But because the canon says it,
therefore the Nonconformist is a contradictist. The hat, and head, and
knee-worship are to little. And I would to God, that they might be reformed, who
will not bow, and that with punishment, if Admonition shall not prevail. My
reason is: no man dares put on his hat in his Majesty's Chamber of presence,
signifying thereby the honor, due to so great a Prince. And therefore a
Christian should be afraid much more to put on his hat in Gods house. For this
is the place of Gods presence, his chiefest place of his honor amongst us,
where he is worshipped with holy worship: where his Ambassadors deliver his
Embassage: where his Priests Sacrifice their own, and the Militant Churches
prayers, and the Lords supper, to reconcile us to God offended with our daily
sins. All should be bare. For Jesus is the Greatest Prince in all the world,
the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. 1. Tim. 6. 15. The practice of some
Puritans is to sit bare in the Church, not so much for reverence to be done to
God as to obscure their neglect of the name of Jesus. I pray God, give them
more grace, and more wit.

Objection.
If every knee must bow at the name of Jesus, of things in heaven and of things
in the Earth and things under the Earth: Then there is one kind of bowing in
all things: viz. the bowing with the knee. But this cannot be. For Angels,
Devils, and souls departed have no knees.

Solution.
At 148. psalm. all things are commanded to praise the Lord: viz: Angels,
sun, and moon, the heavens, the waters under the heavens, the Dragons, and
all deepes: fire, and hayle etc. Must all these creatures then, praise the Lord
in one, and the same manner: or rather according to that ability, which God
has given to every creature? The Angels praise God in their kind, singing
their Halleluiahs: Apocalyp. 19. The sun, and the moon praise God in an
other manner, in running their Courses etc. psalm. 19. Every thing in his own
way does praise the Lord. It is thus in bowing at the name of Jesus. The
Angels, and Saints in heaven do bow at the name of Jesus, as it becomes
them, who live in the state of glory: and the Militant Church does bow, as they
ought which live in the state of grace, so far forth as they conform their
will to God. The Devils, and Reprobates bow, as stubborn Prisoners. The
Puritans grant, that Angels, and souls departed, and Devils, shall confess,
that Jesus is the Lord. But what tongues have they if they have no knees? They
have tongues so St Paul. 1. Cor. 13. Analogicall tongues: so BP. Andrews. And
so they have analogicall knees, which the Schoolmen call potentiam
obedientialem, power for to obey. But what if Angels have but similitudinary
knees? yet they bow better, than we are able. Let us not prate, but pray, that
we may imitate the good Angels in their perfect serving of God, saying: Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. As for the Devils, and stubborn
Men they must bow. A greater weight than the Wydowes Alms shall bring them
down on their knees.

Whether Bowing at the Name of JESUS be a Duty according to the Meaning of the
Text?

HVMILITAS Claritatis Meritum, and Claritas Humilitatis Praemium: so
Iudiciously Solid Bp Andrews out of St Augustine on the 17. Chapter of St
John's Gospel. Humility the Merit worthy of honor: Honor the reward of Jesus
his humility most worthily deserving are the scope, or meaning, which the holy
Ghost did signify to the Church by this scripture. Philip. 2. from the 5th to
the 12. verse. who this Person is, who is the Meritorious Practitioner of
humility, the Text says He is Jesus Christ. Philip. 2. 5. The Terminus a Quo,
whence Jesus began to humble himself, is his Equality with God in form, or
Essence; in his own thought equal to God ver. 6. The first descent of his
humiliation is his putting of the Glory of his diety; He made himself of no
Reputation, answearable to his Majesty. Then he took on him the form of a
servante: this is his conception by the holy Ghost. Then he was made like unto
men, this is his Incarnation. Then he was found in shape as a man: this is his
Nativity. Then he humbled himself living in obedience to poor Parents. Then
he became obedient unto the death. No sooner was he borne: but King Herod
sought after his life. Matthew. 2. No sooner did he preach, but his own
Countrymen, and kinsmen were offended at him. For casting out Devils, he is
proclaimed to be a Coniurer: For his Excellency, and Majesty obscurely
perceived, he is accused for a Seducer, and a Traitor. Then he submits to the
sentence of the Judge, and he condemned him, and his own Nation did crucify
him. Now behold how Jesus performed a Saving suretiship for us to God the Just
Judge. We are the transgressors of Gods law: and therefore Jesus submitted to
die. We are the Traitors against the king of Heaven, and Jesus was put to
death. This is Jesus his greatest saving humility: observe it well, whether it
be meritorious, and so meritorious, as to be honored by all rational
Creatures. The Holy Ghost does testify, that Jesus his humility has deserved
all honor of Heaven, and Earth, and Hell. Such a desert so well deserving must
needs infer a large reward. And what is that? God has highly exalted him,
and given him a name above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow of things in Heaven, of things in the earth, and of things under the
Earth. And that all tongues shall confess, that Jesus is the Lord. I will
repeat Arch-BP Whitguifts words: These. One reason, that moved Christians in
the beginning rather to bow at the name of Jesus, than at any other name of God
was, because this name was hated, and most contemned of the wicked Jews, and
other Persequutors of such as professed the name of Jesus. For other names of
God, they had in reverence: but this name they could not abide. Wherefore the
Christians to signify their faith in Jesus, and theit obedience to him, and to
confute by open gesture the wicked opinion of the Jews, and other Infidels,
used to do bodily reverence at all times, when they heard the name of Jesus,
but especially when the Gospel was read, which contains the glad tidings of
salvation, which is procured unto man by Jesus Christ etc. Neither can it be
against Christianity, to show bodily reueverence etc. These are the words of
Orthodox Dr Whitguift, the most Reverend Arch-BP of Canterbury, in his Answer
to Mr Thomas Cartwright in the defense of the Answer to the Admonition, page
742. It Is merit, why Jesus is the name above every name of God, not to add an
higher degree to Gods essence, or to his eslentiall glory: but to make it
manifestly known, in which name God will be most gloryfied by his Triumphant,
and Militant Church, and by his Enemies taken captive, and made the Perpetual
Prisoners of Hell. Upon S. Matthew. 11. ver. 27. on these words. No man has
seen the father, but the son etc. S. Ambrose writes thus. Plus dix it
defilio, quam de Patre, non quod plus habet, quam habet Pater, sed quod ne
minus esse videatur. lib. 2. de spititu Sancto cap. 12. There the text says
more of the Son, than of the Father: not because the Son has more
Authority than the Father: but because the son should not seem to be
inferior to the Father: At Philip. 2. Merit is cause, why Jesus is the
greatest name of God, proposed to us to worship. And the reason is very
infallible. For seeing that God only in the name of Jesus would humble
himself, and suffer shame, and rebuke: therefore in the same name, he is, and
will be to the worlds end, most of all magnified. He will be more magnified in his
name Jesus, than in any other Title. For no other name of his, but Jesus
suffered shame, reproof, death and Hell. Swearing dishonours God: Idolatry
more: but God hanged on a tree: this is the great curse, the most shamfull
dishonouring of Jesus. Yet thus Jesus redeemed us from the curse of the law
Gal. 3. 13. He was crucified in the flesh 2. Cor. 13 verse 4. Jesus was slain,
and hanged on the Tree. Acts 5. 30. Still it is merit, why Jesus is exalted,
why his name is above every name. God has then rewarded Jesus; and he requires
our duty, to bow at his name, and so acknowledge, that his name Jesus is above
every name, that he has. God has rewarded Jesus freely. (...): God has
freely given him his name Jesus to be the name above every name. He being dead
in body, God raised him from death: He did not suffer his holy one to see
corruption. When the humanity could not help it self, then God did, and
raised Jesus to honor. There is the gift above every gift. Jesus his hands
were enabled to receive, the gift was put into his hands: and he has honor so
freely given him above all honor. Accepit, vt homo, quod habebat vt deus: His
Manhood did receive, and his Godhead did confer the gift. I add, his humbled
Godhead did receive his manifested greatest Exaltation. When Jesus his humanity
was dead: the high Exaltation was a gift: and because Jesus did lay down his
life, the Exaltation is also a reward. Gratia vnionis, because Jesus is the
most Excellent Person that died, therefore he was rewarded with transcendent
honor: thus Jesus is the Exalted name above every name. In this name Jesus are
joined together Gods glory, and our safety; therefore God estemes of his name
Jesus above all other his names: so B. Andrews. Jesus is Gods only most
deserving name, and then by proportion of Justice, Jesus is his only name above
every name: God made choice of this name, above all his names, that we might
accordingly esteem of him, that esteemed it above all, only for our sakes.
This is the only name, by which we are saved. Act. 4. 12. The learned, and
Right Reverend B. Andrews, says very remarkeably and solidly: that the name
of Jesus is of more worth to us, than the very name of God. For God in him
reconcileth the world. 2. Cor. 5. 19. without Jesus, God is the Enemy to the
world, and to us. With Jesus there is comfort in the name of God: without Jesus
there is none at all. Jesus is the name, that helps us out of sin, and
misery. For Jesus is God, and Man: so he is our Savior, our Allmighty, and
most merciful Jesus.

A last note that bowing at the name of Jesus is a duty of the text, and that
we must bow in time of divine service, is Philip: 2. 10. 11. For then we must
bow, when our tongues ought to confess, that Jesus is the Lord. Every knee
shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, that Jesus is the Lord. These must
go unseparably together: so Mr Prinne. And when must we confess that Jesus
is the Lord? Not till the last day? No Christian dares say: That it is true. For
we must confess, that Jesus is the Lord in time of divine service. At the
general confession of our sins, we do actually confess that Jesus is the
Lord, and then we bow. At rehearsing the Apostles Creed, we stand, and bow at
the name of Jesus our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost etc. At the
second Lesson, though we sit, yet we bow. At the Gospel we bow standing. The
glorified bodies must bow at the last day. The regenerate bodies must bow in
the time of Grace. For Grace does owe her knees to Jesus. And her knees are not
in her heart but thereby governed. Hence it is, that good Christians do bow at
the name of Jesus, testifying thereby that Jesus is the Lord, that died the
death of the Cross to save sinners. And therefore with retribution of hearty
thanks, for that supervaluable benefit, we praise Jesus the exalted, with
heart, and knee at once. And the Lord Jesus give us grace ever to bow, and such
safety therein, that we never be hindered by Puritan, or Papist. Now observe,
whether Mr Prinne does come nigh the meaning of Philip: 2. 9. 10. 11. verses,
as they have revere^ce, to the 5. 6. 7. 8* and that it is not the meaning of the
text, that our knees shall bow at the name of Jesus in time of divine service,
seeing he does not use these arguments. 1. Because Jesus did not deserve this
honor of bowing. 2. That God did not give Jesus this honor, being dead. 3.
That God has not commanded us to bow at the name of Jesus, although Jesus has
deserved more then knee-honour. 4. That Jesus did not deserve so universally
for every member of our bodies, that the knee must give him honor. 5. That
Jesus was not the only vilified name of the Lord. 6. That there ought to be no
bowing at the name of Jesus in the time of Grace, but only in the time of
Glory. (This he would make his friends believe, but therein he has deceived
them). 7. That the time of of bowing is utterly separated from the time of the
tongues confessing, that Jesus is the Lord, if the time be the time of the
practice of grace in the Temple. Hence I pray you observe, that Mr Prinne has
corrupted the text, with false, and by-suppositions: that he has secretly
wounded his private friends; and encouraged others to be obstinate
Schismatiques. But will not the Gentl. understand? Must ignorance, and
presumption, prescribe to established doctrine, and discipline? I pray to
Jesus, that that day may never be. Away with imperious Puritanisme, and behold
his arguments exactly confuted.

Objection.
Jesus is not the name above every name, understood at Philip. 2. 10. For the
name above every name was given to Jesus after the exaltation. But Jesus, this
name was given by God the Father unto Christ, before his nativity, or
conception. Matthew. 1. 21. 25. Luc. 2. 21.

Solution.
Jesus his name was given him twice: once till death: afterward for ever:
first as a note of entering into covenant with God the just Judge, to fulfill
the law for us, and to die for our sins: secondly as a note of so Meritorious
a person, more rewarded, more exalted, then any person ever has or shall be
magnified. First Jesus was the humble name of the only deserving Grace. Now
Jesus is the exalted name of transcendent Glory. The Jews did crucify Jesus,
and his name; and the Apostles did then distrust, whether Jesus was the true
Jesus: Luc. 24. 21. All the Disciples did forsake him, they did fly from him:
Matthew: 26. 56. St Peter did curse, and swear, that he did not know him. v.
74. And was not this a death of Jesus his name, which before was admired among
the people? Matthew: 4: 24. But behold God has raised this same Jesus from
death, his day of resurrection is his glorious Birthday: Psalm. 2. 7. Because
Jesus was crucified to save sinners: therefore God has highly exalted him, and
given him his name Jesus again. Although his name was dashed out with the
shameless scorns of the High Priests, and people of the Jews: Yet God has
given Jesus the same name, with letters of the greatest honor: therefore at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. Here are two reasons, why Jesus his
name was given him twice. The former that he should be our Justifying,
Sanctifying, and saving Surety: thus those texts signify Matthew. 1. 21. 25.
Luc. 2. 21. The latter, that he shall be acknowledged to be our Exalted Lord the
King of Kings: Because God has thus rewarded his most deserving humility.
Therefore at Philip. 2. 9. 10. 11. we read that his name Jesus is above every
name. Note then that Master Prinne has not disputed according to the time of
giving Jesus his name at Philip. 2. which is the time of Jesus his Exaltation,
but according to the time of Jesus his humility, which is at Matt. 1. etc.
There is not a Father, but he does teach, that Jesus is exalted, and that
therefore he is exalted, because he died the death of the cross. See the
318. Bishops of the Council of Nice against Arius, and the 200. Bishops of the
Council of Ephesus against Nestorius. Dominus noster Jesus Christus est in
gloria Patris, licet Arianis id ipsum non videatur. -- Caro per verbum Dei
glorificata est. Factus est homo, vt nos in seipso Deificaret: Athanasius in
his Epistle to Adelphius his Brother Contra Arianos. page 69. The 5. 6. 7. 8.
verses of Philip. 2. speak of Jesus his humility: but the 9. 10. 11. speak of
his glory: that his humanity is exalted: that it did receive the All glorious
reward of Jesus his deity, being a cause of his Exaltation. Athanasius Orat.
2a, contra Arianos page 100. 101. 102. In the time of his humility he was taken
to be nothing else, but a man: but now he is acknowledged to be God over all
things, blessed for ever. Romans 9. This is St Ambrose note on the Text. The
Jews dishonored him, as he was the Son of God. If thou be the Son of God,
Come down from the Cross, and we will believe in the: for this scorn to the
death, God made Jesus fairer than the sons of men? this is St Augustins note
on psalm. 103. By reason of his humility God exalted Jesus above the Angels: To
that purpose St Hierome writes on Philip. 2. In extremis temporibus, propter
salutem nostram verus Deus factus verus Homo humiliauit seipsum, and ideo
dicitur Exaltari, non secundum verbi naturam, sed secundum incarnationis
mysterium. D. Cyril. Thesauri lib. 8. page 99. Because Jesus humbled himself
therefore he is exalted; but not so, as if his Godhead were made greater in
essence, or in the glory of his Majesty, than in the beginning: but he being
made man for us, and for our salvation, he wills, and commands all Creatures
to honor him most of all, as he is Exalted Jesus. The Heretic Eunomius can
say, that humility is a cause of his Exaltation, and that by the Grace of union
Jesus his humility did deserve Exaltation: although he would not confess, that
Jesus is God. Crux triumphus erat. S. Cypria^ in expositione symboli
Apostoloru^. The cross was the cause of Jesus his Exaltation Quid humiliar^?
An non vituperari? an non accusari? and Calumnijs pet^? Quid vero Exaltari?
Nonne honorari? Laudari? in magna gloria esse? D. Chrisost: in Philip. 2. in
morali Digressione. Because Jesus was humbled, suffering scorns, false
accusations etc: therefore he was Exalted with honor, and praise, and great
glory. These reuilings did cause Jesus his name, which was given him at his
nativity, to be a new name, a new Exalted name: but not so new, as if Jesus was
not before that time Jesus his imposed name: but Exalted Jesus that name so
much honored was never imposed on him till his Exaltation. Postquam Crucem
sustinuit Rursum Exaltatum dicit etc. so the Acts of the Council of Ephesus
page 915. collected by Nicholinus. First Jesus was crucified, and then he was
restored and Exalted. Had Mr Prinne observed this Connection of humility and
exaltation: he might easily have discerned, that his arguments are nothing to
the Purpose. Mr Prinne observes the humility of Jesus, he has no regard of
Jesus his Exaltation, and therefore he has four arguments more, not much
differing, to prove that Jesus is the name of our Saviors humility.

Objection. 1.
This name Jesus was given to our Savior principally in regard of his
humiliation, and passion. Therefore Jesus is not his name of Exaltation.

Solution.
This name Jesus was principally given to our Savior: nay, only this name was
given him to undergo a Just, and holy Suretiship for us. Matt. 1. Luc. 2. do
prove thus much: that Jesus should save his people from their sins: and this
Suretiship Jesus has performed with all humility. St Paul is witness: Thus,
He made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and
was made like unto man and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himself and
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. Philip. 2. 6. 78
But what did God never intend to exalt the same Jesus? Does the Text say so?
Did God intend according to the Text, never to reward him for his
Supermeritorious obedience? Mr Prinne is deceived: the same text has convicted
him for an Ignoramus, For the 9th verse says. Wherefore God has highly
exalted him. What is the meaning of. Wherefore God has highly exalted him?
This: Because Jesus was obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross,
therefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name.
What name is that? JESUS is that name. How can you tell? Thus: At the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow. Then we may see, that Jesus is the name, before a
name of humility, but now it is the only exalted name of our Blessed Savior.
Jesus is not his name, which does exalt him: Those names are titles of honor:
viz. King of Kings, Lord of Lords. Revel. 19. 16. Head of the Church. Ephe. 2.
but Jesus is his exalted name, his most honored name. The Lord Jesus was more
vilified, than all the Lords names: therefore it is most honored, highly
exalted, only this name Jesus: so the most Reverend Arch Bishop, Doctor
Whitgift: the right Reverend Bishop Andrews, Zanchius etc. But negatur
argumentum is sufficient answer to so poor an argument. For what Christian
is he, that does not believe, that he shall be glorified for the merits sake of
Christ Jesus? And then is not Jesus the name of Personal covenant with God,
exalted? And being exalted, it is a new name: new for honor, though not new for
letters. This is Master Prinnes second arguments resolution. But see how he
loves this argument, he alleges three reasons more.

Objection. 1.
Jesus his proper name given him at his Incarnation is not his name of
Exaltation. But Jesus is his proper name given him at his Incarnation. Matthew.
1. Therefore Jesus is not his name of Exaltation.

Solution.
This Argument, and the first according to the sense of the Text are the same:
and here is a false mayor. Some thing is supposed, but nothing is proved: yet
see, what our Savior has said in his own cause. It Is our Saviors humble
petition. Thus: These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and
said, Father the hour is come, Glorify thy Son. John. 17. 1. Can any
Christian say truly, that God did not glorify Jesus his Son? It Is
impossible. Who then is glorified? Apt respondetur. Jesus the Son of God is
glorified. Demand at whose name every knee shall bow? Apt respondetur: this
answeere is the text. At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow.

Objection. 2.
Jesus is the name of his passion: so the Evangelists. Jesus is the name of the
very lowest degree of his humiliation. Philip. 2. 8. Therefore Jesus is not the
name above every name.

Solution.
This does not prove, that Jesus is not Jesus, not exalted Jesus after his
resurrection: that Jesus was not made a new name by honors. I have so many
witnesses to prove, that this name Jesus is a new name in honors after the
resurrection, as there are tongues in the world: except Prinns tongue and his
accomplices, and one day They must bear witness. For all tongues shall
confess, that Jesus is the Lord Philip. 2. 11. Now demand, who is the exalted
Lord? All tongues must confess that Jesus is the exalted Lord: the text is
evident. The Evangelists called him Jesus after the resurrection. Jesus came,
and spoke unto them saying, all power is given unto me Math. 28. 18. He did
rise up Jesus. Mar. 16. 9. After the resurrection Jesus blessed the Apostles.
Lue. 24. 36. Then Jesus ordained the Apostles to be the Preachers of the
Gospel in all the world. Ioh. 20. 22. 23. and the Lord Jesus gave them missiue
authority to be the Catholic Bishops: Or else let any Anti-disciplinatian tell
me, why St Peter taught at Act: 1. from the 15. to the 23. verse. that one of
our Saviors Disciples must be chosen into Judas his place. The Apostles did
call Jesus. Jesus, and honored him for their only Lord and Master after the
resurrection. S. Paul writes, that he is the servant of the Lord Jesus in his
Epistles: so does S. Peter: and so S. James, and S. Jude: every Apostle is the
servant of Jesus Christ our Lord. And yet Jesus is not the exalted name among
Non-Conformists: but they cannot truly say that they are servants of any
higher Lord. And if they persist in their obstinacy, they will prove to be no
servants of this Lord Jesus.

Objection. 3.
The name above every name is the of Souereignty, and glory. But Jesus is not
the name of Soureignty, and glory: for Jesus is the name written on the cross,
over his head to show the cause of his death.

Solution.
The psalmist says, that God will take the poor out of the dust, and set them
with princes, even with princes of his people. As for example, God did take
David from the sheepfold, and made him the King of Israel. Is not this true,
because David was a poor shepherd? Do you believe the 78 psalm* 32? The
comparison holds. Jesus was so execrable in the eyes of Jews, that they did
crucify him, and hang him on a tree. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the
cross: JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. Ioh. 19. 19. What is Jesus
therefore not the name of Souereingnety? God has highly exalted him, and given
him a name above every name. Phil. 2. 9. 10. 11. Pilate and the Jews exalted
Jesus his name with scorn: God therefore has Magnified his with the greatest
honor; thus Jesus is the name of Souereignety, and glory

Objection 3
This is Mr Prinnes general Thirdly, and a confirmation of the former
argument. A patching disputant. Thus then he: The name above every name is the
name of the Kingdom, Royalty, Majesty, and universal Dominion of Christ over
Angels, men, and devils: Philip. 2 9. But Jesus is not the name of Kingdom,
Royalty, Majesty, and universal Dominion of Christ over Angels, men and
Devils. For this name Jesus denotes only the Priesthood. Heb* 3. 9. 17. Heb.
3. 1. Heb. 4. 14. Heb. 6. 20. and so S. Bernard in his 15 sermon on the
Canticles.

Solution
Mr Prinne would add this word (only) to Heb. 2. 3. 4. 6. c. to prove that
Jesus is only the High Priest. But it is good for him to take heed, that he
add not a word to alter the sense of holy scripture. Revel: 22. 18. and St
Bernard does not say Jesus is not King of glory, in his 15 sermon on the
Canticles, an encouraging sermon of Salvation; he is better skilled in
modalities then to call a plain simple positive sense, exclusive; which is to
say; because Heb: 2 etc: teach that Jesus is our high Priest: therefore Jesus
is only our high Priest, and not at all the Almighty King above us, not the
great prophet before us. But see Act. 3. 15: and then Jesus is not only the
high Priest; for there he is (...), the King, or Prince of life. See Luc. 24.
19. and there he is a Prophet mighty in word, and in deed. Esa: 9. 6. 7. does
teach that he is God, the Prince of peace, and King. These three offices were
diversely manifested by him to the Church. At the 6. cap: of St Ioh. verse: 15:
then he would not be made a King. A good note to teach him to be a Priest in
all humility, who is called by himself Seruus servorum. When Pilate examined
our B. Lord Jesus, as one guilty of treason against Caesar: then he would not
manifest his Kings office. His answer was most humble, not like the command of
a King: but as he did exercise his office of a Prophet, so he did manifest
himself. Thus: to this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth; and my Kingdom is not of
this world, Ioh: 18. 36. 37. His offering himself up to be the sacrifice for
our sins, did manifest Jesus to be our everlasting priest Heb: 10. 12. But
till after his resurrection did Jesus manifest himself to be the universal
Monarch? Then he made it manifest to the Eleven, that all Power was given him
in heaven, and earth. Matthew. 28. Then St John proclaimed his titles of honor,
King of kings, and Lord of lords. Revel: 19: 16: and at Philip. 2. 9: 10: 11.
St Paul publishes the honor, which God has given him: A name above every
name, and the honor, which every Creature ought to give unto his name: This:
At the name of Jesus every knee shall how, of things in heaven, of things in
the earth. And is Jesus only a Priest then, though he be the only high Priest?
Or is Jesus a Priest in the Quatenus of Jesus a king? Where then be his three
offices? Or must Jesus a king, be subject to Jesus a Priest? Why then is he
styled King of kings, rather then Priest of priests? Or must he be King, who is
Priest, and so the successor of Melchisedeck, in being King and Priest, as he
was? Heb. 7: 1: Jesus is both King, and Priest, Heb 7: but he has no
successor. Let Papists, and Puritans exactly consider the 23, and 24 verses of
Heb. 7: and the Popes supremacy must evidently appear to be nothing, and the
Puritans all equal to the Pope, exalting themselves above the King, must
necessarily be laid in the dust. Our Savior has made it plain Luc. 22: that
no Apostles should be so great men in authority as Kings, when the Sons of
Zebedee would have been above their fellows.

Objection. 4.
That is the name to be bowed at, which every tongue shall confess to be
Jesus. But every tongue cannot confess Jesus to be Jesus: For Jesus is no
Jesus to Angels. Heb. 2. 16. nor to devils. Matthew. 7. 22. 23. nor to damned
spirits Romans 9. 27.

Solution.
Jesus is not a redeeming Jesus to Angels: so Heb. 2. 16: but a confirming
Jesus. Ephesians. 1. 10: not a redeeming, nor a confirming Jesus to devils, but a
Commanding Jesus, Jesus casting out Devils. Matthew. 7. 22. 23. Jesus that has
damned spirits under him, all things in subjection under his feet. 1. Cor. 15.
Zanchius says, that our Savior is a confirming Jesus to good Angels for five
reasons, upon 1 Chap. Ephe: verse 10. page 19. And the exalted Jesus he is,
far above all Principality, Power, Virtue, Dominion, and every name, that is
named, not only in this world, but in the world to come. Ephesians. 1. 21. And he
has put all things in subjection under his feet verse. 22. The devils have
confessed Jesus to be Jesus: This is the Legions speech. I know who thou art,
Jesus the Son of the most high. Matthew. 8. Mar. 5, Luc. 8, The devils are
made to know already, that Jesus is their Lord, and governor. Jesus has
trivmphed over them, when he was nayl'd to the Cross. Coloss. 2. 15. He led
captivity captive. Ephe. 4. And therefore the devils, and the damned
Reprobates know, that they must be governed by Jesus their commanding Lord:
and that thus He is Jesus to them.

Objection, 5.
The name at which every knee must bow is above every name, but this name Jesus
is not above every name.

Solution.
This argument of Super-excellency is Mr Prinnes Thirdly last past, and having
lost himself in Method, he has 4. arguments more, to prove that Jesus is
not the name above every name. And though this he can never prove, yet see his
contradicting zeal, how it talks.

Objection, 1.
Jesus is not a name above Joshua: for he is Jesus. Heb. 4. 8. Act. 7. 45. And
Jesus the son of Sirach is Jesus* Therefore Jesus is not the name above every
name.

Solution.
Now Mr Prinne is run away from the meaning of phil, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10: or
else let him say, that either Joshua, or Jesus the son of Sirach is here
understood, if he has not digressed from this Text: or that they are equal to
exalted Jesus: for the name is correspondent to the person signified in
signification, and merit. But see a great difference, This Jesus is God and
man: so the text. Philip. 2: but they are not Gods, but Creatures of this Jesus
here understood. This Jesus had no Father of his humanity. Heb: 7. but they
were begotten of natural Parents. This Jesus not guilty of any sin
committed by his own Person, died to save sinners: but they were sinners,
guilty of sin: and they had not continued Jesus, if the Lord Jesus had not
protected them. This I sus is rewarded, because he died for sinners. He is
exalted, magnified, honored, above every other Jesus: a good Christian may
easily know him, because he puts his whole trust in him, and therefore the
Equivocation of the name Jesus is not now ambiguous, being so manifestly
distinguished into persons known so much to differ.

Objection. 2. and 3.
Jesus is not the name above every name. Secondly because Jesus is his name of
Incarnation, humiliation, and debasement. Thirdly because Jesus imports not
universal power, and Souereignty of Christ over all Creatures.

Solution.
This Secondly is twice a First argument before: twice Secondly. This Thirdly
is twice Thirdly in this question: and once Fifthly. So the one is disputed five
times over, and the other four times. A foolish woman uses this prating
Immethody a frequent repeating of the same thing: verbum Sat sapienti. A wise
man is no Babbler.

Objection. 4
Jesus is not the name above every name: for the scripture prefers other names
before Jesus. What names? These: his name, and Title of Lord. 1. Tim. 1, 1. Of
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 1 Timothy 6. 15. So good authors say, that those
names are above the name of Jesus.

Solution.
This argument of Souereignty was disputed four times before. But still Jesus
is the exalted name above every name. Thus. Who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords? Apt respondetur: Jesus is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Revel: 19.
1 Timothy 6, 15. And that you may know, that this is true, see his name: it is
written on his thigh: you will believe your own eyes. St Thomas did, Ioh 20.
and so must every St. P. B. N. C. Whatsoever his name be, Jesus is exalted:
therefore Jesus his name is above every name: read Philip. 2, without
partiality: If Mr W. Prinne were exalted above all Justices of Peace: he would
undoubtedly believe that W. Prinnes name is above the rest. But it is against
his stomach, that Jesus exalted above every name, that this name should be
said, and worshipped above every name. Wilfulness is a masterlesse sin. Take
this for a note that there is nomen exaltans vt Deus; nomen, quod est
exaltatio, vt Rex Regum, and nomen exaltatum, vt Jesus. There is Jesus his
name, which is his reward, or his exaltation: This name of his is King of
kings, and Lord of Lords. God is his rewarding name. And Jesus is his name,
which is rewarded, exalted above every name: and thus this proposition is true:
Jesus is the name above every name, so the text. All tongues must confess,
that Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father. And seeing all
tongues must confess, what says M. Prinne to this? He has five reasons to
prove this first argument against the text: He is not for the meaning of
Philip. 2. 10.

Objection 1.
The name above every name is a name of Sovereign Power and Authority. But
Jesus is not a name of Sovereign Power, and Authority etc.

Solution.
This Argument is five times disputed already. Me thinks, one argument once
disputed is sufficient for one: therefore I suppose Master Prinne had many
private friends to help him, and every one has pawnde his life, that this
argument is vnanswearable, and therefore it must be repeated on all the
Puritans credits jointly, to cry down Philip 2, 10. and the 18th Canon, or
else they shall not be the Masters of Israel. But mark well this answer.
Apt respondere ad Quaestionem factam per Quid, Master Prinne did learn to be
the rule to know an Essential Proposition. Apt respondere ad Quaestionem
factam per Cur sit, it seems, he did not learn to be the Rule, to know a
Demonstratiue proposition. Thus then let him learn, why is Jesus his name
exalted above every name? Apt Respondetur. Because Jesus made himself of no
reputation, and took on him the shape of a servant, and was found in shape, as
a man; he humbled himself unto the death of the Cross. Is this the cause,
why Jesus his name is above every name? The text says the same. Thus;
Therefore God has highly Exalted him, and given him a name above every name.
Philip. 2, 9. Does Master Prinne understand? A weak disputant to confute
Bishop Andrews, Doctor Boys, Zanchius, Master Hooker, Master Adams,

Objection. 1.
Jesus did die to purchase the name above every name. So Act. 2. from the 32.
to the 37.

Solution.
Jesus then did deserve to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords: and so Jesus is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This is true: and Master Prinne has
confessed this to be truth. He calls to witness that excellent full place.
Act: 2. from the 32. to the 37. Jesus is now Exalted. Therefore let all the
House of Israel assuredly know, that the same Jesus, whom the Jews crucified,
is both Lord, and Christ. Master Prinne then proves that Jesus is both Lord,
and Christ: so here is Prinne an Anti-Prinne.

Objection 3.
The name a boue every name does fully express the deity and humanity of
Christ. But this name Jesus does not fully express the deity, and humanity of
Christ. For Jesus is not Lord by name: and Lord is the name of the deity of
Christ. Psalm. 110. 1. Act. 2. 32. etc.

Solution.
Jesus is both God and man. This is the 2. Article of the Primitive faith, and
of our Reformed faith. The Arians deny, that Jesus is God nomine, and re. The
Manichees, and others deny, that Jesus is man. But if Master Prinne will not
believe our Churches faith: let him learn of the good theife, that was hanged
on the Cross, who then prayed thus to Jesus, Lord remember me, when thou
come into thy kingdom Luc. 23. 42. And how was Jesus then Lord to the
theife, but according to the Godhead? Thus the theife called Jesus Lord: and
according to the Godhead Jesus answear'd the theife. This day Thou shall be
with me in Paradise.

Objection 4.
The name above every name has reference to all, to Devils, to the damned.
But Jesus is not Jesus to them.

Solution.
This Fourthly is a Fourthly before: a fourth reason of Master Prinnes second
Argument, that Jesus is not the name intended at Philip. 2. 10. and there you
may see that Jesus is exalted above all, and the Commanding Jesus of Devils and
Reprobats: although he be not a saving Jesus to them.

Objection. 5.
Every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Lord. Therefore Lord is the name
in the Text: and so say all Orthodoxe Interpreters etc. but Bishop Andrews.

Solution.
That Lord is the name above every name is the General Argument of these five
last reasons, and very often repeated: a sign of much violence. But moderately
let Master Prinne demand according to Philip. 2. 11. Who is the Lord? And the
text will answer him, that every tongue shall confess, that Jesus is the
Lord. So it is apparent, that Master Prinne did never understand Orthodoxe
Bishop Andrews. nor other Orthodoxe Interpreters, as hereafter you may read.

Objection. 2.
After the Excellency of Jesus a superlatiue name, being exalted above every
name, Master Prinne is come to a Secondly, and says: That this name The only
begotten Son of God is the name above every name. Thus: It Is peculiar only to
Christ. Heb: 1. 5. A name more Excellent than any name of men, and Angels.
verse 4, 5. declaratiuely, given to the Person of Christ after his
Resurrection. Rom: 1, 4. And therefore Theophylact, Anselme, Musculus, Aretius,
and others say, that this is the name above every name.

Solution.
That Jesus is the one, and only begotten Son of God; it is the text: begotten
before all worlds; it is the Council of Nice* Greater in dignity, and nature,
than men, and Angels: it is Heb: 1. and whether He were not declared to be the
only begotten son of God, till after his Resurrection, ask the Holy Ghost at
Matthew: 3, vlt. Ioh: 3, 16. In Essence, and Person The only begotten Son of
God is the great name. But still only Jesus is the greatest deserving name
upon the Covenant of Circumcision, and Baptism: and therefore Jesus is the
only Exalted name above every name. That at the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow. In this sense Theophylact etc. do not deny, but Jesus is the name above
every name. Non mayor humiliatio, nec mayor exaltatio fieri potest, so Anselme
on Philip: 2. Jesus is exalted above all, because he was more humble than all
the world. Jesus is exalted to be King of Heaven, and Earth: so Musculus on
Philip. 2. And so Aretius on Matthew: 28. Why? Because Jesus died for our sins.
Therefore Jesus is the name above every name; so Theophylact: So Master Prinne
is deceau'd in his own Aurhors.

Objection 3.
These arguments taken from the compare of Jesus his several Attributes are
disputed in the 3. argument of the letter of the text. Yet the daring
Attributist cannot choose, but come to repetitions. Thus: Emmanuel is the name
above every name. For this signifies Jesus to be God, equal to the Father, and
the Holy Ghost; to be God with us, to us, and in our nature. And this then is
the name in substance above every name:

Solution.
Then Emmanuel is in substance our Saviors Greatest name. Without question
Emmanuel signifies the greatest Substance in the world, which is God, and God
incarnate. The Holy Ghost is witness. Matthew. 1. 23. But which was Jesus his name
most Reviled, and exalted, and therefore above every name? In that Relative
sense Master Prinne is silent. And yet that is the meaning of Philip. 2. That
therefore Jesus is exalted above every personal deserving name: because his
person was most dishonored in the name of Jesus. Master Prinne might have
learned this note of learned Bishop Andrews, if he had in him True Christian
humility, to follow so worthy a Guide: whose note it is, that all the Fathers
except Origin upon Philip. 2. say: that Jesus his most deserving humility is
the cause, why Jesus is exalted above every name, and that so much, as that at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: and on chap. 2. of Saint Luke, and Rom:
14. there Origin says that we must Bow at the name of Jesus, because he was
humble.

Objection 4.
Intercessor is the name, which Jesus has gained since his exaltation, to sit
on his Fathers Right hand, and intercede for us, 1. Tim: 2, 5. Therefore this
is the name above every name.

Solution
By baptism Jesus was bound to be our Intercessor, to fulfill all
righteousness. Matthew: 3. And he still lives to make Intercession for us by
his prayers. Heb: 7, 23, 24. This then is the doctrine of that text: That Jesus
is the All Glorius Priest, a glorified Intercessor: In this world he was the
gracious Intercessor, the deserving Mediator, and therefore he is now preferred
to be the glorious Intercessor. This argument smells of Popery. For Jesus our
high Priest, as intercessor is not Sovereign Lord of the Church Triumphant,
and militant, but Jesus as King of kings, and Lord of Lords: at whose exalted
name Jesus every knee shall bow. This is that Jesus, whom the 4 Beasts cease
not to worship day, and night, saying Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, which is, and which is to come: Before whom the 23 Elders fall
down, and worship, and cast their Crowns before his Throne. Revel. 4. 8. 9.
10. This is He, to whom the kings of the earth shall bring their glory, and
honor. Revel. 21. 24. Yet the Puritans suppose his name Jesus to be but a
nominal consisting of five letters. What pretending simple ones are these, and
yet they are very malicious, to accuse our Church for worshipping this bare
Articulate Jesus, as if they were the five letters, to whom we bow, and whom we
confess to be the Lord.

Objection. 5.
The highest name is supremacy. But Jesus is not supremacy. The head of the
Church is supremacy. Ephesians. 1. 20. 21.

Solution.
Jesus is head of the Church. Ephesians. 1, 20, 21. He is supreme commander: a
supremacy above heaven, and earth. Jesus is called (Wonderful) in his works.
Counselor in the laws of heaven. The mighty God in his Omnipotence. The
everlasting Father: for he is the resurrection, and the life restoring the
dead. The Prince of peace: for he has reconciled God, and sinners. The
blessed: For he is all glory. The only Potentate: for he is the only commanding
Lord. Emmanuel, the only begotten son of God, The King of kings; all
Creatures are his subjects: The Lord of Lords: for all are his servants. He is
the head of the Church: for the Church is his body, which he makes to live, to
move, and to be in essence. Is Jesus so great a governor, and commander, and
has he humbled himself to save sinners, and will some refuse to bow at the
name of Jesus, being thereunto commanded? Are our knees blessed, our heads, our
souls, and bodies, because Jesus died the death of the Cross? And shall not
we honor Jesus with all manner of honor, internal, and external? Imperious
ingratitude! The bowing of the outward man is a lesser duty, then bowing of the
inward man. He then that will not perform the lesser, may very well be
suspected for neglecting the greater duty. He that is so stiff in the knee,
and so heady in the hat, is masterles at the heart. Jesus is no Master, no
Lord, no King over such. These are the men, whom no Lord must control, psalm:
12. These will rather break, than bow: Away with such insufferable contumacy.

Objection. 6.
Here is understood Lord, only Lord to be the name above every name, which
runs in the Genitive case. And every tongue shall confess, that Jesus is the
Lord: and this is the opinion of the ancient, and modern Commentators on this
Text: and Jesus is the Genitive case, which denotes the person of Jesus.

Solution.
This Genitive case-argument is answered at the 2 argument concerning the
letrer of the text. That Lord is the only name here understood is twice
disputed before in this Question at a fourthly and fifthly. But let Mr Prinne
note, whether this proposition be true: Jesus is the Lord: and being granted
to be true, let him say, if he can, which is the nomen significans, which is
the subject of the proposition: if Jesus be not. And it is certain that Jesus
is the highest personal name for merit: That King of Kings and Lord of Lords
are his titles of honor: and that every knee must not bow to the titles of
Honor, but to the most Renowned Person: and so not at those names, but at this
proper personal name once reviled. For only Jesus is the Finis cui, the
personal end of bowing.

Here note that Master Prinne has said all this, to contradict Jesus, the
Personal End, for whose honors sake we bow at his name Jesus in time of divine
service: for rewards, or titles of honor receive not honor, for they are
honors given. Now in that, which follows, he would make his private friends
believe, that he will teach the real meaning of the text, or else he has
forgotten himself, this being a Question concerning the meaning of Philip, 2.
different from the literal meaning, which is a part of the letter, if the
letter has any signification. And I believe, that he is on the literal
meaning here at this part of his Appendix. For there are tres species three
kinds of the dictionall, or literal meaning: this is true metaphysically,
according to participation of essence, though the vulgar division Entis
rationis in scripturis, of the written word of God be literal, and figurative.
These are the three species: 1. is grammatical: 2. is rhetorical, whereof
metaphorical is a part, 3. is logical. Only metaphorical bowing at the name
of Jesus, He says, is understood at Philip: 2, 10. This dispute begins at a
Secondly, which has no reference to a First place, expressed in the Appendix.
This is to dispute sine capite without an head. But is bowing at the name of
Jesus metaphorical, figurative, and so dictionall? Certainly it is real: for
it is essential, a real subordination of the knee to a religious heart in the
state of grace: and in the time of glory every knee, spiritual, and corporeal
shall really bow. Besides this real essence, Bowing at the name of Jesus
depends on real causes. The 1. is Gods command, which requires the Church to
bow, for all knees are commanded, which are the knees of things in heaven, of
things in the earth etc: then bowing etc. is lawful. The 2. is Jesus his
merit, which is the Holy Ghosts reason, and it is a necessary reason, because
it is just, that Jesus be rewarded with all honor, and therefore with
knee-honour. The 3. is the love, and honor, and glory of Jesus, which we owe
to him; this is the end of bowing, which makes it commendable. Master Prinne
then must be followed, in his own way, that essential, and demonstratiue
arguments may overtake him, and bind him to his good behavior, because he
says, that this bowing at the name of Jesus is metaphorical. But our knees
are not metaphorical, but substances, corporeal, organicall, and obedient. He
says, that bowing etc. is one, and the same in all creatures: and yet all have
not knees alike. He says, that bowing etc. is subjection of all creatures to
Jesus at the last day, only at the last day. But our Church does now testify,
that Jesus is the Lord now in the time of grace with bowing of the knee: and is
this a sin against any law of God? Obstante Prinne, this is a duty of the
text.

Objection. 7.
This kind of bowing in Philip 2. 10. is metaphorical. For it is not the
external Civil Reverence, which is due only to man. Genesis 19, 2. and 33, 6, 7.
etc. 2ly this bowing is not divine worship or Adoration, which is due only to
God. Genesis 18, 2. and 24, 26, 48. 3ly nor is it prayer, which we perform with
bended knees. Psalm: 95. 6. Ephesians: 3. 14. For the Devils, the damned, and
Infidels do not adore, nor pray to Jesus. But this bowing is the bowing of all
things Philip: 2. 10. of all things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth.
And what can that be, but the subjection of creatures to Christ at the last
day, above whom he is exalted. The last day is only the time, when Philip: 2.
10. shall be literally fulfilled. Therefore it is only that Subjection, therefore
it is a metaphorical bowing.

Solution.
This Argument is 5th argument of the letter of the text: and twice a fourthly
in this Question. But here note that this bowing at the name of Jesus, now
Questioned is external divine worship in our Church; it is adoration: and now
Master Prinne may know what kind of bowing, bowing at the name of Jesus is.
There is adoration inward and outward at Esaias 45, 23. and at Rom: 14. 11. Esaias
45. is not understood of bowing at the last day: for there the text teaches
Gods people to forsake Idols, and bow, or give worship to him. But when? not
till the last day? Rom: 14. 10. teaches, that we must all stand before Gods
Judgment seat, that he only is Judge, and therefore we must not Judge one an
other: at the 11. verse, that we worship him, because he is the Lord. And
Philip. 2. teaches the merit of Jesus rewarded. How? that every kneeshall bow
at the name of Jesus. Therefore the Church having learned her duty, that now
Jesus is to be acknowledged to be the King far above all dominion,
Principality, and Power, she bows the knee with all humity, and reverence, to
manifest her bounden duty, and to testify, that it is Gods command, that he be
more honored in the name of Jesus, than in any other name of his. This is the
reason of vayling, and bowing the knee at the exalted name Jesus. It Is easy to
be deduced from Philip: 2, and more, than at Esaias, 45. and Rom: 14, and
therefore we must bow more, than is required by these texts. But how that can
be, see the uncovering of the Head, and bowing of the knee, not only at prayer,
but at reading, and preaching our faith, which is in the Lord Jesus. Philip: 2.
teaches that we must be humble in the practice of grace, and how we must be
humble: That we must bow at the name of Jesus. That text teaches the
Philippians, that all knees must bow. And then ought not that Church, and every
Church collect this doctrine; That the knees of the Church universal must bow
at the name of Jesus? Saint Paul did not teach the Philippians: that they
should not bow till the last day: but his words are, that they should be
presently humble verse the 5. Neither did he teach them, that their knees were
Angels knees, which do now bow in Heaven. Revel. 4: but that all things must
bow their own knees; and therefore the militant Church must bow her knees, at
the name of the Lord Jesus. The Diuils do bow, for they have their bounds,
which they cannot pass. It were answer sufficient, to deny, that all
creatures bow in the same particular, or proper way. And that they must only
bow at the last day, the 15 scriptures which M. Prinne has alleged, do not
prove. Romans 14, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12. do not teach that all, creatures must only
bow at the last day. Nor Ephesians. 1, 20, 21, 22. nor Revel. 1, 7. nor Revel. 5.
from ver. 8, to the end of the chapter. nor Revel. 20, 11. 12. 13. nor Matthew.
28. 18. nor 1 Cor. 15. v. 24, 25, 27, 28. nor Heb. 2. 7, 8: nor 1 Pet. 3, 22.
nor Ioh. 17. 2: nor Acts 10. 36. nor Coloss. 1. 17, 18. nor 1 Cor. 8, 5, 6. nor
Esaias 45, 22, 23. nor Daniel 7. 14. Not one of these, nor any other Scripture
says, that the Church and all other creatures must bow at the name of the Lord
Jesus only at the last day. It is a common saying that a Puritan will not
swear; and why he should falsify these 15 Scriptures, no man can give any
Godly Christian reason.

And he has not only falsified the Scriptures, that all creatures shall bow at
the name of Jesus only at the last day, but also the Fathers, and others.
These: Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenaeus, Tertullian, St Cyprian, Origin,
Athanasius, St Hilary, Theophilus Antiochenus. St Basil, Nazianzen, Greg.
Nyssen, S. Ambrose. St Hierome, St Cyrill of Jerusalem, St Chrysostom, St
Augustine, Theophilus Alexandrinus, Primasius, Sedulius, Rhemigius, Beda,
Haymo, Anselme, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Paulus Orosius, Leo,
Chrysologus, Fulgentius, St Damascen, Isidor. Hispalensis, St Bernard, Pope
Caius, Surius, John 2 Pope, Synod of Francford under Adrian, Alexander Alensis,
Aelredus, Aquinas, Peter Lombard, Gorran, Bruno, Salmeron, Estius, Glossa
Ordinaria, Lyra, Calvin, Musculus, Bullinger, Marlorat, Zanchius, Gualter,
Olevian, Beza, Aretius, Hyperius, Hunnius, Tyndall, Dr Fulke, Mr Cartwright,
and Dr Airay on Philip. 2. 10. Iunius, Ferus, Luther, Konigstein, Sarcerius,
Avenarius, Matthaeus, Chrytaeus, D. Boys, Cutbert Tonstall, B. Babington, D.
Whitaker, Mr Perkins, Mr Charke D. Willet: here are 80 Authors, aut eo
circiter. And is it not a shameless boldness to falsify so many, a sign of a
brazen face, of an impudent Scribler. He says that bowing is only at the last
day, and that bowing at the name of Jesus is subjection, but not adoration. But
Mr Prinnes Authors say, that bowing at Philip. 2. is adoration; so S. Hierome
and Oecumenius in Phil. 2. Omnes hominem simul adorent in Deum assumptum, and
Primasius has the same words: we must altogether adore the humanity of Jesus
assumed unto his Godhead. This Bowing is a figure intensae, and vehementis
adorationis, of that perfect, and earnest adoration, when Angels bow to Jesus:
D. Chrysostom. hom. 32. in 1 Cor. 12. It Is follicitae, and humillimae adorationis
indicium. Theophilus Alexandrinus in Epist. 2. Pascali in Bibliotheca Patrum
387. Margarinus. Bowing, etc. is a token of a solicitous and most humble
prayer. Adorabunt te, and in te orabunt, so St Cyrill of Alexandria lib. 2.
cap. 2. in Hesaiam, this bowing is adoration, and invocation. Humilis subiectio
and adoratio, so Sedulius in Philip: it is subjection and adoration. A bowing
with invocation, so Rhemigius. In in vocatione nominis Jesus, Haymo. It Is bowing
in time of Prayer. Evidens signum subiectionis: humilitas and veneratio, so
Anselme in Philip. 2. It Is an evident sign of subjection, humility and worship.
In hoc nomine, deitatis tota adoratur maiestas. Chrysologus ser. 144. To bow at
the name of Jesus, is the adoration of the whole Majesty of God, because Jesus
is the one and only God, therefore we must bow, so Fulgentius in his 10
answer to the Arians objection, It Is reverence, so Peter Lombard. It Is reverence
or adoration so Thomas Aquinas. It Is divine worship, which by a synecdoche is
called bowing with the knee, so Salmeron. It Is the glory of Christians, so St
Bernard in his ser. de passione Domini, page 57. Obtemperare, agnoscere,
adorare, haecomnia genuum flexione hoc loco significantur. Sic part e
contraria, genua non flectere, est aliquem non colere, and habere Deum Dominum,
so Avenarius de Christi exaltatione page 625. To bow, is to obey, acknowledge,
to worship Jesus: not to bow is no worship, nor having him for their Lord God.
It Is reverence, which Angels and men ought to give, etc. so Konigstein in
Postilla in Dominica Palmarum. So then according to the essence of Bowing, it is
not only subjection to Jesus at the last day: Mr Prinnes Authors have said
this, though M. Prinne says, that they teach bowing to be nothing but
subjection at the last day.

2 This bowing is inward and outward worship: this St Hieromes notable full
place teaches; although M. Prinnes marginall note does seem to prove the
contrary. These are his words. Haec spiritualiter exponentes non statim iuxta
literam, orandi consuetudinem tollimus, qua Deum genu posito suppliciter
adoramus, and fixo in terram poplite: magis quod ab ^oposcimus, impetramus.
Legimus enim Paulum in littore sic ^rasse, and geniculationes in oratione
praeceptas: sed sicut illud aedificat simplices, sic veram geniculationem esse
docemus in animo: quia multi Coporale flectentes genu, animae nequaquam
poplitem curvaverunt. Et contra alij erecto Deum corpore deprecantes magis se
animo curuaverunt. S. Hierome in Ephesians. 3. Saint Hierome would that the simple
be instructed to bow at prayers, as S. Paul did with soul and body, and not to
bow the knee only, and not the heart: nor the heart only, and not the knee, as
some have been accustomed. S. Chrysostom teaches the same, Gloria omnino
haec apud vos est, flecti genua, etc. S. Chrysostom commends the Heretics
for bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, and his desire is, that they should
believe and profess, that he is God Almighty, equal to the Father. S.
Chrysostom in Phil. 2. Calvin, Musculus, Bullinger, Marlorat, Zanchius, etc,
upon the text, give inward and outward worship to the Lord Jesus. So in the
second place according to the two kinds of bowing, bowing with the knee at the
name of Jesus, is proved to be religious according to more of Prinnes good
Authors: But how they are good for him, he cannot be sensible nor
intellectual: for neither sense nor reason calls nothing at all (and so
nothing to the purpose) a proof; nor a false quotation, a true and good
Authority.

3 Some of M. Prinnes authors give the reason, why all knees must bow at the
name of Jesus; propter meritum, and praemium, because Jesus has deserved, and
God has rewarded his merit. Quid and quantum humilit as mereatur, ostendit. Si
homo Deo Patri obedivit, quid magnum est, quod dixit Apostolus? Sed hoc magnum
dicit, quia cum eo aequalis esset, obedivit S. Ambrose in Philip. 2. The text
shows what, and how much honor Jesus his humility deserves, and therefore is
it too great an honor, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow? The
obedience is equal to that reward, because Jesus equal with God, did humble
himself, and obey, Because Jesus was obedient, etc. Therefore the name above
every name was given. S. Aug. lib. 1. de Trinitate cap. 13. fol. 25. Jesus
deserved, therefore he was rewarded S. Aug. tract, 105. on S. John. Quem Deus
posuit Propitiatorem in sanguine suo, vt in nomine eius omne genu curvetur: so
Paulus Orosius in Apolog. de Arbitrij liberate: in bibliotheca Patrum, page
148. H. N. because Jesus shed his blood for us, therefore we must bow. Quia
Dominus Jesus Christus est in gloria Patris, etc. Leo ser. 1. Mensis 10. and 6.
ser. de ieiunio, 7 mensis. Jesus is glorified, therefore we bow: and not only
for his glories sake, but also for his merits: Ser. 1. etc. So in Ser. 9. Cap.
2. in nativitate Domini, and in 11. decretali Epist. Meruit Exaltari, etc.
Fulgentius, lib. 3. ad Transimundu^ Regem cap. 34. Jesus deserved this bowing.
The same say all the Fathers, which repeat the Apostles words, which is an
evidence of our Saviors merit: these authors are mentioned in the state of the
question concerning the letter of the text. And now Jesus has power, and
authority ouerall creatures, and they are all subject to him, but the only time
is not the last day: outward bowing is not denied him by the Fathers, which
teach his majesty and command, due to him for his merits sake over all the
World according to Philip. 2. viz. Athanasius loco 3. S. Hilary loco 2. and 3.
Theophilus Antiochenus, S. Basil, Nazianz. orat. 36. quae est secunda de
filio. Nyssen loco 1. S. Ambrose loco 4. S. Hierome loco 2. S. Bernard,
Rhemigius, Haymo in Phil. 2. Theophilact in Romans 14. Isidor. Hispalensis,
Surius, Synod Francford sub Adrian: Epist. Papae Adriani, Alexand. Alensis loco
1. Gorran in Philip, Salmeron, Lyra, and the Ordinary Gloss, Iunius in his
Paralells. Tuo iussu, and voluntate meipsum exinaniui, etc. Ferus in his
Annotations on S. John cap. 17. Jesus therefore prayed, to be glorified,
because he did obey, etc. Praemium humiliationis, and obedientiae. Sarcerius in
Epist: Dominica Palmarum. To bow is a reward of Jesus his humility. Then
recollect the Premises, and you cannot but affirm, that bowing at the name of
Jesus is necessary ex part causae, inferred by the necessity of its causes. A
good observation to teach M, Prinne knowledge, that scire is Per causam scire:
that bowing is certain, perspicuous, very necessary, and truly honorable,
ever proper to its subject, the Church, being an external worship, caused by
so meritorious a cause, as the death of Jesus, and commanded by so just, and so
true a rewarding Judge as God, who for his deaths sake did highly reward him,
and gave him a name above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow.

4 After the essence, species, and causes of bowing at the name of Jesus
according to M. Prinnes Authors, still according to practice and essence,
behold a real bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus, according to other of
his quotations. Flexibile genu, quo prae caeteris Domini mitigatur offensa, ira
mulcetur, gratia prouocatur, so S. Ambrose lib. 6. cap. 9. Hexameron. Bowing at
the name of Jesus, God does so well respect, that the bowers thereat are had in
much favor with the Lord, etc. Hoc jurat Dominus, quod idolis derelictis omne
genu ei flectatur, etc. Et moris est ecclesiastici Christo genu flectere, etc.
S. Hierome on Isaiah 45. There the same Father quotes Phil. 2. 10: and says
that the Church shall not bow to Idols, but to Jesus Christ: and behold the
obedience of the Church, it is customary with her so to bow. S. Augustine in his
123 Question on Genesis, teaches that the Church must so bow to Jesus, as
Joseph's Brethren did to him, etc. and venerable Bede has the same words.
Parere. so Sarcerius. This bowing is to obey the power of the Lord Jesus. It Is
subjection, submission, and obedience of all creatures. B. Babington. A
subjection, and obedience to the service of God: so the same author out of
Origin. We dare not so much as speak of an earthly King vnreverently, what
reverence then do we owe unto Christ the King of Heaven and earth? Thus M.
Perkins on Philipp 2, in his exposition of the Creed. Page 309. And is not
bowing then real in the practice of the Church, and in the essence of Bowing.

5 Note that not one of M. Prinnes authors does expound bowing, etc. only of
subjection at the last day: and some do not expound it at all, S. Ambrose in
his last place says neither that bowing is due at the last day, nor expounds
it of subjection: but that Jesus is the glory of his Father, and that there is
but one glory of the Father, and the son, per communem substantiam, and
virtutem in substance and power, and that the humanity is equal: so he
proves the son to be higher then the Angels in glory. S. Chrysostom. on Phil.
2. speaks nothing of subjection, at the last day. Nor S. Hierome at his
excellent full place in Ephesians. 3. nor at Esaias 45. S. Aug. lib. 1. cap. 13. de
Trinitate says, that the name above every name is given Christ according to
his humanity: and so on 109 Psalm: and in his 2 book cap. 2: contra
Maximinium: Christo homini mortuo, Christo per carnem resurgenti, ascendenti
donauit nomen. To Christ, dead, risen, and ascended, God gave the name. S.
Cyrill of Alexandria lib. 5. in Hesaiam cap. 55. page 362. says to the
humanity which was in esteem ignoble, the name above every name was given: and
in his first place quoted he expounds not Philip. 2. Theophilact speaks not
of subjection at the last day, on Phil. 2. Pope Caius teaches to which nature
of Christ the name above every name was given. Cyrill Athanat. 6. Theodoret and
Theophilact say that all must bow, but not only at the last. Paulus Orotius
says that all shall bow at the last day: but not only at the last day. S.
Damascen says, that there was bowing at hearing the Preaching of Jesus, and at
his descent into hell. Beza speaks not of subjection. Gualter on Philip. 2.
notes only our Saviors humility, and says seeing that he in whom was all
good was humble, therefore we in whom there is no good must be rather humble.
Olevan speaks of the multiplicity of the glory of Jesus: and to bow the knee
is one glory given to the Lord. Konigstein in festo ascensionis, says Jesus is
exalted above all creatures. D. Airay says, that now all creatures are subject
to him in 31 lector on Philip. page 357. True it is, that Bowing with the knee
at the name of Jesus is a custom, which has been much used, and may without
offense be retained, when the mind is free from superstition. He speaks
against bowing at the bare sound, and says to bow, and know not what the name
means, is superstition. So then they that know, that Jesus at Phil: 2.
signifies the Lord Jesus, may and ought now to bow: so the same Doctor in the
words following. Hyperius writes thus: Genu flectere significat sese
submittere, superiorem agnoscere, denique and adorare. To bow the knee,
signifies a submission too, and acknowledging of Jesus to be above us, and
adoring of his Majesty, power, and glory. Hunnius de persona Christi p. 145.
says that Philip. 2. proves Jesus to be God, and in his tract de
indulgentiis, p. 1552, that Jesus is exalted; Bruno on Phil. says, that all
shall bow at the last day; but only then he says not. M. Cartwright against
the Rhemists says, it is false, that we will have no reverence given to the name
of Jesus: and afterward he quarrels as much as any Puritan against Jesus,
except the vain Catalogue* Quoter. D. Fulke speaks thus. It may be used well,
when the mind is free from superstition in sign of reverence to his Majesty,
and as in a matter, wherein Christian liberty ought to have place, so that
Doctor And the service of Jesus is perfect freedom, and shall we then not bow?
Flectitur, etc. Peter Lombard in Phil. Every knee does now bow.

6 The name at Phil. 2. must be bowed to. For by essence it is God. God is the
name, so Tertullian. Nazianz. 2. orat. de filio, S. Ambrose loco vltimo,
Oecumenius. This name is the son of God. Sedulius, Oecumenius, Peter Lombard,
Bonaventure, etc. This name is Majesty and Power, so Hyperius. Honorificentia
so Bruno. Honor, or worship. It Is power, Glory, Honor, and Authority above all
powers, etc. so B. Babington in his exposition on the Creed page 245. It Is fama
so Sarcerius. The fame, credit, or worthiness of Jesus, The only begotten
son, so Konigstein. It Is Jesus so Haymo on Phil. 2. Chrysol. ser. 145.
Alexander Alensis. Only Jesus is the deserving name. If the Arians, and
Nestorians, who questioned our Saviors deity, must be answered: then God is
his name. If Christians must be taught, what is his name above every name, then
the answer with reference to his merit must be, that only Jesus is his
meritorious, and his exalted name. This answer let M. Prinne observe in his
reply, if he be able and ought, to write again, against the truth, 1. so
essentially, 2. so specifically, 3. so demonstratiuely, 4. so practiquely, 5.
so testimonially, 6. so really, and nominally made more then customarily known
by his own quoted authors.

7 Besides falsifying of the of Authorities, by exclusive sense, Mr Prinne has
his simple false Quotations in his 80 times long Catalogue. 1. Hezaem for
Hexamer^^n. in Saint Ambros. 2. Theophylact Alexandrinus is no Author but
Theophylus Alexandrinus 3. Saint Cyrill in his 5. lib. in Hesaim. cap. 55. page
362. is non ens, so is his cited place on St John. lib. 17. cap. 17. 20. 22.
for he has writ but 12. books on Saint John: and lib: 13. Thesauri is a false
quotation: 4. Primasius says nothing on Rom: 14. 5ly Pope Gaia there is non,
but Gaius or Caius there is, 6ly Leo his 14th 81, and 95. Decretal Epistles are
false Quotations. So is Aelredus in ser. 1. in Isai. 13: and Tyndall; for he
has only a Prologue to the Philip: and mentions not bowing. Neither Luther nor
Feras, has a Postill on palm Sunday. Pet. Matthaeus writes the sum of the
Pops constitutions: and Phil. Matthaeus writes civil law: Chrytaeus has no
postill on Palm Sunday. Komingstein is no uuthor, but Koneigstein is, Cutbert
Tonstall, a Bishop, and Master Charke a Kentish Paritan do not say, that the
Church must bow at the name of Jesus only at the last day. It Is strange, that M.
Prinne does quote D. Boys, and Zanchius for Avouchers of his opinion. Is he so
forgetful of his division, to prove bowing etc. to be nothing, where he says
that Zanchius, and Doctor Boys hold that bowing at Philip: 2. is a ceremony
etc. but not an Indifferent ceremony, as Master Prinne reports. By this time
you see how truly Master Prinne has confirmed this denying of bowing at the
name name of Jesus in the time of Grace, by good Authors. Only at the last day
his Tenet he will prove, and if he be so tedious, he should not have dared to
write till then: so he might have saved his Credit, which now is lost in so
many falsifications. How many? 80. or there abouts? There are 15.
Scripture-chapters: but there are particular quoted texts of chap: 36. There
are 80. Interpreters, or very nigh so many, but their particular cited places
are 120. at least. For ought any solid scholar can read, and observe out of
these scriptures, and Interpreters, Master Prinne might have quoted Saint
Whetston, if there be any such alive, or intombed, as well for his purpose, as
these. If he would make this evasion, that he says not, that bowing shall be
only at the last, but only principally at the last day; he has showed himself
to be a fighter with the aier, and his disputations to be vain, and Idle, for
that is not the thing in Question, but whether bowing be a duty according to
the meaning of the text, whether now in the time of Grace we must bow at the
name of Jesus.

These are his Propositions comparing bowing of Grace with the bowing of Glory.
1 THat bowing of the Church is an actual Corporal bowing peculiar to men,
who have knees to bow. But this bowing in the text is metaphorical, which
Angels, Spirits, and men yield to Christ.

Reply.

Do Angels bow metaphorically? Surely they bow and shall bow actually. For
they bow spiritually, really: they do in deed exercise potentiam
obedientialem their obedientiall Bowing Power in a super-morall perfection. And
if actual Corporal bowing be peculiar unto men: why then shall not they bow
their corporal, organicall knees. God commands every creature to bow those
knees, which he has: Shall man make answer: the Angels have noe corporal
knees, and therefore men will not bow their knees? Is this a good answer, do
you think? It can never please God. For God requiring according to that, which
a man has, will not be mocked.

1 That Bowing of the Church is adoration. This in the text is Subjection.

Reply.

Adoration in the state of grace is a subjection: or else to to adore were not a
bowing: and so Christians should be noe worshippers of God. And who are they,
but knee-bound Hypocrites? None else are so vnreverent.

3 That bowing of the Church is only a bowing of living men. This of Angels,
Devils, and fowls departed. That only of Christians in the Church. This both
of Christians in, and of Infidels, Jews, Pagans, out of the Church. That only
of some few Christians, and they for ^^e most part Papists etc. This of all.

Reply.

The time of Grace is not to be compared with the time of Glory comparatione
aequiparentiae at the last day. The number of them, which shall then bow, is
greater by many thousands. But does this infer, that there shall be no bowing
at the name of Jesus, but only then? Shall Grace be vnreuerent, and not bow?
Credat Iudaeus Apella. Who but an Infidel, will believe that false supposition?
Master Prinne says that bowing at the name of Jesus, is the practice of
Papists, ignorant, superstitious Persans, that it is a new coined duty. But our
Church does bow at the name of Jesus, to testify, that Jesus Christ is the
Lord, the glory of God the Father: and let this direct the ignorant, and
reform the Papist, and Puritan, Is this new-coynd service? It Is so ancient, as
Saint Paul's Epistle to the Philippians: For that is the ground precept of
Bowing:

4 That bowing of the Church is only at the name. This is to the Person.

Reply.

This is so true, as if Jesus were not the name of Jesus, or not understood,
and acknowledged to be the name of that King of Kings.

5 That bowing of the Church is not joined with this confession: Jesus is the
Lord. This bowing is joined.

Reply.

The bowing at the name of Jesus is an implicit Confession, that Jesus is the
Lord, so B. Andrews. And I advise all well beloueing Christians, to believe
the 18 Canon of our Church rather then all Prinnes, then all the
Non-conformists, at what place soever. For the Canon teaches, that bowing at
the name of Jesus is a testifying, or confessing that Jesus is the Lord. Me
thinks that the regenerate (if learned) do know, that holy worship has so
necessary dependence on Grace, that the contrariety, and contradiction of man's
will must not make a professed change of, and a diverting from pious worship,
and religious perseverance. Jesus has and does always perform his part of
covenant: He is always merciful. And the regenerate must perform his part of
Gods covenant. He must depend on the cause, on the author of habitual, and
actual grace, in applying, and employing himself in all religious obedience
too, and for the Lord Jesus. For quifecit te sine te, non vult servare te sine
te: he that made thee without thee, will not save thee, if thou be disobedient.
Jesus is thy head, and shall thy peevish will separate thee from Jesus. His
Church then must excommunicate thee: and extra eccle siam non est salus, out of
the Church there is no salvation: and which is that Church, Read learned B.
Mortons book entitled The Grand Imposture of the Church of Rome: a book
which no Jesuit nor Jesuitical College can confute.

Whether bowing at the name of Jesus be an indifferent harmless, and decent
ceremony.

CEremonies of State, I commend to Heralds at Arms, and their adherents.
Moral ceremonies, an uncovered head, a courteous speech, a bended body, and
knee, let the Moralist take, to signify his courteous heart, wishing all
happiness to the person saluted, etc. Nor may I here speak of every outward
sign: for the signs, which did signify Christ to come, were the Jews
Typical ceremonies, and they are abolished. And the signs, which do signify
Jesus dead for sins, are the two Sacraments: nor are these signs of Christ's
death, within the letters of this question. The Ceremony here to be discussed,
is the Ecclesiastical ceremony; which I define thus. An ecclesiastical
ceremony is a decent, and orderly sign of the Regenerats or Churches signified
duty.

Every Church-ceremony is a sign. For compare a moral ceremony with a moral
substantial duty, and then it is but a resemblance. Compare a moral ceremony
with a Christian internal moral duty signified, and it is but a ^^gne, which
must be decent. Thus: morally signifying a comely correspondence to the duty
signified. And this sign must be orderly, an orderly sign according to rule,
and method. The rule must be the scripture, or some rational rule, not
contrary to scripture. The method must be perfect, the reason of the Author
without exception. There must be no confusion, but a certain, and perspicuous
signification. There must not be ouer-many, nor to few ceremonies, but a
convenient number: their signification must be apposite, to the purpose, which
is religion.

Some decent, orderly fignes are universal ordained for the whole Church:
These are, either express scripture, as imposition of hands Heb: 6, 2, Acts:
8, 17, The 2, Is a man uncovered in the Church at prayer and Sermon 1. of Cor.
11. 4. 7. the third is loud musical instruments Psalm. hence Organes and Bells
are used in the Church. 4. Bowing at the name of Jesus. Phil. 2. 10. and many
such like. These are necessary ceremonies, because they signify the
substantial internal duty of the Catholic Church.

Other ceremonies are necessarily deducted from Scripture. The first, the ring
in marriage is deduced from Mat. 19. ver. 4. 5. 6. from this principle: Man and
wife are no more twain but one flesh: therefore the ring in Marriage is given
for a sign of that perpetual unity. The sign of the cross is deduced from
Mat. 16. 24. from this duty: He that will be the disciple of Jesus, must take
up his cross and follow him, therefore the cross after Baptism, is given for
a sign to signify a professed willingness, to endure any affliction for Jesus
his sake. The third, to kneel at receiving the Lords supper, is deducted from
our kneeling at prayer, Psalm. 95. 6. Therefore because we must say Amen to
this prayer, in most humble manner: viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
preserve both body and soul to Everlasting life: Therefore kneeling is the
appointed ceremony, of our humble, reverent, and faithful receiving. The
fourth is Procession, whi^^ is deduced from Mat. 28. 19. from this duty: Go,
and teach all Nations. Therefore Procession is given for a sign of obedience
to this precept: that, we go to our utmost appointed parish bounds, and read
the Gospel. The 5. the surplesse is deducted from Revel. 19. 8. from the
analogy of the righteousness of faith, with the righteousness of the Saints in
Heaven: therefore the white surplesse is given for a ceremony. The sixth, is
standing at the Creed, deducted from Ephesians. 6. 14. being a sign of standing
there to our faith. The seventh is the 4 cornered cap deduced from
vnmoueablenesse in the faith, at Ephesians. 4. ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. Quadrangulare
difficulter mobile: A four cornered body is hard to be moved: the 4 cornered
cap signifies vnmoueablenesse and so it is a sign. The seventh is the
penitenti^ll sheet deducted from Mat. 11. 21. from the analogy of repentance
in sackcloath and ashes. Therefore the white sheet is appointed for a sign of
the like repentance. These signs which are express Scripture, are universal,
and so necessary ceremonies of the Catholic Church, as the first four, and
so are all ceremonies, which are pregnantly deduceable out of holy Writ. It Is
more then probable that the Church, being rational, able to give a reason of
her moral significant ceremonies, took these Scriptures, etc. to be the rule
and ground of her ceremonies.

Besides the universal, there are particular, decent, orderly ceremonies,
which are not one and the same in all countries: so our 34 Article. Neither
their matter, nor form is commanded in the text. Against the text they must
not be: and they must be convenient, decent, and orderly for the countries and
times, and men's manners, where they are established: thus they are harmless
ceremonies. These particular ceremonies are no duties of the text: but St Paul
requires that they be decent and orderly. These are the indifferent ceremonies,
indifferent for matter, as an hairecloath or sackcloath, or some other vile
cloth might be the ceremony of penance, as well as the white sheet.
Indifferent for color, for as white analogically signifies pureness of faith
so suppositiuely gray signifies seniority, black, mortification: Scarlet, the
vndauntednesse of mind, etc. Here then is variety: and every country may choose
his color. But I call no particular ceremonies so indifferent, as that a man
may or may not use them pro suo Arbitrio, as he will himself. He must use
them being thereunto commanded. Every soul must be subject to the Higher
Powers in these things, which are not contrary, nor in part contradictory to
Gods word; be they ceremonies, be they what they are: they must be observed for
conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. And although some ceremonies are indifferent, in
respect of coveniency or aptness of signification: yet you must understand,
that they are necessary when they are commanded: and punishment must make them
necessary again, which indulgence makes to be but indifferent, or rather
presumption grounded on indulgence. The sum of all is this. The essence of
Church ceremony in genere in kind, is a moral sign; in correlation it is a
moral Christian duty signified: the formality is decency, and order: the
Author of ceremonies expressed in the new Testament is the Holy Ghost: the
author of ceremonies deducted from Scripture by pregnant consequence is the
Church, and these are, or ought to be the Ceremonies of the Church universal.

Ceremonies deducted from analogy of Scripture for the convenience of
Countries, times, and men's manners, are particular ceremonies. The use of all
ceremonies according to their nature, author, and end is harmless: for it is a
good, moral, decent, and orderly expression, of a signified duty, by a moral,
decent, and orderly sign. The property of no ceremony commanded is
indifferency: for command, and indifferency cannot, nor may they dwell
together. Must I repeat unto you in this place how bowing at the name of Jesus
is a duty of the text, and how it is a ceremony: Thus then: as it is an humble
obedience to this commanding Scripture, Phil. 2. 10. so it is a duty of the text.
As it is a moral decent and orderly sign of bowing of the heart at the name of
Jesus, manifested by the knee: it is a ceremony, a necessary ceremony, it should
never cease to be in any Church; it is an universal ceremony: for God requires
it in all Churches: not only for a day or a year, but for ever: so perpetual
are Gods moral commands. They that do not practice this bowing do diminish
somewhat from the scripture: and if they will not amend, let them expect a
judgment: The Scripture does direct them, where they may behold their
condemnation. These arguments following have no help in them, to deliver a man
from danger, which the disobedient may incur.

1 Bowing at the name of JESUS is no Ceremony.
Objection. 1.
EVery Ceremony is an Adiunct, or an Appendix to a form, or Circumstance of
any religious duty whatsoever. But bowing at the name of Jesus is no Adiunct
etc.

Solution.
Master Prinnes marginall note is that the Jews Ceremonies were types, or
shadows of Jesus Christ. Coloss: 2: 16, 17. Heb: 10, 1. but our ceremonies are
things appendant to religious duties etc. Where is Master Prinnes proof, that
bowing at the name of Jesus is not an appendent sign, or rather a dependant
sign on, and of a religious duty. Every Ceremony is a sign of a religious
duty. This is true. But the contrary is not true. For bowing at the name of
Jesus is the Christian moral sign of the Hearts worshipping of Jesus, exalted
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. The knee is a material sign, the manner of
bowing the knee in honor of Jesus, is decency, and order, because it is an
external humble reverence. This argument has proved nothing, but it is a bare
suppose.

Objection. 2.
Every ceremony has relation to some sacred Ordinance, or Religious duty, to
which it is appendant. As kneeling to prayer, Standing to the Creed. But bowing
at the name of Jesus has relation, neither to any sacred Ordinance, nor to any
Religious duty. Because it has immediate reference, to the very person of
Christ himself, not to the sound, or syllables of his name.

Solution.
This Argument is Mr Prinnes 2 Argument at the first Question, and the 4 in the
last Question. And let Mr Prinne learn, that bowing at the name of Jesus has
relation to a sacred Ordinance, and this is divine service, then only we bow:
and relation to a religious duty, which is the Hearts worshipping of Jesus, the
inward bowing; and relation immediately to the Person of Jesus, for he is the
Immediate finis cui, the exalted Lord, for whose Honors sake we bow.
Independent relation, what learned word is that Independent? Master Prinne
says, that bowing at the name of Jesus has immediate Independent relation to
the very person of Christ. Relation is a mutual dependence, if it be
essential; and bowing at the name of Jesus is dependent on the very Person of
Jesus, there it rests, as in its Center: or Personal End.

2 Assertion
The arguments which are produced, to prove it to be a necessary, or laudable
ceremony, do directly prove it, to be no ceremony, but a divine worship, or
Adoration peculiar unto Christ as God.

Objection, 1.
Bishop Andrews, Doctor Boys, Master Adams, and Master Widows etc. have
disputed the very letters, and syllables of Philip. 2. 10: to prove bowing at
the name of Jesus to be a necessary or laudable ceremony, but this argument
proves it to be a duty incident to the very name, and Person of Jesus:
therefore it is no naked, arbitrary Ceremony.

Solution.
Here observe that Master Prinne has contradicted the division of his first
argument, at the first Question. For there Bishop Andrews, and Master Adams
are the Teachers, as he says that bowing at the name of Jesus is a duty of the
text: and here again He says, that Doctor Boys, and Master Widows do
teach that bowing at the name of Jesus is an indifferent, harmless Ceremony.

Quo teneam vultum mutantem Protea Nodo? In my first answer there is Bishop
Andrews M. Adams etc. Tenet: which Master Prinne did falsify: And there is Dr
Boys and Giles Widows etc. assertion: all opposite to the intruding Divine.
But see a contradiction in this argument. D.r Boys etc. prove bowing at the
name of Jesus to be a necessary, or laudable ceremony, so Master Prinne: but
they hold that it is a naked arbitrary ceremony, so Master Prinne, As if
necessary were not opposite to indifferent: and laudable were not more
excellent than a bare Arbitrary ceremony.

Objection. 2
This bowing at the name of Jesus is to the person of Christ: therefore it is not
idolatry to bow at the name of Jesus. From this argument Mr Prinne concluds,
that the bowing at the name of Jesus, is no bare arbitrary ceremony because it is
done to the person of Christ.

Solution.
And I say that it is no arbitrary ceremony: because it is express Scripture: so
say all Orthodoxe divines: B. Andrews, Dr Boys, Mr Adams: Zanchius, etc. And
therefore it is a necessary ceremony; commanded by God himself* and for
Puritanicall contempt, which now despises this ceremony, our Church has
ordained the 18th Canon, to reform the wilful and ignorant.

Objection 3.
This is a forged reason, why Christians bow at the name of Jesus: This: To
justify, testify, and proclaim the deity of Christ, against Arians, Jews, and
Infidells, that deny it. No ancient Father ever said that this is true, nor
Council, etc.

Solution.
Here Mr Prinne does accuse Zanchius, Mr Hooker, and Dr Boys, of forgery. But
he is very grossly mistaken: though he has disputed this argument before, at
the first question, and first argument. For Athanasius contra Arianos orat. 2.
and in his Epistle to his brother Adelphius, does teach that we must bow to
testify that Jesus is God. The council of Ephesus consisting of 200 Fathers
says the same against Nestorius. Athanasius answers the Arians that
disputed, that Jesus is not God, because he died the death of the cross. Phil.
2. 8. Thus: That Jesus was put to death in the flesh, and the humanity exalted,
now he must be honored with this honor: At the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow: Nunc, and in posteris; for ever. The Fathers before quoted say the same.
Again, there is not the same reason, why we should bow at the name of the
Holy Ghost, though Heretics have denied, that he is God, as there is, why we
should bow at the name of Jesus: for the text says, because Jesus died the
death of the Cross, therefore every knee shall bow: so Jesus was really, more
really despised then the Holy Ghost, and a long time before Macedonius was an
Heretic. And why we bow at the name Jesus, rather then at any other of his
names: It Is answered at the 3 argument of the 2 question.

Objection. 4.
This reason of justifying, testifying, and proclaiming the deity of Jesus
against the Arians. etc. cease to be a reason, because none do openly deny
the deity of Jesus, as these Arians.

Solution
The Turks deny Jesus to be God, so do the Jews, who are not converted, and
other infidells, divillish Apostats. And the Puritans are no friends to Jesus,
and differ not much from Arians and Nestorians, in expounding of this text. His
name Jesus was not above every name with these, neither is it the highest name
with them. Jesus was most disgraced in this name Jesus: but what is that to
Puritans, they will worship him nothing the more for that? So then there is
cause, and shall be cause, why we must maintain bowing to the Worlds end. When
Jesus shall come to judgment, shall he find all faithful that are then alive?

Objection 5.
If this bowing be so great, as that every knee must bow: then this bowing is
the greatest of bowings: then it is a divine worship proper to Christ, then it is
no humane Constitution, which man can prescribe, then it is no arbitrary
ceremony.

Solution.
This bowing is so great, as the Text says, all knees shall bow at the name of
Jesus. And in a divine manner with reference to Jesus both God and man, all
knees at divine service do bow. The bowers at Jesus his name, do love him
above all things, and accordingly they do bow at his name. Thus this bowing is
above all other bowings. This is a bowing proper to God in man's nature, first
vilified, now exalted, and it is only due to Jesus, as he is exalted King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. It is beyond the sphere of man, to be the author of
this adoration: but the Church has power to reform the neglect of this bowing
at the name of Jesus: Hence the Church has instituted the 18 Canon to that
purpose.

Objection 6.
This bowing at the name of Jesus is not arbitrary: for many are urged to use
it, others are questioned for oppugning, and censured. But Mr Hooker, Dr Fulke,
and Mr Willet say that this Ceremony is arbitrary.

Solution.
Master Hooker says that bowing at the name of Jesus is harmless. He uses
not the words arbitrary ceremony. D. Fulke does commend it, and misliketh the
superstition at the name Jesus. Yet neither he, not Doctor Willet speak so
fully to this bowing as they might have done. But I tell you, and not I but
Orthodoxe Bishop Andrews that bowing at the name of Jesus is a necessary
ceremony. They that say, that this bowing is arbitrary in actu elicito as a
thing to be thought by any man for indifferent, are to be Questioned, and
Censured for Church Rebels. But questionles it is arbitrary actu imperato. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to the Church, to will and command, this
bowing at the name of Jesus

3 Assertion. Bowing at the name of Jesus is not an harmless ceremony.
Objection 1.
It Is no harmless ceremony. For it occasions much Idolatry in Papists, and
ignorant Protestants. The Papists do adore this name Jesus, as they do their
Images, Altars, Hoasts, Crosses, and Crucifixes. Ignorant Protestants do
worship the very naked name Jesus, or else Joshua, Iustus, or the son of
Sirach: and the Identity of the word Jesus deceaues the ignorant Protestant.

Solution.
Gods blessings do occasion some men to be covetous. And therefore king David
Prayed to the Lord: thus: Incline not my heart to covetousness. Psalm. 119.
Joseph the Lords chosen servant, occasioned his Brethren to sell him to the
Ishmaelites, Genesis 28. What then? Should neither Gods blessing, nor Joseph be;
because evil men did abuse them? This is strange doctrine. Jesus his name
occasions idolatry: (that is your Scandalum acceptum your peevish conceit:)
Must Jesus his name then be had in no honor? Must not the knee bow? I deny
that Prohibition. Do ignorant Protestants bow at the bare name Jesus? Then
they must be thus instructed: that they bow ever hereafter in token that Jesus
being despised by Jew and Gentile, is Jesus exalted, and acknowledged by our
Church to be the King of Heaven and Earth. Do ignorant Protestants bow at the
name of Jesus who is either Joshua, or Iustus, or Jesus, the son of Sirach, I
think in charity that no Protestant is so ignorant as to bow at the name of
Jesus the son of Sirach. For he is in the Apocrypha: But who ever did hear
of any man, that bowed at the name of Jesus in the old Testament or Apochrypha?
And did any man bow at the name of Jesus, who is Ioshuah, at reading the new
Testament? or at the name of Jesus who is called Iustus. Then let him learn
these notes. Jesus who is Joshua is only at Act: 7. 45. and at Heb: 4. 8. And
Jesus which is Iustus is read only at Coloss: 4. 11. The 2 former scriptures
are not so plain, as the last, to know the Jesus there signified. But
remember, that I have put you, and your Brethren in mind, where you must
forbear to bow at the name of Jesus. Do Papists committ Idolatry with their
Images, Altars, Crosses, and Crucifixes? This is Indirect Idolatry: so much I
have observed out of Bellarmines indirect worship of Images. Direct Idolatry is
a sin against this law: Thou shall have none other Gods but me. To bow down
before Images, Crucifixes, etc: is a sin against the second commandment. For
therein God has forbidden such worship. God will be worshipped according to his
own method, and rule, in spirit, and truth Ioh: 4. thus, according to his
own Method, which is the method of Grace, and no otherwise he will be
worshipped: therefore man's presuming worship must not be practiced. But the
adoration of the Host is Idolatry: it is a giving of the honor of the Creator
unto the Creature. And Transubstantiation is a gross sin. By a Popish
conceit, it is a Confusion of Jesus his glory, more Tyrannical, than the
pulling of Jesus his skin, over his ears. For Transubstantiation in termiuo
a Quo, is a separation of Jesus his All-glorious Essence from his most glorious
Inseparable Accidents: And in termino ad quem it is a confining Jesus under the
superficies of an inches length, and breadth: or thereabouts in their sacrament,
with more than a 1000 parricular contradictions. This is much like Master
Prinns separating the name Jesus from the signified Jesus: as if the name Jesus
had no signification, no sense, because a Perverse Humorist thinks so
ignorantly of unlearned Protestants, as if they did bow to the five letters.

Objection. 2.
It Is no harmless ceremony: For it occasioneth much palpable superstition, by
bowing at the name of Jesus only, and not at the name of God the Father, God
the Holy Ghost, God, Emmanuel, Lord, Jehovah, Savior, Son of God, Lamb of
God, Christ, Mediator, etc. All being Glorious, Reverend, Holy, Great etc.
Names, deserving as much Bowing, as the name Jesus does.

Solution.
This superstitious Argument is disputed in many arguments before, at handling
the scope of the text, and there it is answered, that Jesus is in Essence, and
Power, all these. But here is so much repeating of the same thing, as if Master
Prinne were in love with superstitious Tautology. If that first Move able be in
his mouth, his tongue can never stand still. And why then is Jesus so much
magnified? Because Jesus exinanivit se, did put of himself, etc. and God the
Father is so well pleased herein, that he has made this bowing, and this
confession to be his Glory, and Greatest delight.

Objection. 3.
It Is no harmless ceremony: for it makes a disparity in the sacred Persons, who
are coeternall, and coequall. For the Son is advanced above them; Because his
name Jesus is more honored than theirs.

Solution.
This Argument is disputed before: and Master Prinne is a fraide of the text.
But was either the Father, or the Holy Ghost so basely used as he. Will He ever
be talking and yet never speak to the Purpose? Tell me, what is the reason,
why Jesus is exalted, and so much exalted, that at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow? If He will be tongue tied now, I will tell him the reason, and I
would to God, that he would understand the text; which says. Because Jesus
was so humble as that he died the death of the Cross, that cursed death. Yet
He will not Bow. Why? Truly then he should dishonor the Father, and the Holy
Ghost: yet the Father and the Holy Ghost are so willing, that Jesus should be
honored with hat, knee, and heart, that they teach, and command, that as Jesus
was vilified with the knee: for the Jews bowed the knee, and mocked him.
Matthew. 27. 29. so the Church therefore must honor him with the knee, and bow
to their Almighty King Jesus. Our Savior says that He is in the Father, and
that the Father is in him: and and therefore he told Philip Ioh: 14. 9, 10.
That He, that had seen him, had seen the Father also. The three Persons are
but one God in substance: thus there is no disparity, no superaduancing: For
the same Substance is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who is thus reverenced,
worshipped, honored. St Aug: in his 14. lib. de Trinitate, as I remember calls
the three Persons, Relatiuam naturam, Gods relative nature. St Hierome in his
exposition of the Creed, calls the three Persons, tres proprietates, three
relative properties of God. And it is granted by Protestant, Papist, and Puritan
that the three persons are not three substances, but three Relative Modalities
of one, and the same Infinite, and most Merciful God. And because in the
Relation of a son he did humble himself to perform all, and the extremest
obedience for us: what shall hinder him to require our thankful, and most
humble heart, and knee-obedience, cheifely to magnify his deity, and humanity
in the name of Jesus God made this Person lower then the Angels to Crown him
with glory, and worship, so the Psalmist.

Objection 4.
It Is no harmless ceremony, for this preferrs one name of Christ's before
another.

Solution.
It Is true: and yet this is not an unlawful disparity, as it is disputed in the
3 argument. For Jesus is the name above every name. The 3. Argument of the 2
Question does not prove the contrary, nor the Argument of Souereignty repeated
6 times in the 3. Question. This reason of S. Paul must still be true: because
Jesus was so humble, as that he died the death of the Cross: therefore Jesus
is thus exalted: that at the name of Jesus etc.

Objection. 5.
It Is no harmeles Ceremony. For this attributes more honor, and dignity to
the Naked name, than to the Person of Jesus.

Solution.
This argument is part of the first in this Assertion: it is the 2. of the 2.
Assertion: it is a fourth at the Metaphorical sense: it is a part of the 2.
argument of the 1 Question in Master Prinnes Appendix: it is at the 6 argument
of the 3 Question, and now it is fifthly. And it is not true that our Church does
Bow at the name Jesus, and not to his person, as it is answered already.

Objection. 6.
It Is no harmless Ceremony. For to bow at the name of Jesus is to take Gods
name in vain. For many do ignorantly, carelessly, customarily, and
superficially for the most part cap, and Bow without reverence etc. of Jesus
his person.

Solution.
Some then sin against Jesus Ignorantly: they do worship only the five
letters. Therefore Master Prinne will not Bow the knee. He will oppose his
Mother the Church, and his nourse the University, and which is worst of all,
the holy Ghost, the teacher of all truth. Here is a case worse, then the worst
case in Law: and it must not go on his side. For the Evidence is plain, that
our Church does not take Gods name in vain, by bowing at the name of Jesus.
The Ascension-day is the appointed time, when our Church does solemnly
celebrate this part of the Apostles Creed: Jesus ascended into Heaven. Then
publicly, and religiously, we teach with bended knees that Jesus is the
Lord. And is this to take Gods name in vain? 8th Psalm ver. 1. our Church
affirms, that Jesus is our Lord, and Governor. At the 2. ver. that He is
omnipotent in ordaining strength out of the mouth of Babes, and sucklings for
to still the Enemy, and the Avenger. In the 3 that He is our Creator. I will
consider the Heavens, the works of thy fingers etc. At the 4 verse. That He is
the most merciful God, mindful of us, in that he came to visit us by
Incarnation. At 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. verses there is the exaltation, the Crowning of
him with glory, and great worship: The acknowledging, that Jesus has the
Dominion of the works of Gods hands. That all things are put in subjection
under his feet. At the 15. Psalm: we read in the Audience of all the
Congregation: that only he is the Deserving Person, to dwell in Heaven. At
Psalm: 21. That Jesus is our King, our saving King, our Crowned King, our
Immortal King, Invincible, Victorious King. At the 24. Psalm: That Jesus is our
Triumphant King, the King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty in Battle: The
Lord of Hosts, the King of Glory At Psalm: 48, and 108. there our Church does
abundantly rejoice in him, our Powerful, and merciful God. The Chapters, the
Epistle, and Gospel, and the Collect for the Ascension-day, are infallible
rules, that our Church does not take the name of God in vain, but has
appointed the services, in and to the honor of our God, and Savior Jesus.

4. Assertion. Bowing at the name of Jesus is no orderly, and Decent Ceremony.
Objection. 1.
It Is noe orderly, and decent Ceremony: For it confounds one duty with an other:
viz praying with Bowing: Reading, and bowing: hearing, and Bowing. For many
duties cannot be done together without Confusion.

Solution.
To rise up from praying on the knee to Bow, is a needles suppose: for that
Bowing at prayer is the greater Bowing at the name of Jesus: for that does
invoke the Lord Jesus, and this does but testify that Jesus is the Lord. But
to read, and bow, these are coordinate duties, and so are to hear, and bow:
one does not confound the other: for they are yoake-fellowes, fellow-labowrers:
they do enjoy one the other in an unanimous Concurrence. A man does hear, and
go at the same time: so he does see, and go: speak and go, read, and go: A
man does hear, and stand, and then why not hear, and bow? Coordinate duties,
although they be many, are all done together without confusion. At the same
time a man does see with the eye, hear with the ear, taste, smell, handle
without confusion, every Coordinate Organ is able to exercise its office: At
the same time many subordinate duties may be done. The first moveable does move
all other spheres, and they all do move from East to West in 24. hours. So
the heart serving God does incline, and agitate all inferior parts to praise
the Lord, so that the knee does bow, and the tongue does confess, that Jesus
is the Lord; both, serve the Lord thus together.

Objection. 2.
It Is no orderly, and decent Ceremony. For this disturbs men in their devotion.
For devotion, and bowing are several, and distinct actions: and they both
require the whole Inward, and outward man at once. Therefore to bow, and to be
devout together destroy the Hoc agere, the seriousnes, which ought to be
several in devotion, and Bowing: because no man can serve two masters.

Solution.
The Inward man is the guide, and Governor of the outward man in the state,
and in the able parctise of Grace. He then is no regenerate man, in whom there
is so much contrariety, as that his soul, and his body agree not to worship
the Lord Jesus. If Puritans consist of such sullen oppositions, their ways are
confusion: and their Hoc agere is nihil agere. If their hearts, and ears, and
knees be such great strangers, as that when to pray fervently, to hear
attentively, be at Church, then to bow reverently is separated from hearing,
and praying, and left at home, the outward man is not subordinate to the
inward, and the soul, and body are contraries. Are bowing, and devotion
distinct actions? cannot they agree together? This bowing is external
adoration, and so it depends on, and necessarily is subordinate to unto inward
devotion. They cannot be separated distinctly: for devotion is in bowing, and
exercising, and bending the knee. What is that, which does essentially,
virtually, and effectually read, pray, and bow, but faith radically in the
heart, and the same faith manifested in the tongue speaking, and in the knee
Bowing? And then what great difference, what distinction have the inward, and
outward actions, but a Primarily for the inward action in the heart believing*
and a Secondarily for the outward action in the tongues expression, and in the
knees orderly, and decent signification, that Jesus is the Lord, at whose name
every knee, etc. The members of man's body serve to help one another in their
several actions. The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you; nor
can the feet say to the head, I have no need of thee, etc. 1. Cor. 12. In the
hoc agere in the most serious work they help one another. Therefore the heart
in devotion, and the knee in subjection, must not be spared at bowing at the
name of Jesus; a true and divine service. Here is no serving of two Masters,
but of one. For Jesus is the fame yeasterday, to day, and ever. Heb. 13. 8. But
yet so ignorant Mr Prinne is, that he knows not the difference between
subordination and contrary opposition.

Master Prinnes opinion is, that Bowing at the name of Jesus is a mere Popish
Invention to Justify the worshipping of Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, Hoasts,
Relics, and Idolized Altars. This he says, is a practice much in use of late
among some Romanizing Protestants, yet he hopes, that shame may turn the
hearts of the zealous Teachers of bowing at the name of Jesus, and
Altar-Geniculations, that they will forbear thus to bow, till they can produce
better Authority, then yet they have alleged.

Reply.

And what better proof, then the Text, that we must bow at the name of Jesus?

God commands this bowing. Thus.

1 All knees commanded to bow at the name of Jesus, must bow at the name of
Jesus. The Churches knees are commanded to bow at the name of Jesus: Therefore
the Churches knees must bow at the name of Jesus.

The mayor is a divine axiom, so worthy for truth, that all Christians must
believe it. The minor is the Text. Thus: All knees are commanded to bow at the
name of Jesus, and the Churches knees are included in all knees.

True says Mr Prinne, at the last day all knees shall bow: but our knees must
not bow at time of Divine service, which I refell. Thus:

A time to bow is the time of Grace. Thus:

2 The time of Grace to confess that Jesus is the Lord, is the Militant
Churches time to Bow at the name of Jesus. The time of Divine service, is the
time of grace to confess that Jesus is the Lord. Therefore the time of Divine
service, is the Militant Churches time to bow as the name of Jesus.

The Mayor and Minor propositions, are divine axioms. And Master Prinne says,
that then is the time of bowing, when the tongue must confess, that Jesus is
the Lord.

3 Argument.

From the end of bowing.

To testify that Jesus is the Lord is lawful and necessary at time of divine
service.

To bow at the name of Jesus is to testify that Jesus is the Lord, so the 18th
Canon.

Therefore to bow at the name of Jesus is lawful and necessary at time of
divine service.

4 Argument

From the latitude of our duty,

All Religious Church-honour is to be given to Jesus in time of divine service.

Bowing at the name of Jesus is religious Church-honour. Therefore bowing at
the name of Jesus is to be given to Jesus in time of divine service. It is
adoration so the Fathers, and Master Prinne at his compares.

5 Argument

From the intent of St Paul's exhortation.

To be humble is necessary at time of divine service. To bow at the name of
Jesus is to be humble. Therefore to bow at the name of Jesus is necessary at
time of divine service. St Paul teaches humility at the 5th verse.

6 Argument

Is a demonstration.

1 There is the cause: Jesus by dying deserved bowing of the knee at his name.
2 There is the effect: which is bowing the knee. 3 There is the subject, which
is the Church.

Thus:

Where Jesus deserved by his death, bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus,
there must be bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus.

In the Church, Jesus deserved by his death that there should be bowing of the
knee at the name of Jesus.

Therefore in the Church there must be bowing the knee at the name of Jesus.
But is not the death of Jesus worthy of knee-honour? Heard-hearted Blasphemy!

7 Argument

From Gods gift.

Whatsoever God has given to Jesus we acknowledge to be due unto him. To bow
at the name of Jesus in time of divine service God has given Jesus. Therefore
to bow at the name of Jesus in time of divine service we must acknowledge to
be due to him. The Minor is true. For God has given Jesus all Power: and
therefore the Church must honor Jesus with internal, and external honor.

8 Argument

From the proportion of Jesus his merit.

Jesus deserved grace for the whole man: therefore grace in every part of man
must serve Jesus: therefore the regenerates man's knee must bow to Jesus in the
time of grace.

9 Argument

This proposition is true of corporal, and spiritual knees, At the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow: therefore Jesus is the name at which the Churches
knees must bow.

And now you may know evidently: that Jesus is the name at which every knee
must bow: whether they be knees of the regenerate or of the glorified. And let
Master Prinne be ashamed of his fighting against Jesus, and his Church. This is
his folly: he has dishonored Jesus, and so the king, the Vicegerent of the
Lord Jesus. And is he not affrayde?

Concerning the Turning of Communion-Tables into Altars, That is contrary to
the Scripture Mar. 14. 18. Luc: 22. 21. But why should not we bow toward the
Holy Communion Table: though it be neither scripture nor canon, to bind us thus
to bow: yet an orderly decent ceremony may and ought to be admitted into the
Church: so our Church teaches. There is sufficient reason; why we should bow
toward or at the Holy Comunion-table. For we must bow at his Majesty's Chair
of State, this is a known truth: and the King is Jesus his Deputy in his
Dominions. The Chair of State of the Lord Jesus, his chiefest place of
presence in our Church is the Holy Communion Table, and therefore we may bow
thereat without Idolatry, to testify thereby the honor that belongs to the
Almighty King. Seeing Jesus is the saving king, our king of glory, we should
bow there, which is the sign of the place, where he was most despised,
dishonored, and crucified. So we shall be good soldiers of the Lord Jesus,
and stout warriers against our Saviors mortal Adversaries, even in our very
gesture. And now Mr. Prinne assuredly know, that Reverent, and orthodoxly
learned Bishop Andrews Dr Boys Mr Hooker Zanchius were no Romanizing
Protestants: and that Mr Adams, and Giles Widows do truly, and resolutely
hold all our Churches tenants of faith in the 39 Articles, of Gods Holy
worship in the common praier-booke, and Ecclesiastical obedience in the Canons
141. which no Puritan will endure; because he is a kind of stiff Jesuit in his
opinion, and practice. His, and the Papists ends are all one: though their
ways to their ends do differ so much, as the scripture bafled, and the Church
corrupted.

And now let Mr Prinne, and his private friends forbear to dispute against the
18th Canon, for it is the rule of Reformation, to cause the renewing of Bowing at
the name of Jesus, where it is neglected. Let them not deny, that Philip: 2. is
the fundamental precept, to teach Christians to bow humbly, and reverently,
when Jesus is named at divine service: for St Paul thereby did teach the
Philippians a duty due to Jesus, which he calls bowing with the knee. Mr
Prinnes Authors call that bowinw adoration, an inward, and outward adoration,
deserved by the lowly humility of Jesus, and given by the Father. Mr Prinne
does believe the scripture. It Is well if in the proper sense, The Canon he
belieues. Well, if he did, and his own Authors: for shame these he cannot
deny. Then let him, and his friends bow at the name of Jesus propter meritu^,
and praemium, because the obedience of Jesus is rewarded with this degree of
glory: which is a name above every name, and therefore it is to be honored
with the knees of Grace, and Glory.

Mr Prinne understand, for you owe knee-obedience to the Lord Jesus, or else He
is not the commanding, and deserving Master of the knee. You compel me to call
you according to your exposition of Philip. 2. 10. the Allegorical Origin of
these days: your knees are turned metaphors, and you similitudo hominis the
shadow, or likeness of a man, and so your bowing at the name of Jesus is
Metaphorical. Unthankful divinity! Heartles knee! Ill disposed ignorance!
Because you are so wilful in defense of your error, I dare you to dispute face
to face in the Schools etc. that you may no longer trouble the Church: for the
writing violence of a Schismatique is impudent, and endless. It is certain that
you are more will than intellect, therefore your submission to Jesus, to his
Vicegerent the King, and to the Church may become you well. If you dare not
dispute, and will not conform, then write no more for shame.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. read Rhapsody for Ropsody. p 1. r. Schismatical for Shismaticall. p.
1. r. which for with are etc. p. 4. r. dilemma for delemma. p. 4. r. peculiar
for perculiar. p. 17. r. reference for reverence. p. 19. r. evil for ewill. p.
20. r. genu for genus. p. 20. r. flectitur for flectiter. p. 21. r. concilii
for conilii. p. 21. r. Emmanuel for Emmavel. p. 21, r. and for annd. p. 26. r.
literally for literally. p. 28. r. vt ei coelestia for coelestia etc. p. 39.
r. reference for reverence. p. 53. r. interpreters for interpreter. p. 54. r.
come for ome. p. 59. humility for humity. p. 62. r. poplite for polite p. 65.
r. Orosius for Orotius p. 73. r. must not for mustn ot. p. 80. termino for
termiuo.

Certain others there be, whereof M. Prinne has admonished me, which I
correct thus.

Docter Willets Century, for the Magdeburgians. p. 16.

Read Calvin at the 9. verse quoting the Sorbonists, but not at the 10. p. 16.

Seeing that he is so quick sighted to see the Mote in mine eye. When he has
perused my book, he shall find cause, to take the beam out of his own eye,
He can never satisfy his private friends, seeing he has falfified 36. texts of
scriptures, and 120. and more particular places of Interpreters, as it appears
by my 6. reasons at the examination of his own Authers.


