A TRVE RELATION OF taking of ALBA-REGALIS, in the German Tongue, called
Sfullweissenburgh, the chief City in Nether-Hungarie, which was taken by the
Christian Army, the Twentieth of September last past. 1601.

Truly Traslated out of the German Tongue.



LONDON, Printed by Ralph Blower, for C. B. 1601:

The cruel Actions of the Turkish Emperors from time to time, against the
Christians, with the winning of the great Cirtie of ALBA-REGALIS, from the
Turks, etc.
Courteous and well-beloved, before that we proceed to the Treatise of the taking
of this City, we will first rehearse some particular Actions and proceedinges
of Soliman ye Turkish Emperor, and of the situation and importance of the
said City. We do read in the Turkish Histories, that after the decease of
Selimus, the Eleventh Emperor, succeeded his son Soliman, who in the
beginning of his Reign, showed himself to be of a very meek and tractable
Disposition, and governing his Empire in quiet and peaceable estate, resembling
a Lamb in nature, as being then but young and vn-experienced: but after that
he grow to ripe years, and that with th'increasing of his age, the old
Turkish Ambition and Tiranie began to creep in his heart: his loving
lambe-like Disposition was converted to a most furious Lion-like rage; and an
vn-quencheable bloud-thyrst, insomuch that all men were deceived in their
former hopes and expectations of him, for there was never any Turkish Emperor
since the first springing of their Mohammedan Religion until this day, that ever
did so much annoy and vex Christendom as this Soliman has done.

First in the year of our Savior Christ 1521. he (...) up his forces, and
besieged the Greekish Weisseaburgh, which in short time he took. Next went he
to Rhodes, and there he shot down the Walls, the Turrets and Houses: holding
and continnuing his violent assaults for half a day together, insomuch that at
one assault he lost 2000. of his men.

On the other side, the Christian Knights be-haued themselves so valiantly that
they repulsed him with small loss on their side: but at length, by reason they
could not receive any aid or succor which they expected, and further by
reason of a great scarsitie of Men* Munition and Uictuals (he having continnued
his siedge for the space of nine Months) they were constrained to yield him
the Forte, together with great gifts and presents, conditionally, they should
enjoy their Lives and Goods: so that every one with his Wife, Children and
goods departed thence into Italy.

Shortly after he surprised the City of Mongacum. scitated on the Danubie,
between Ofen and Greekish Weissenburgh, in the year 1526. the 26 of August.

Next he Rapayred to Ofen, besiedging the same with a huge and in-uincible
Army, whereat the Christians who kept the same, dispayring of any Rescue or
succor, rendered it up unto him, upon Condition of their lives safety; but he
having possession thereof, kept not his agreement with them, but murdered the
most part of them, and made the Residue of them Captives.

After this the King FERDINANDO went into Hungary accompanied with CASSIMIRVS
Marquis of Brandenburgh, being his General under him. He took and Re-gayned
many Cities and Castles from the Turks again, but ye Marquis dyed in that
journey.

When Soliman understood thereof, he Returned again to Ofen, molesting them
with a violent siedge, and lost eight assaults, but he continuing the same
still without intermission, insomuch that the Soldiers of the City being
ouerwearied, and quite tired, they yielded the City to the Tyrant again, who
most miserably murdered them all.

From thence he went to Pest, and Gran, and Reduced them all to his will, and
in this his fortunat vn-controlde vain, no Fort nor Castle was almost able to
resist him. He also came unto the City of Vienna in Austria, thinking to
obtain the same as easily as the others, and be-gyrt the same in 16. places
round about with a strong siedge. The Soldiers of the City themselves fired
three of the Subburbes, to the end they might not advantage the Tyrants, nor
endamage themselus, They also avoided the City of many thousands of
vn-necessarie persons, as, Spiritual men, Woomen and Children: whereof the
women and Children forth most part of them, fell into the Bloud-houndes Claws.

In the City of Vienna remained only 2000. men, who making continual
sallies upon the Enemy in their very Camp, took away 8. Barrels of Powder,
whibh they had laid and appointed to undermine the City, and blowing up the
Walls in many places: but perceiving he could not prevail, he was forced (God
be praised) with shame to depart thence,

There was a speech given out of a thousand persons which the Tyrant
notwithstanding should have taken and carried out of the neighbor country and
villages.

This done, he departed toward Constantinople, to circumcise his three sons,
to wit, MVSTAPHA, MAHOMET and SELIM, which was done with great Triumph and
solempnitie.

Also, in An. 1541. the said Soliman took in the province of Morea, diverse
Cities belonging to the Venetians.

This Soliman bring thus fully bent to spill the Christian blood, which to do,
he neither spares Labor nor charges, not only in Hungary and Austria, but
also resolu'de (upon confident hope of his continuing victories, tending
altogether to the utter extirpation of the Christian Faith) to bend his course
also toward Germany, and to that end, with a huge and mighty Host, he took
his journey up the Danubie again toward Alba-Regalis, in the German Tongue
called Stulweissenburgh, where he determined to make his seat in that kingdom,
the same being the chiefest and principallest City both for strength and
Riches in all Nether- Hungary, wherein also heretofore the Kings have kept
their Courts. Likewise, if at any time, their Kings desiring to hold their
Courts in any other City or Castle, and that in the same they chanced to
dye, their Bodies were always conveyed thither again, where their Funerals
were in most Royal sort celebrated, and were interred in a most stately and
worthy Cathedral Church, which in former time was founded and built by
Stephanus, Father unto Emericus King of Hungary, to the Honor of the blessed
Uirgin Mary: which said Church is so endowed with such abundance of Treasure
and Priueledges, as it is acompted far to exceed all others near unto it.

This City is situated on a Boggie place, seeming altogether in Men's
judgments invincible, for it is fortified and begyrt with mighty strong Walls
and Bulwarks, and has also great Subvrbs thereunto, with particular and
private entrances, likewise there are strong Gates which are also fortified with
Bulwarks and Walls against any sudden incurtion or invasion of the Enemy
insomuch that it can not possibly be entered, neither is there any ordinary
access but upon the Banks and Walls of Earth cast up in the Moorish ground
to travel on. Moreover, it is guarded and strengthened with very deep ditches.
Also through the City flows a strong running River named the Sarwits.

This invincible City was by composition taken by the said Soliman the 2 of
November, in An. 1543. and ever since has bin possessed by those Infidels.

Also, together with this City, he took many other places, and was even at
the same time when Fraunois King of France would have invaded Germany,
surprising diverse Cities in the province of Elsash, whereof many of their
Governors met him with the keys in their hands: whereby those Cities were
not spoyld nor distroyed, by reason whereof, the Emperor Charles (of worthy
memory) was constrained to leave the defense of Hungary to resist the French,
and besiedged the I Will of Malta: but he was forced to leave the same to his
great Damage.

Soliman likewise took Iula and Sigeth, wherein that most worthy Captain,
Earl N^cholas von Serin behaved himself most valiantly, but at last was with
all his people most pitifully slaughtared.

The Tyrant then perceiving that with his Tyrany, he could no further prevail
against Christendom, he caused his first borne son called Sultan Mustapha
through false accusations* to be murdered in 1553.

And after that he had long time tyranized, and grievously molested
Christendom, he ended his life at Funfkirchen in Hungary.

From the Camp at Alba-Regalis, the 17. of September. 1601.
ALthough that the Subvrbes also were outwardly fortified with a strong Wall,
and with diverse Bulwarks as is already said, likewise guarded on th'inside
with a Mighty Ditch: all this notwithstanding (with the help of God) the
Christans took the same by in unforce and strength, howbeit that the Turks
making a mighty resistance both in shooting and in continual casting of
fire-workes troubled us greatly, but finally, they* perceiving themselus to
have the worst* setting the houses on fire (with small loss on our side) they
forsook the Subvrbes, and fled into the fort or City.

The Christians immediately upon the taking thereof fortified the same, and
brought some great pieces of Ordinance to batter the city withal.

In the aforesaid Subvrbs were found 20. pieces of Ordinance, which were al
cast out of their cariages: also a great quantity of Hay, but the other goods,
were all before carried into the city, by the Turks.

In this assault were lost 16. of our men, and some others hurt, and amongst ye
rest, the L. Vabecourth, who was shot in the right foot very daungerously.

Likewise, there was found great store of new grain and Munition, and there
was at that instant above 200. christians released.

This day we began to batter the city with 9. pieces of Ordinance, with good
hope to give an assault unto ye Town: Whereunto our Soldiers are very willing
and forward, insomuch that we hope shortly of some good.

Moreover, there is good store of Bauin and Faggots provided for the filling up
of the Ditches and ways, which were very full of Water, and muddy withal.

Notice is also given that the Beeg (a Turkish commander) with all his
Horsemen (being 1000. fighting men) is in the city, and that they have also
30. great pieces of Ordinance, ready mounted in their carriages, with store of
Munition and Uictuals, which Horsemen together with the perjured Valachians, do
daily sally out upon us.

From Prage the 24. of September. 1601.
THis Day his Emperial Majesty, (by his own Messenger) has received news
that ye City and Fort of ALBA-REGALIS (God be praised) was taken in Order and
manner hereafter following. First, when our men took ye forestreetes and
Subvrbes, the L. Rues examined the prisoners and other ^oores Iahabitants:
which place in the citiy the Turks held for their strongest or weakest, and by
their answer they gathered, the Turks held the Marrish side for most
strongest, and as impossible for to be entered that way: Whereupon the L. Rues
without delay, sent immediately 2. of his servants to epsy and discover ye
same, whether it were so or no: who at their return, confirmde the same to be
true, discoursing then unto him the situation of the place, and that it was
impossible to bring any men that way: But the L. Reus making little account of
their speeches, followed his first determination, and presently took 1000.
brave, stout and courageous footmen, commanding each of them to take his
faggot or Bavin under his Arm, and so went to the place prefixed, and as every
man passed on, according as need required, threw down his faggot or Bavin to
pass thereon over the Bogge: In which brave exployt, himsealfe with an hundred
chosen men, marched foremost, to the notable example of all Christian Generals
and Leaders: my sealfe have seen th'xperience of many valiant and aduenturous
exploytes, but surely [my Lords) in all my life I never saw the like gallant
enterprise of Soldiers performed, for we stood almost for the space of 9.
hours continually up to the waste or middle in Water, with every Soldiers
bundle of Bavin at his back, or under his Arm: but truly we found it more
difficult then at first we deemed it, for whosoever he were that mistook his
footing, and missed of the right way, fell over Head and Ears into the water,
and in such sort as that his fellows were feign to help him out again. Yet
all this notwithstanding being so perilous an enterprise, the Soldiers were
never once perceived to abate their courage, nor to seem unwilling to
accomplish their Resolved enterprise: but perceiving me with an 100. men
before, and that I fared no better then the worst of them, they with their
woonted courage and forwardenes, followed all together, and (with ye special
help of God) in the Morning an hour before day, we gave the assault upon ye
strongest place. In this enterprise we lost 6. men, and some 7. or 8. were
drowned and smothered in the Mudde (the almighty God grant us his ^erayde and
strength. Amen.

When the Turkish Sentinel espied us, with a great striking and noise, seconded
our Alarm, and we also after the like sort fell upon them, and put them to
flight.

Likewise, the Duke of Mercury (as he was appointed) hearing the outcryes and
the noise of the Alarums* assaulted the City in an other place, so amasing
the Turks, that they could not tell which way for to turn themselves, nor
where to save themselue, and in that sort (God be praised) they were overcome.
All the men, women and Children, that came in the way in the first fury, were
every one put to the sword.

Thus was this invincible place won with maine force and violent Arms, now
again reduced into the Christians power: after that it had so long time binne
possessed by those Infidels, to the great prejudice and hurt of all that part
of Christendom.

From Vienna the 24. of September. 1601.
WHen the Turks perceived that (by the help of God) we had obtained the
Uictory, many of them (both men, women and Children) leaped over the Walls
into the Bogs, thinking for to escape, but as well those which were not drowned
or smothered in the mudde, as also the residue which were not then slain in
the City, were all taken prisoners and brought into the Christians camp.

In the City was great store of powder (as some do report 30000. weight)
which the Turks had dispersed in sundry places and churches.

But when as now our men in the assault were Running to and fro at vn-awares,
or any of the Turks witting of it, have set the same on fire, and have blown
up all the houses and churches about their ears: so that it should seem, that
little more then the bare Walls are left standing.

All the Riches and Treasure of the Turks is consumed by fire, or else the
poor Soldiers had gotten-good pillage, (the city being very Rich) but there
was nothing at all saved except 300. imprisoned christians.

By the fire also, we lost 300. of our men, as also many pieces of Ordinance
were molten.

We hope very shortly to hear good news from Canisa, Th'omnipotent God grant
his people power and strength To whom, be all praise, Honor and glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

BY Letters from Italy to London, Received the fowerteenth of this present
Month of November, the taking of the aforementioned City of Canisa: together
with other places by the christian Army. Also, that the Turkish Army
understanding of the loss of Alba-Regalis coming with a strong Host to
surprise the same, before yt the christians should fortify it: were
discomfited and put to flight, in 2. several pitched Battles, wherein many
thousands of the Turks have bin put to the sword: together with the death of
two Bashas, Generals of the Army.

The truth of all, will with the next News be made manifest. I beseech the
Almighty God of his infinite goodness and mercy, to continue his lardge
benefits toward us, against the Enemies of his Faith, To the Honor and Glory
of his most holy and blessed name, and the maintenance of his most glorious
Gospel. Amen.

FINIS.

