THREE Miseries of Barbary: Plague. Famine. Civil war.
With a relation of the death of Mahamet the late Emperor: and a brief report
of the now present Wars between the three Brothers.

POST TENEBRAS LUX


Printed by W. I. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pater noster row at
the sign of the Sun.

To the Right Worshipful the whole Company of the Barbary Merchants.
Having drawn certain Collections together of some, the best and maine
occurrents which have now lately (and not many years past) happened in Barbary;
and they being digested into a Volume (although little for quantity, yet
delightful to be perused for the raritye,) I thought they could not better be
bestowed, than upon such as hold commerce with that Country, and know the
state and condition of the people. Amongst which number I make bold to
present these my labors to you only, because you are all Brothers, and men
that most worthily can judge of the Relation, and the truth thereof. The chief
and farthest point that my intention seeks to arrive at in this, is to describe
the horror and vn-heard-of misery that has fallen upon that Kingdom by a
Plague: to the intent that by comparing our sins with theirs (being altogether
as greet if not greater) and the hand of mercy which Heaven has stretched forth
over our Nation, above theirs, we may be allured to look into our souls
betimes, least the like Viols of Wrath be powered down upon us. It is my love
that bestows this upon you, which I pray receive with such good acceptance,
as with my best affection it comes unto you. And thus referring my self to
your censure I take my leave.

Devoted yours, Geo. Wilkins.

Barbary.
THis is a story (like a brief Chronicle) containing various and much matter
in few lines: It is but a little bottom of Time, which you may hold and hide
in your hand, yet being vnrolled (to the length) it reaches to the beginning
of many years past. A word now must stand hear (as in a Map) for a City, and
a few sheets for the Chart of a spacious Kingdom.

Understand therefore that Abdela the Emperor being dead: Muly Mahamet his
Brother succeeded, and was crowned King of Barbary. No sooner was this dignity
conferred upon him, but he revenged himself on those that in Abdelaes reign
loved him not, and therefore by their counsels did what in them lay, to draw
his Brothers (the Emperors affection) from him, yea so far that they persuaded
either to have his eyes put out, or be sent to death: of these counselors,
these three were chief, Alcade Azus, Alcade Mussa, and Alcade Bardu, from two
of which he commanded their lives: but because his state needed the heads of
Wisemen to hold it up, and for yt he was not generally beloved of ye Nobility
and some of the blood Royal: he gave Alcade Azus his life, and of a prisoner
and a Man in disgrace, advanced him up to higher honors then before; receiving
him every day into his bosom for his counsel: which he did the rather
because he knew that Azus would be provident and careful to increase the
Emperors Bittelmell (that is to say) his treasury. Much and often was his mind
perplexed with thoughts about settling his Empire; his cogitations fought
within themselves, when sometimes he would (in his own pryuate Judgment) make
such a man fit to be of his secret and chiefest counsels, and sometimes
another: this he would like to day, and to morrow utterly distaste him.

At length he resolved to trust none of his own Countrymen, but lay his heart
in the breast of one of his Elkes, (yt is to say, a Christian turned Moore) yet
(upon sounder contemplation) him he rejected too: he would put the health of
so great a Kingdom into no such dangerous Physitiaus hands: for he delivered
that Mahamet (his GOD) would take all favor from him if he should do so:
besides he that had forsaken his own Law and religion, could not have the
temper of constancy, to serve one of a contrary religion: nay, how ever in
out-ward show, these Elkes or Regadoes (quoth he) seem Saints, and holy ones,
to me they may prove Devils, and hold it no conscience to betray my blood and
Kingdom. Azus therefore was the man culled out from the rest, by the Emperor.

This Prince flourished in as great glory, as the greatest of his predecessors:
the blessed fruits of sweet peace, took away the soreness of any war
(either foreign or domesticke) that was served in against him: his subjects were
infinite, his Cities filled with Nations: He had more Wives then any of his
forefathers: his Concubins were fairer and more in number; he was as happy as
ever was any King in Barbary, in the flourishing multitudes of his people: and
as unfortunate as ever any before him, in beholding their misery. Fortune twice
had her pleasure upon him, first in lifting him up high in her love, lastly
in pursuing him and his subjects with her tyrrany.

Many noble and notable occurrentes, presented themselves to the eye and ear
of the world, during his Reign: of which to write as they deserve, were to
add a large Uolume to the Chronicles of that Country. I will therefore (as
one having been at a royal banquet) reserve some of it to my self, and bestow
some upon others, such as I think will be sweetest in going down: of which
take this as part.

It was in his time, when that great Armada, (that brought terror in her Womb
from Spain) was delivered of it, in the narrow Seas of England. At the birth
(but indeed the burial) of which invincible Navy, the Spaniards that lay then
in Barbary and attended on the Spanish Ambassador, beguiling themselves with a
false rumor, that this land was conquered, prepared for triumphs, as (if their
joy had bin tamely begot) they had reason: But one Master Arnold Tomson (an
english Merchant) certifying to the Emperor the truth and certain defeature
of the Spanish Fleet: the English men that were there, had likewise leave of
Mahamet, to express their joy in Bone-fires, and other triumphs; for the King
did ever love the Nation of our Country, and did many favors to our Marchantes.

The English Ambassador lying in the same street where the Spanish Ambassador
lay, and our Merchants gathering together, determining to ride into the field,
and there having put themselves into some gallant order, to come back into the
City, in a triumphant and civil manner, to do honor to their Country for so
happy and vn-heard-of a victory: behold, before the Spanish Ambassadors gate
(by which our Countrymen determined on horseback to pass) stood a company of
Spaniardes, (with some Moors whom they had hired) armed with pike and shot to
stop their passage; between whom what happened, those english Marchantes ye
then were hurt, (of which master Arnold Tomson was one) can if they be yet
living testify: and for those that were then slain outright, the Emperor
(in indignation) swore not only that they who did execute this treachery upon
the english Nation, should have Iron given them (that is to say, should have
their throats cut) but he would also certify the King of Spain of this
abuse: so willing was he to do Justice even to strangers.

Another accident (because it is worthy note for the example, and may be a
warning to our Contrymen) will I set down: and this is it. An English man
fallen out and struck by his master, desperately resolved (whilst the fire
was in his blood) to revenge those blows on his body, by giving wounds to his
own soul: and thereupon he presently went and denied his religion, forsook
Christ to follow Mahomet; And from a Christian turned Moore.

It is the custom of that Country when any Man will do so, to observe (amongst
others) these ceremonies: It is signified to those Christians yt are in the
City, Town, etc. that such a one will be an Elke, or turn Moore, A certain
equal number therefore (as well Barbarians as Christians) are assembled in a
place fit for such purposes; one part sitting (like Judges) on ye one side, the
other, opposite directly against them: the Turne-coate just in the middle of
the room between them, and in presence of both, he is there then demanded,
whether he will deny the law of his own religion and embrace theirs or no: It
is offered unto him his free liberty to take the one or the other: nay it is
lawful for those that sit there on the contrary part (being Christians) to use
all the power of Argument to win him from this delinguishment. Thus did they
serve this man: thus was he three several times, conuented before them: and
three several times did he most stiffly defend what he had done, and defy
Christ: no Physic of Spiritual counsel doing good upon him, they gave him
over. But note the judgment of that Captain (the Lord of hoasts) whose colors
of salvation he had forsaken, within a short time (after this Apostasy and
rebellion of his soul) this Traitor to God, happened to kill a Man: for which
fact he was adjudged by the Ladies of that Country, not to loose his life, but
(which was worse) to live; But how to live? As the first Murderer that ever
drew blood of Man: as Cayne lived, wandering up and down, with none (on pain
of death) to keep him company, but his own thoughts which were ten thousand
executioners; none to give him bread, so that he fed upon despair: none to
quench his thirst, so that he drunk the poison of an infected conscience, he
knew he had killed a Man, and therefore even Infidels abhorred him: he knew he
had forsaken his Religion, and therefore Christians would not pity him: In
this wretehed state he went up and down, in this misery he pyned, till he
dyed: let that death of his teach others how to line.

But leaving this, let us again fix our eyes upon Mahamet the Emperor, who
(thinking it would be as great a glory to him, to create others, Kings, as to
be a King himself) did (by the advice of his counsel, but most of all out of
the working and height of his own spirit) determine to divide his large and
fruitful Empire amongst his Sons.

Of all the Wives and Concubins that this Emperor had, three only, (above the
rest) had a sovereignty over his amorous affections, and of those three, he did
still prefer one before the other. Lilia Isa was the fairest, and her did he
love dearest: she was empress over the rest, yet were ye rest Queens over
others, she had the supreme command of the Kings house, and none command
her but the King. Lilia Ageda was a Negro, yet had she a second place in his
heart. Lilia Myriem had the third: of Lilia Myriem (being a black Woman
likewise) did he beget a Son, called Muly-Shem, being one of the fairest
Children that ever he had, but this Muly-Shem offering some offense to a youth
that attended on him, was by him slain. The young man afterward (knowing the
Emperors wrath) killing himself. Lilia Agede was mother to Muly-Beferris, and
Muly-Sheck, (the youngest Brother:) Lilia Isa Mother to Muly-Sidan (the
eldest.) Between these three were these late ciuell wars in Barbary.

And thus did Mahamet make division of his Kingdom, which afterward bred
division amongst his people, and set all in a Combustion to Muly sidan (who was
given to Arms and to love a Soldier) gave he the Kingdom Tadula, and
Taphalet: to Mulibefarris (whose soul lusted after nothing but sensual
pleasure) gave he the Kingdom of Sus: to Muly-Sheck, the Kingdom of Fez:
appoynting Mustapha (that was born a Christian, and turned Moore, but a
Soldier, and a Gentleman of a Noble Spirit) to attend on Sheck as his
Guardian, because he was but young.

Before we step any farther, it shall not be amiss (because I would draw this
Barbary-picture, with as much life and delightful colors as I could) to set
down a pretty combat between two of the Emperors Wives, played before the
Emperor himself. Thus it was: Mahamet sitting one morning with Lilia Ageda
(the Negro) by him, talking mearily (for he took pleasure in her speech,
because she was wise:) In comes Isa (his fairest bedfellow) and seeing the
Blacke-one so near her beloved, she blushed and showed anger even in her eyes,
(for what Woman would not be angry to see another rob her of the love of an
Emperor?) At length bowing to the earth, she fell at the Kings feet, and with
a pretty smile began to tell a tale of the Lark and the Crow: the shutting
up of her morrall being, that the Lark was the Bird of the morning, and of
the day, and therefore might be bold to challenge the mornings due, and all
Rytes of the day; But the Crow was the Bird of the night, and had nothing to do
with the morning.

The emperor understanding her sweet witty bitterness, that by the Lark thee
meant her self, and by the Crow, Lilia Ageda (because of her blackness) was so
delighted with the comparison, that he gave charge none should ever after
presume to give the Emperor his good morrow, till Lilia Isa had bin with him,
and thereupon was Isa called the emperors Lark, or his Bird of the morning.

Let us loose one point more of our compass, and sail a little out of our
intended way to find out in what fear and awful reverence the subjects of
this Kingdom hold the anger of their Sovereign: to understand which, receive
this only as a taste. One of the emperors officers of his Custom (whose name
was Cidde Abdela Creme) being an old Man, had one Son only, (called
Enhamet) whom he tendered as his life, being the hope and health of his age: him
had the father put into his own place: the young man coming in a morning
betimes to the Custom House, but the rest of the officers being not present,
he could not enter (for every one has a several Key, and unless all be there
together, not one can get in) he determined within himself to spend an hour
(til the rest met) in renewing the emperors palace (where his Concubins lived)
because he was told it was a rare and rich place, and that it was not lawful
without great means to enter. That report more inflamed his desire, insomuch
that in the end (watching his time) by stealth he got in.

Where being, and staring up and down, it chanced that one of the Women saw
him, who presently screeked out, and ran crying, A man, a man: for you must
note, that if any one of them spy a Man, (except the Eunuchs that attend them)
and do not call for help, it is death to her: and what Man soever rudely
presume to have a fight of the^, it is death to him. It was known by inquiry,
(upon her noise) that it was Enhamet the Customers Son, who had thus offended
the laws: the Emperor being given to understand so much, made an oath he
should dye for it. Immediately upon this (by occasion of some business) comes
the old Man (Enhamets Father) to the King, who supposing it had been about
his Sons pardon, and his indignation being now a little cooler) suddenly
demanded of him what that Man deserved, that durst break into the place where
his Emperors Concubins were: Cidde Abdela (not suspecting the offender)
answered, that he deserved the sharpest sentence of death, for so the Law
would adiudge him. Be thou then (quoth the Emperor) thine own Sons
condemnation: As thou have judged him, so let it be. But the King beholding
death sitting in the old Man's face at that doom, grew pitiful, and (for
love he bare the Father) forgave the Son, which mercy notwithstanding, Abdela
Creme not truly laying hold of, but mistaking the Noble spirit of a Prince,
and imagining that this favor so strangely extended was but a snare to entrap
his own life, because offenses of that nature were never before pardoned in
any: home he comes; with sorrow in his afflicted looks, and his heart even
murdered within him, by the cruelty of his own thoughts: his Son demanded
the cause of this so strange and sudden distemperature, but his Father giving
no answer, sends for cords, shows them only insteade of speech, and to make
this dumb Tragedy fall in the end, he causes him before his own eyes to be
strangled: great were the lamentations of the Son, and abundant were the
tears he let fall to soften his Fathers heart: a mighty conflict was there in
the poor old man's bosom, between natural piety to a Child, and natural
fear of a Sovereign: but the last of the two prevailed: and having bestowed
upon the dead body the ceremonies of the grave, according to the custom of the
Country, he caused the Act to be registered down for his own safety,
alleging that howsoever the Emperor (when he heard this black and unnatural
deed reported) would happily be moved unto wrath, yet inwardly he would be
highly contented with it.

Mahamet being thus feared and loved of his subjects, wanted nothing that
(according to humane Judgment) could make a Prince happy: pleasure was his
slave and waighted on him whenever he lusted for her company: Riches flowed
into his houses of treasure in large and Golden streams: his Court was full of
counselors; his Cittyes full Merchants, his Castles full of soldiers: he was
a mighty King himself, and had sons that were as mighty as he, their
Dominions were ample, they were full of men, and full of all things that
maintain men. It seemed that the Father lost much of his imperial state and
dignity, when he placed his three sons (like three great lights) to shine
equally in his kingdom, considering that all the beams of majesty that came
from them, might (if he had pleased) have been sent forth from the centred
glory of his own head, but even this borrowed reflections of theirs, made his
brightness the greater: and his sons yielding acknowledgement of all their
royalty to flow from him, did (like Rivers paying tribute to the Sea) seem
not a whit the less for such homage and fealty.

Fortune having turned the wheel of this Emperors fate along time with steddie
hand, had now brought it about to the uppermost point and highest, on which she
meant he should sit: he should be no more her darling, and therefore she
took her favors from him. Or to speak of a power that co^trolls Fortune, and
whose very finger throws down kingdoms to utter confusion, or holds the^ up
in their greatness, whether the general sins of the whole Nation deserved
it, or whether the people were punished for the particular faults of the king
and his Courtiers, as many times it falls out, and as it happened to the
Grecians, for Quicquid delirant Reges plestantur Achini: or for what other
faults soever, the rod of vengeance was made ready: it is in man to think
upon and fear, but not to examine, yet sure it is, that as a fire catching
hold at first but of some mean cottage, in some one end or corner of a City,
has oftentimes (ere the fury of it could be put out) swallowed up in his
flames, the goodliest and most beautiful buildings that stood even fardest
out of reach, so did the clouds of infection burst open their veins, and let
fall the poison of them, on this kingdom of Barbary.

If ever the Plague in any place got his true name, there he had it. At the
beginning it struck (like an Arrowe) on the head but of one City, but in a
short time after, it fleme from City to City, and in the end stuck in the
very heart of the whole kingdom. Insomuch, that Death came (like a tyrannous
Usurper) to the Court gates, and threatened to depose the Emperor himself.

He that before sat in his throne of majesty, greatly feared of other
Nations round about him, and strongly guarded by his own, is on the sudden
daunted, and (being accounted one of the mightiest amongst the Kings of the
earth) is ready to submit to him, with whom even Infants do every hour fight
hand to hand.

See the authority, fame and terror of that Inuader (Death) he struck but up
an Allarum in this Emperous Palace, and the Emperor himself trembled through
fear thereof: his conceits that stood before like so many aged Oaks, bowed
presently to the earth like so many ranks of young Willowes: yet his Cities
shook at the voice, no less then if it had been at an Earthquake. And so
hardly did the pestilence pursue Mahamet, that he durst not sleep for it in one
place twice together: every night was he compelled (for safety) to fly unto a
contrary lodging.

As his Court removed so did the plague: whersoeuer the one kept his standing
house, there the other pitched up his Pauilion as a proud and daring Challenger
to all comers. Insomuch that sickness in the end (though weak of himself)
wrastled with so many that were near and about the Princes person, and still
got the better of the^, that Mahomet had not men to remove those tents which
he was enforced to carry up and down with him for his own household to lie
in: fourscore Barbarians (being all attendants and Officers in Court) falling
every night, in this mortal and pestiferous massacre. So that the Emperor for
want of Servants was glad to take chained slaves from the Oar (out of their
galleys) and to make them his guard.

What a strange alteration is here of a Court? He that had seen this prince so
royally attended, so maiestically attyred, with such God-like reverence kneeled
unto: so guarded, so followed, so circled round with a Nation in number
infinite: Would that Man have ever thought that such a Prince could have been
driven out of his stately palaces, and been glad to lie abroad in the
fields? Or that he should ever submit to such humility, as to put his life into
the hands of slaves and miserable Captives? The only despised wretches of his
Kingdom: the beggerliest: the most disconte^ted, the worst-minded to him and
his Nation: yea, such whom he knew could have been glad to cut his throat, to
ransom themselves from the bondage and Hell of the gally? Yet even these most
forlorn Creatures, (which before like Oxen were yoaked by the Necks with
Iron) was this great Monarch feign to make much of, and to turn them into his
best and fairest courtiers. So easily and so low can the hand of Heaven pull
down the mightiest upon earth, and make them stoop even to the weakest.

The heart being thus sick, was not the whole body (think you) in danger to
perish? The eye of the Kingdom being so much blemished, did not the Uniuersall
land dwell in darkness? Was it possible that the Court should pyne, and that
the Cities should flourish? No, no, Alas! Full houses were emptied there of
whole families: whole streets of their households: yea, even the Cities
themselves were left desolate of inhabitants.

Had all the Artifiers in the Land, laid by all other work, only to have
made Coffins, they could not all have builded rooms fast enough, for the dead
to dwell in: For sickness was even weary of throwing down bodies, and Death
even glutted with killing them. Do but imagine how the World showed, when all
Creatures that were drowned in the Uniuersall flood, lay heaped together, after
the waters were shrunk into the earth, such a Mount Caluary was Barbary: the
carkases of unburied men were so many, that a far off they might be taken for
hills, yea so numberless were they, that it seemed as if all the Nations upon
earth had sent their dead thither, and that Barbary had been the common
Churchyard.

When Vespasian besieged Jerusalem, Famine fed upon the City within, and
war without, yet did the Jews choose rather to steal forth, and trust the
doubtful mercy of an Enemy, then to perrish under the cruelty of their own
countrymen. At length, such multitudes of them got daily through the gates,
that Tytus (to be rid of them, and fright them from coming) crucified them
all, and sixth the bodies so put to death, round about the City, before their
walls, as a terror to those within: so that in the end, (they pressing forth
for all this continually upon him) there could be found neither wood enough
for Crosses to nail them upon, nor ground enough whereon to set Crosses.

The like misery fell upon this royal kingdom of Barbary, for the people in
it were struck down so fast by the Pestilence, that the living were not able
to inter the dead, neither could there be found ground sufficient enough (about
their Cities) to afford them burial, so that the earth did not (as in other
Countries) cover and bury them, but they buried and covered the earth.

Let us muster the dead together, and take a view of this disordered Army. In
Morocco the cheifest City of Barbary, died in one year seven hundred
thousand Moors, and seven thousand seven hundred Jews, as by bills daily
sent to the Emperor did appear.

What Nation in the World would not have trembled, hearing of such an
invinsible host marching against them, yet Death with one Arrowe slew all
these. In the City of Far, died (the same yee^e five hundred thousand, beside
those that fell in the Country.

Yea so terrible and fierce was Death in his execution of those in Morocco,
that in the space of one day and a night, he slew there with his own hands,
four thousand, seven hundred and odd. A merciless and tragical conquest,
an inglorious victory, for he made them away in their beds.

O what a number of graves must have been opened, if all these thousands
should have had their rites of burial? How many fathers for children, wives
for husbands, sons and daughters for Parents, and kinsfolks for friends,
should here have wept, if the dead had been paid their due lamentations? But
Mourning here had so wasted it self, that it quite forgot truly how to
mourn. Sickness and grief grew so familiar with men, that to be rid of such
loathsome company, they sought out Death, when they knew not where to find a
Grave.

O thou beautiful Kingdom, how could thou choose but look unlovely, having
so many children dead in thy womb? how could thy body be otherwise then
unwholesome, having so mortal a disease running upon thee, yea, all over thee
seven years together! And O your Cities that were the fairest Daughters to so
Noble a Mother; What shrikes, and soule-afflicting passions did not you breath
forth, seeing all your Merchants (that had wont to court you be your loves)
and forsaking you to see your buildinges stand in their wonted height, but
robbed of their wonted ornaments! to see Foxes and wild Beasts (instead of
Men) inhabiting in your goodliest streets and meeting daily upon your
Exchanges! A more then Widdow-like lamentation must you needs put one, to
behold your selves utterly bereaved of those that were your best-beloued: What
Kingdom (though never so far removed) is not heavy at the heart, hearing
these sad stories of your sorrow? -- Quis talia fando,
Mirmydonum, Dolopumue, aut Durimiles Vlissi
Temperet alachrimis?
Your enemies cannot be so barbarous as not to yield to your condolement. We
will therefore no longer let out your tears within-doores, nor no more stand
wondering to see all your buildinges show like so many hearses; but will suruay
your filds abroad, and try if they can afford any better consolation, Alas
they cannot: calamity there travels up and down in the same wretched
habilyments, that she wears within the walled Cities, People fly in numbers
up to the Mountains, to dwell amongst beasts, and to dispossess them of
their inheritance: they fly thinking Death would not follow them, but he like
a politic General, lay so close in Ambush at their returning back to their
Cities, that he cut them off faster then at the first, and left their bodies
to be a pray to those beasts, who not many days before ran into their Caves
as being afraid of them.

O what a misery was it, to see highways strewed with dead and infected
carkases, as if the whole kingdom had been sacked, and the enemy had had all
the people in execution? A rich and abundant harvest covered the face of the
earth, but the Husbandmen in stead of filling their Barnes, were busied in
filling up graves: the fruits which the ground brought forth, she herself
did again denoure. A strange harvest was it, for Corn was had in without
Reapers, it was gathered and sowed again all at one time, for the Earth did
now play the good Huswife, she saved all to herself, and yet even in saving
it, did she spill all: there were not hands enough to gather the food, which
she out of her plenteous lap bestowed amongst her children, nor mouths
enough to eat it.

The Country-Lasse sat not now singing by her Milking-payle, for the poor
beasts ran bellowing up and down with swolnevdders, mourning before their
Masters doors, because they could not be eased of their burdens.

The Pestilence having thus (like a merciless Inuader) destroyed both Cities
and Uillages, and having oftentimes made the greatest Lords in the kingdom
stoop to his command, and determining to conclude his conquest, with taking
the General over so great a Nation prisoner, did at the last set upon the
Emperor Mahamet himself, and with her venomous breath killed him. Which
glorious victory being gotten, Death and his Liefetenant (Sickness) began to
sound a retra^te, to march from their walls, and to let them live in quiet.

No sooner were their backs turned, but again in multitudes came the people
down from the Mountains, and as all Rivers (when Land-waters have oppressed
the^) fly to the bosom of the Sea for safety, so did the Nation of this great
Empire, from all parts thereof come marching joyfully, (and yet fearfully) to
fill up and make good again their disinhabited houses. What stories are now
told of lamentable Funerals? what friends and kinsfolks are missing? what
sorrow there is for so much Acquaintance lost? what gladness to meet with any,
whom they heard or doubted were in their graves? Their Cities do now look
with cheerful countenaunces, streets are filled with men, houses with
families: every one applies himself to his former labor, every Merchant to
his traffic. But behold, in the heat of all this Sunshine, when no wrinkle
could be seen in the browe of Heaven, when all was calm, and that men lay
safely snorting on their secure pillowes, a second storm burst out of the
clouds, a second and a more fearful: God poured another vengeance on the
heads of this people, he sent Famine to breath upon them, and to suck the
lifeblood out of their bosoms, so that they that before durst not come near
one another, for fear of being infected with the Pestilence, are now ready to
lay hold each of other, and to turn their own bodies into nourishment. The
Plague was merciful to them, in dispatching them quickly out of the world, but
this tyrant put the^ to lingering deaths. They had once more meat then
mouths, now they had many mouths and no meat. O Hunger! how pitiless art
thou? a monster thou art of a most strange condition, for, how small a thing
will appease thee, and yet what will thou not destroy to satisfy thy ravenous
appetite? thou art most cruel to them that most seek to relieve thee, and
when thou have nothing to feed upon, thou plaiest the murderer, and eatest up
thy self. How tirannous have thou showed thy self to this great Nation? thou
have heard children crying for bread to their Parents, yet would not relieve
them, whilst the Parents went mourning and pyning up and down that they wanted
food themselves. Men that were strong of body, did thou by thy sorcerie
bring so low, that they could scarce stand on their legs: Weomen that had
fresh blood in their cheeks, and were lovely to be looked upon, did thou
make leave, and turnedst them into Anatomies.

O Famine, thou cruellest executioner of Gods wrath, thou dishonest guest, for
into what house soever thou come, thou destroiest all that is set before
thee: thou traitor to Plenty, envious hag, malicious Witch, that with thy
unsavory breath blasteth whole fields of Corn: away, get thee gone, the
hand of Heaven keep thee from landing upon the English share, hide thy head
for shame, in the graves of those whom most vnmercifullie thou have
slaughtered, be buried there for ever: for if thou should set footing upon
this little I Will, thou would quickly turn it into a great Land of misery.

But was the terrible Judge of the world, satisfied with punishing this people
twice in this manner, had their offenses toward him deserved no more blows?
It seems they had run into a most proud rebellion, and that he had sworn in
his indignation to be revenged upon them for it: for lo, the spirit of his
rage comes now in a consuming fire, it is wrapped up in clouds of lightning,
and the thunder of it breaks into Civil war. The three sons of so great
an Emperor, shine now like three Meteors in the firmament, all in steel,
their Courts now are Camps, and none are Courtiers but Soldiers. Three
Brothers being all three Kings, are up in Arms, only to make of three but
one, misery upon misery. They that escaped the stripes of the Pestilence,
were eaten to death by Famine, they that saved themselves out of the Jaws of
Famine, are now in danger to perish on the Sword.

O noble France, if I should bid thee only to tell the horror, the terrors,
the unbounded mischief and calamity that come marching in with intestiue
Broils, thou need to say nothing, but to open thy bosom, and show those
deep scars which thine own sons have set there. There are tears yet in thine
eyes, for those sad funerals which the Civil sword prepared. The
Low Countries have been in labor a long time, and are not yet delivered of
that Monster: if they could not express the pains and pangs that follow this
inward disease of a kingdom, this grief about the heart of a Land, this very
Earthquake that has power to ouer-turne Towns and Towers, we have too many
leaves in our own Chronicles, spotted with the inuenomed Inck of Civil
discord. Too many of our Kings have been too famous by that misery: too many
of our noblest Families, have shaken their ancient Houses by that thunder.

This fire of Discention has now taken hold of Barbary, a kingdom full of
people, abundant in riches, flowing with Arts and traffic with all Nations:
how happy therefore are we, that have peace in our Cities, and plenty in our
fields? yet doubtless, our sins are in number infinite, in nature
abominable, we deserve as little pardoning as they, yet is our wickedness as
black and detestable as theirs. Let us therefore stray aside awhile, and by
comparing the heavy afflictions which the Divine Iusticer has laid upon other
Countries in times past, acknowledge an incommensurable love and mercy of his,
to this Island of ours, now in these present days. For in the year of Christ
81. and in the year 188, the breath of the Pestilence was so strong, and so
contagious, that in Rome there died daily two thousand people. In the year
254, fifteen Provinces of the Roman Empire were almost consumed with the
like calamity. Nay in Constantinople the rage of the disease was so great,
that in the year 530, there fell every day (for many days together) five
thousand, and sometimes ten thousand. Within ten years after that, (which
was in Anno 540,) there began an universal plague over the whole world, which
continued 50 years with hot violence.

In the year 1359, so mortal a blow did Death give to Italy by infection,
that there was scarce left ten of a thousand. And to Rome (in the year 1521)
that she made graves for a hundred thousand. Millan likewise, Padua and
Venice, in the years 1576 and 77, opened the Earth to receive into her womb a
hundred thousand dead carcasses, that were left breathless in each of those
Cities, by the tyranny of this pestiferous disease. And in Bohemia (being
but a small kingdom) there died three hundred thousand the same time. In the
year 1596, fell such a plague in Constantinople, that it struck down in six
months space, seven hundred thousand persons. And this misery was seconded by
so terrible a Famine, that a penny loaf of bread of English money, was worth a
crown in gold, by reason of which, the people were worse consumed the^ before
by the Pestilence.

We will now set forth some of our own homeborne tragedies wrought by the
Plague, of which take this as Prologue to the rest. In the reign of K. Edward
the third, the Infection spread it self in the East Indies, amongst the
Tartars, Saracens and Turks, which had a hand over them by the space of 7
years: and this vengeance which was poured down from heaven upon this people,
struck their souls into such amazement and terror, that many of the Heathen
(with the very fear thereof) offered to be converted and turn Christians.
Shorthe after, by reason of Passengers from one Province to another, the same
mortal plague was dispersed in many Christian kingdoms, and (amongst others)
brought into England, where it was so forcible all over the Land, that not
only men, but also beasts, birds and fishes were smitten therewith, and
found dead with botches upon them. Yea, such a massacre did it make amongst the
living, that they were scarceable to bury the dead. At which time, (with the
rest that then died of the Plague,) Henry Duke of Lancaster, Blanch Duchess
of Lancaster, and the Earl of Warwick ended their lives. So that in one year,
in a little plot of ground of 13 Acres compass (then called Spittle-croft, and
now the Charter House) were buried 50000. persons, besides all them that were
then buried in the Church yards and diverse other places. Our late calamities
infliced upon us for our sins are fresh in memory, the eyes of many people
are yet wet with mourning at burials, the rod is still held over us, the stripes
of it are even now to be seen sticking in our flesh.

Yet you see how the Great Father of Nations, keeps us under his wing, he is
loath to chide, more loath to strike us, let us not therefore, like foolish
haire-braind children, provoke him too often, and too much to anger, least he
take up his triple Mace of hot vengeance, and with it bruze our people, as he
has already stretched out his Arm to smite those of Barbary.

FINIS.

