depiction of solar system A Discourse concerning A NEW world and Another
Planet In 2 Books.

Printed for John Maynard, and are to be sold at the George, in Fleetstreet
near St. Dunstans Church. 1640.



THE FIRST BOOK. THE DISCOVERY OF A NEW WORLD OR, A Discourse tending to prove,
that it is probable there may be another habitable World in the Moon.

With a Discourse concerning the possibility of a Passage thither.

The third impression. Corrected and enlarged.

Quid tibi inquis ista proderunt? Si nihil aliud, hoc certe, sciam omnia hic
angusta esse.

Seneca praef. ad I lib. Not. Quest. LONDON: Printed by JOHN NORTON for JOHN
MAYNARD, and are to be sold at the George in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstons
Church. 1640.

To the Reader.
IF amongst thy leisure hours, thou can spare any for the perusal of this
discourse, and do look to find somewhat in it which may serve for thy
information and benefit: let me then advise thee to come unto it with an equal
mind, not swayed by prejudice, but indifferently resolved to assent unto that
truth which upon deliberation shall seem most probable unto thy reason, and
then I doubt not, but either thou will agree with me in this assertion, or at
least not think it to be as far from truth, as it is from common opinion.

Two cautions there are which I would willingly admonish thee of in the
beginning.

1. That thou should not here look to find any exact, accurate Treatise,
since this discourse was but the fruit of some lighter studies, and those too
hudled up in a short time, being first thought of and finished in the space of
some few weeks, and therefore you cannot in reason expect, that it should be
so polished, as perhaps, the subject would require, or the leisure of the
Author might have done it.

2. To remember that I promise only probable arguments for the proof of this
opinion, and therefore you must not look that every consequence should be of
an undeniable dependence, or that the truth of each argument should be
measured by its necessity. I grant that some Astronomical appearances may
possibly be solved otherwise than here they are. But the thing I aim at is
this, that probably they may so be solved, as I have here set them down:
Which, if it be granted (as I think it must) then I doubt not, but the
indifferent Reader will find some satisfaction in the maine thing that is to be
proved.

Many ancient Philosophers of the better note, have formerly defended this
assertion, which I have here laid down; and it were to be wished, that some of
us would more apply our endeavors unto the examination of these old opinions,
which though they have for a long time lien neglected by others, yet in them
may you find many truths well worthy your pains and observation. It Is a false
conceit for us to think, that amongst the ancient variety and search of
opinions, the best has still prevailed. Time (says the learned Verulam)
seems to be of the nature of a river or stream, which carries down to us
that which is light or blown up, but sinketh that which is weighty and solid.

It is my desire that by the occasion of this discourse, I may raise up some
more active spirit to a search after other hidden and unknown truths. Since it
must needs be a great impediment unto the growth of sciences, for men still so
to plod on upon beaten principles, as to be afraid of entertaining any thing
that may seem to contradict them. An unwillingnesse to take such things into
examination, is one of those errors of learning in these times observed by the
judicious Verulam. Questionless, there are many secret truths, which the
ancients have passed over, that are yet left to make some of our age famous for
their discovery.

If by this occasion I may provoke any Reader to an attempt of this nature, I
shall think my self happy, and this work successful.

Farewell.
The first Book.
That the Moon may be a World.
The first Proposition, by way of Preface.
That the strangeness of this opinion is no sufficient reason why it should be
rejected, because other certain truths have been formerly esteemed
ridiculous, and great absurdities entertained by common consent.

THere is an earnestness and hungering after noveltie, which does still adhere
unto all our natures, and it is part of that primitive image, that wide extent
and infinite capacity at first created in the heart of man. For this, since its
depravation in Adam, perceiving it felfe altogether emptied of any good, does
now catch after every new thing, conceiving that possibly it may find
satisfaction among some of its fellow creatures. But our enemy the devil (who
strives still to pervert our gifts, and beat us with our own weapons) has so
contrived it, that any truth does now seem distastefull for that very reason,
for which error is entertained.. Novelty. For let but some upstart heresy be
set abroach, and presently there are some out of a curious humor; others, as
if they watched an occasion of singularity, will take it up for canonical, and
make it part of their creed and profession; whereas solitary truth cannot any
where find so ready entertainment; but the same Novelty which is esteemed the
commendation of error, and makes that acceptable, is counted the fault of
truth, and causes that to be rejected.

How did the incredulous World gaze at Columbus, when he promised to discover
another part of the earth, and he could not for a long time, by his confidence,
or arguments, induce any of the Christian Princes, either to assent unto his
opinion, or go to the charges of an experiment? Now if he, who had such good
grounds for his assertion, could find no better entertainment among the wiser
sort, and upper end of the World; it is not likely then that this opinion which
I now deliver, shall receive any thing from the men of these days, especially
our vulgar wits, but misbeliefe or derision.

It has always been the unhappiness of new truths in Philosophy, to be
derided by those that are ignorant of the causes of things, and rejected by
others, whose perverseness ties them to the contrary opinion, men whose
envious pride will not allow any new thing for truth, which they themselves
were not the first inventors of. So that I may justly expect to be accused of a
pragmaticall ignorance, and bold ostentation; especially since for this opinion
Xenophanes, a man whose authority was able to add some credit to his
assertion, could not escape the like censure from others. For Natales Comes
speaking of that Philosopher, Mytholog. lib. 3 c. 17.
and this his opinion, says thus, Nonulli ne nihil scisse videantur, aliqua
nova monstra in Philosophiam introducunt, ut alicujus rei inventores fuisse
appareant. Some there are who lest they might seem to know nothing, will bring
up monstrous absurdities in Philosophy, that so afterward they may be famed for
the invention of somewhat. The same Author does also in another place accuse
Anaxagoras of folly for the same opinion. Lib. 7. c. 1.
Est enim non ignobilis gradus stultitiae, vel si nescias quid dicas, tamen
velle de rebus propositis hanc vel illam partem stabilire. It Is none of the
worst kinds of folly, boldly to affirm one side or other, when a man knows
not what to say.

If these men were thus censured, I may justly then expect to be derided by
most, and to be believed by few or none; especially since this opinion seems
to carry in it so much strangeness, and contradiction to the general consent
of others. But how ever, I am resolved that this shall not be any
discouragement, since I know that it is not common opinion that can either add
or detract from the truth. For,

1. Other truths have been formerly esteemed altogether as ridiculous as this
can be.

2. Gross absurdities have been entertained by general opinion.

I shall give an instance of each, that so I may the better prepare the Reader
to consider things without a prejudice, when he shall see that the common
opposition against this which I affirm, cannot any way derogate from its truth.

1. Other truths have been formerly accounted as ridiculous as this. I shall
specify that of the Antipodes, which have been denied, and laughed at by many
wise men and great Scholars, Vid. loseph. Acosta. de not. novi orbis lib. 1.
cap. 1.
such as were Herodotus, Chrysostom, Austine, Lactantius, the venerable Bede,
Lucretius the Poet, Procopius, and the voluminous Abulensis, together with all
those Fathers or other Authors who denied the roundnesse of the heavens.
Herodotus counted it so horrible an absurdity, that he could not forbear
laughing to think of it. (...). I cannot choose but laugh, (says he) to see so
many men venture to describe the earths compass, relating those things that
are without all sense, as that the Sea flows about the World, and that the
earth it self is round as an Orb. But this great ignorance is not so much to
be admired in him, as in those learneder men of later times, when all Sciences
began to flourish in the World. Such were St. Chrysostom, who in his 14 Homily
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, dos make a challenge to any man that shall
dare to defend that the heavens are round, and not rather as a tent. Thus
likewise St. Austine, who censures that relation of the Antipodes to be an
incredible fable; De civit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 9.
and with him agrees the eloquent Lactantius, Institut. l. 3. c. 24.
Quid illi qui esse contrarios vestigiis nostris Antipodes putant? number aliquid
loquuntur? aut est quispiam tam ineptus, qui credat esse homines, quorum
vestigia sunt superiora quam capita? aut ibi quae apud nos jacent
inversapendere? fruges and arbores deorsum versus crescere, pluvias and nives,
and grandinem sursum versus cadere in terram? and miratur aliquis hortos
pensiles inter septem mira narrari, quum Philosophi, and agros and maria, and
urbes and montes pensiles faciunt, etc. What (says he) are they that think
there are Antipodes, such as walk with their feet against ours? do they speak
any likelihood? or is there any one so foolish as to believe that there are men
whose heels are higher than their heads? that things which with us do lie on
the ground, do hang there? that the Plants and Trees grow downwards, that the
hail, and rain, and snow fall upwards to the earth? and do we admire the
hanging Orchards amongst the seven wonders, whereas here the Philosophers have
made the Field and Seas, the Cities and mountains hanging? What shall we think
(says he in Plutarch) that men do cling to that place like worms, or hang
by their claws as Cats? or if we suppose a man a little beyond the Center, to
be digging with a spade, is it likely (as it must be according to this opinion)
that the earth which he loosened, should of it self ascend upwards? or else
suppose two men with their middles about the Center, the feet of the one being
placed where the head of the other is, and so two other men cross them, yet
all these men thus situated according to this opinion should stand upright, and
many other such gross consequences would follow (says he) which a false
imagination is not able to fancy as possible. Upon which considerations, Bid
also denies the being of any Antipodes, De ratione temporum, Cap. 32.
Neque enim Antipodarum ullatenus est Fabulis accommodandus assensus, Nor
should we any longer assent to the Fable of Antipodes. So also Lucretius the
Poet speaking of the same subject, says, Sed vanus stolidis haec omnia
finxerit error. De not. rerum, Lib. 1.


That some idle fancy feigned these for fools to believe. Of this opinion was
Procopius Gazaeus, but he was persuaded to it by another kind of reason;
Comen* in 1. Cap. Genesis
for he thought that all the earth under us was sunk in the water, according
to the saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 24. 2.
He has founded the earth upon the Seas; and therefore he accounted it not
inhabited by any. Nay, Tostatus a man of later years and general learning,
does also confidently deny that there are any such Antipodes, though the reason
which he urges for it, be not so absurd as the former; For the Apostles,
Comment. in 1. Genes.
says he, traveled through the whole habitable world, but they never passed
the Equinoctial; and if you answer that they are said to go through all the
earth, because they went through all the known world; he replies, that this is
not sufficient, 1 Timothy 2. 4
since Christ would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his
truth, and therefore it is requisite that they should have traveled thither
also, if there had been any Inhabitants; especially since he did expressly
command them to go and teach all nations, and preach the Gospel through the
whole world, and therefore he thinks that as there are no men, Mat. 28. 19
so neither are there seas, or rivers, or any other conveniencie for
habitation. It Is commonly related of one Virgilius, Aventinus Annal. Boiorum.
lib. 3.
that he was excommunicated and condemned for a Heretic by Zachary Bishop of
Rome, because he was not of the same opinion. But Baronius says, Annal.
Eccles. A. D. 748.
it was because he thought there was another habitable world within ours. How
ever, you may well enough discern in these examples how confident many of
these great Scholars were in so gross an error, how unlikely, what an
incredible thing it seemed to them, that there should be any Antipodes; and yet
now this truth is as certain and plain, as sense or demonstration can make it.
This then which I now deliver, is not to be rejected, though it may seem to
contradict the common opinion.

2. Gross absurdities have been entertained by general consent. I might
instance in many remarkable examples, but I will only speak of the supposed
labor of the Moon in her eclipses, because this is nearest to the chief
matter in hand, and was received as a common opinion amongst many of the
Ancients, In so much that from hence they styled eclipses by the name of (...)
passions, or in the phrase of the Poets, Solis lunaeque labores.

And therefore Plutarch speaking of a Lunary eclipse, relates, that at such
times 'twas a custom amongst the Romans (the most civil and learned people in
the world) to sound brass Instruments, In vita Paul. Aen^il.
and hold great torches toward the heaven. (...). For by this means they
supposed the Moon was much eased in her labors; and therefore Ovid calls such
loud Instruments the auxiliaries or helps of the Moon, Metam. Lib. 4.
Cum frustra resonant era auxiliaria Lunae.

And therefore the Satyrist too, describing a loud Scold, says, She was able
to make noise enough to deliver the laboring Moon.

Vna laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae. Iuven. Sat. 6.
Now the reason of all this their ceremony, was, because they feared the world
would fall asleep, when one of its eyes began to wink, and therefore they
would do what they could by loud sounds to rouse it from its drowsinesse, and
keep it awake: by bright torches, to bestow that light upon it which it began
to lose.

Some of them thought hereby to keep the Moon in her orb, whereas otherwise
she would have fallen down upon the earth, and the world would have lost one
of its lights; for the credulous people believed, that Inchanters and Witches
could bring the Moon down, which made Virgil say, Cantus and e coelo possunt
deducere Lunam.

And those Wizards knowing the times of her eclipses, would then threaten to
show their skill, by pulling her out of her orb. So that when the silly
multitude saw that she began to look red, they presently feared they should
lose the benefit of her light, and therefore made a great noise that she might
not hear the sound of those Charms, which would otherwise bring her down;
and this is rendered for a reason of this custom by Pliny and Propertius: Not.
Hist. Lib. 2. c. 12.
Cantus and e curru lunam deducere tentant,
Et facerent, si non era repulsa sonent.


Plutarch gives another reason of it, and he says, it is because they would
hasten the Moon out of the dark shade wherein she was involved, that so she
might bring away the souls of those Saints that inhabit within her, which cry
out by reason they are then deprived of their wonted happiness, and cannot
hear the Music of the Spheres, but are forced to behold the torments, and
wailing of those damned souls which are represented to them as they are
tortured in the region of the air. But whether this or what ever else was the
meaning of this superstition, yet certainly 'twas a very ridiculous custom,
and bewrayed a great ignorance of those ancient times; especially since it was
not only received by the vulgar, such as were men of less note and learning,
but believed also by the more famous and wiser sort, such as were those great
Poets, Stesichorus and Pindar. And not only amongst the more sottish Heathens,
who might account that Planet to be one of their gods; but the Primitive
Christians also were in this kind guilty, which made Saint Ambrose so tartly to
rebuke those of his time, when he said, Tum turbatur carminibus Globus Lunae,
quando calicibus turbantur and oculi. When your heads are troubled with cups,
then you think the Moon to be troubled with charms.

And for this reason also did Maximus a Bishop, write a Homily against it,
wherein he showed the absurdity of that foolish superstition. Turinens. Episc.
I remember that Ludovicus Vives relates a more ridiculous story of a people
that imprisoned an Ass for drinking up the Moon, whose image appearing in the
water, was covered with a cloud as the Ass was drinking, for which the poor
beast was afterward brought to the bar to receive a sentence according to his
deserts, where the grave Senate being set to examine the matter, one of the
Counsel (perhaps wiser than the rest) rises up, and out of his deep judgment
thinks it not fit that their Town should lose its Moon, but that rather the
Ass should be cut up and that taken out of him; which sentence being approved
by the rest of those Politicians, as the subtillest way for the conclusion of
the matter, was accordingly performed. But whether this tale were true or no, I
will not question; however, there is absurdity enough in that former custom of
the Ancients, that may confirm the truth to be proved, and plainly declare
the insufficiency of common opinion to add true worth or estimation unto any
thing. So that from that which I have said may be gathered thus much.

1. That a new truth may seem absurd and impossible not only to the vulgar,
but to those also who are otherwise wise men and excellent Scholars; and hence
it will follow that every new thing which seems to oppose common principles is
not presently to be rejected, but rather to be pried into with a diligent
enquiry, since there are many things which are yet hid from us, and reserved
for future discovery.

2. That it is not the commonnesse of an opinion that can privilege it for a
truth; the wrong way is sometime a well beaten path, whereas the right way
(especially to hidden truths) may be less trodden and more obscure.

True indeed, the strangeness of this opinion will detract much from its
credit; but yet we should know that nothing is in it self strange, since
every natural effect has an equal dependence upon its cause, and with the
like necessity does follow from it; so that it is our ignorance which makes
things appear so; and hence it comes to pass that many more evident truths
seem incredible to such who know not the causes of things: you may as soon
persuade some Country Peasants that the Moon is made of green Cheese (as we
say) as that it is bigger than his Cart-wheele, since both seem equally to
contradict his sight, and he has not reason enough to lead him farther than
his senses. Nay suppose (says Plutarch) a Philosopher should be educated in
such a secret place, where he might not see either Sea or River, and
afterward should be brought out where one might show him the great Ocean,
telling him the quality of that water, that it is brackish salt and not
potable, and yet there were many vast creatures of all forms living in it,
which make use of the water as we do of the air, questionless he would
laugh at all this as being monstrous lies, and fables, without any color of
truth. Just so will this truth which I now deliver, appear unto others;
because we never dreamt of any such matter as a World in the Moon; because the
state of that place has as yet been veiled from our knowledge, therefore we
can scarcely assent to any such matter. Things are very hardly received which
are altogether strange to our thoughts and our senses. The soul may with less
difficulty be brought to believe any absurdity, when as it has formerly been
acquainted with some colors and probabilities for it; but when a new, and an
unheard of truth shall come before it, though it have good grounds and reasons,
yet the understanding is afraid of it as a stranger, and dares not admit it
into his belief, without a great deal of reluctancie and trial. And besides,
things that are not manifested to the senses, are not assented unto without
some labor of mind, some travail and discourse of the understanding; and
many lazy souls had rather quietly repose themselves in an easy error, than
take pains to search out the truth. The strangeness then of this opinion
which I now deliver, will be a great hinderance to its belief, but this is not
to be respected by reason it cannot be helped. I have stood the longer in the
Preface, because that prejudice which the mere title of the book may beget,
cannot easily be removed without a great deal of preparation, and I could not
tell otherwise how to rectify the thoughts of the Reader for an impartial
survey of the following discourse.

I must needs confess, though I had often thought with my self that it was
possible there might be a world in the Moon, yet it seemed such an uncouth
opinion that I never durst discover it, for fear of being counted singular,
and ridiculous; but afterward having read Plutarch, Galileus, Keplar, with some
others, and finding many of mine own thoughts confirmed by such strong
authority, I then concluded that it was not only possible there might be, but
probable that there was another habitable world in that Planet. In the
prosecuting of this assertion, I shall first endeavor to clear the way from
such doubts as may hinder the speed or ease of farther progress; and because
the suppositions implied in this opinion, may seem to contradict the
principles of reason or faith, it will be requisite that I first remove this
scruple, LIB. 1. Cap. 2.
showing the conformity of them to both these, and proving those truths that
may make way for the rest, which I shall labor to perform in the second,
third, fourth, and fifth Chapters, and then proceed to confirm such
Propositions, which do more directly belong to the maine point in hand.

Proposition 2.
That a plurality of worlds does not contradict any principle of reason or
faith.

It Is reported of Aristotle, that when he saw the Books of Moses, he commended
them for such a majestic style as might become a God, but withal he censured
that manner of writing to be very unfitting for a Philosopher; because there
was nothing proved in them, but matters were delivered as if they would rather
command than persuade belief. And it is observed that he sets down nothing
himself, but he confirms it by the strongest reasons that may be found,
there being scarce an argument of force for any subject in Philosophy, which
may not be picked out of his Writings; and therefore it is likely if there were
in reason a necessity of one only world, that he would have found out some
such necessary proof as might confirm it: Especially since he labors for it
so much in two whole Chapters. But now all the arguments which he himself
urges in this subject, De Coelo l. 1. c. 8. 9.
are very weak, and far enough from having in them any convincing power.
Therefore it is likely that a plurality of worlds does not contradict any
principle of reason. However, I will set down the two chief of his arguments
from his own works, and from them you may guess the force of the other.

The first is this, Ibid.
since every heavy body does naturally tend downwards, and every light body
upwards, what a hudling and confusion must there be if there were two places
for gravity, and two places for lightness: for it is probable that the earth
of that other world would fall down to this Center, and so mutually the air
and fire here ascend to those Regions in the other, which must needs much
derogate from the providence of nature, and cause a great disorder in his
works. But ratio haec est minime firma, De operibus Dei. part. 2. lib. 2. cap.
2.
(says Zanchy) And if you well consider the nature of gravity, you will
plainly see there is no ground to fear any such confusion; for heaviness is
nothing else but such a quality as causes a propension in its subject to tend
downwards toward its own Center; so that for some of that earth to come
hither, would not be said a fall but an ascension, since it moved from its own
place, and this would be impossible (says Ruvio) because against nature, and
therefore no more to be feared than the falling of the Heavens. De Coelo l. 1.
c. 9. q. 1.


If you reply that then according to this, there must be more Centers of
gravity than one; I answer. It Is very probable there are, nor can we well
conceive, what any piece of the Moon would do being severed from the rest in
the free and open air, but only return unto it again.

Another argument he had from his Master Plato, Metaphys. l. 12. c. 8.
that there is but one world, Diog. Laert. lib. 3.
because there is but one first mover, God.

Infirma etiam est haec ratio (says Zanchy) and we may justly deny the
consequence, since a plurality of worlds does not take away the unity of the
first mover. Vt enim forma substantialis, sic primum efficiens apparentem
solummodo multiplicitatem induit per signatam materiam (says a Countryman of
ours.) Nic. Hill. de Philosop. Epic. partic 379.
As the substantial form, so the efficient cause has only an appearing
multiplicity from its particular matter. You may see this point more largely
handled, and these Arguments more fully answered by Plutarch in his book (why
Oracles are silent) and Jacob Carpentarius in his comment on Alcinous.

But our opposites the Interpreters themselves, (who too often do jurare in
verba magistri) will grant that there is not any strength in these
consequences, and certainly then such weak arguments could not covince that
wise Philosopher, who in his other opinions was wont to be swayed by the
strength and power of reason: wherefore I should rather think that he had some
by-respect, which made him first assent to this opinion, and afterward strive
to prove it. Perhaps it was because he feared to displease his scholar
Alexander, of whom it is related that he wept to hear a disputation of another
world, Plutarch. de tranq. anim.
since he had not then attained the Monarchy of this; his restless wide heart
would have esteemed this Globe of Earth not big enough for him, if there had
been another, which made the Satyrist say of him, Aestuat infoelix angusto
limite mundi. Iuvenal.


That he did vex himself and sweat in his desires, as being pend up in a
narrow room, when he was confined but to one world. Before, he thought to
seat himself next the Gods; but now, when he had done his best, he must be
content with some equal, or perhaps superior Kings.

It may be, that Aristotle was moved to this opinion, that he might thereby
take from Alexander the occasion of this fear and discontent; or else,
perhaps, Aristotle himself was as loath to hold the possibility of a world
which he could not discover, as Alexander was to hear of one which he could
not conquer. It Is likely that some such by-respect moved him to this opinion,
since the arguments he urges for it, are confessed by his zealous followers and
commentators, to be very fleight and frivolous, and they themselves grant, what
I am now to prove, that there is not any evidence in the light of natural
reason, which can sufficiently manifest that there is but one world.

But however some may object, would it not be inconvenient and dangerous to
admit of such opinions that do destroy those principles of Aristotle, which
all the world has so long followed?

This question is much controverted by some of the Romish Divines; Apologia pro
Galilaeo.
Campanella has writ a Treatise in defense of it, in whom you may see many
things worth the reading and notice.

To it I answer, that this position in Philosophy, does not bring any
inconvenience to the rest, since it is not Aristotle, but truth that should be
the rule of our opinions, and if they be not both found together, we may say to
him, as he said to his Master Plato, (...). Ethic. l. 1. c. 6.
Though Plato were his friend, yet he would rather adhere to truth than him.

I must needs grant, that we are all much beholden to the industry of the
ancient Philosophers, and more especially to Aristotle, for the greater part of
our learning; but yet it is not ingratitude to speak against him, when he
opposes truth; for then many of the Fathers would be very guilty, especially
Justin, who has writ a Treatise purposely against him.

But suppose this opinion were false, yet it is not against the faith, and so it
may serve for the better confirmation of that which is true; the sparks of
error, being forced out by opposition, as the sparks of fire by the striking
of the flint and steel. But suppose too that it were heretical, and against
the faith, yet may it be admitted with the same privilege as Aristotle, from
whom many more dangerous opinions have proceeded: as that the world is
eternal, that God cannot have while to look after these inferior things,
that after death there is no reward or punishment, and such like blasphemies,
which strike directly at the fundamentals of our Religion.

So that it is justly to be wondered why some should be so superstitious in
these days, as to stick closer unto him, than unto Scripture, as if his
Philosophy were the only foundation of all divine truths.

Upon these grounds both St. Vincentius and Serafinus de firmo (as I have seen
them quoted) think that Aristotle was the violl of Gods wrath, which was powered
out upon the waters of wisdom by the third Angel; Rev. 16. 4.
But for my part, I think the world is much beholden to him for all its
sciences. But yet 'twere a shame for these later ages to rest our selves
merely upon the labors of our Forefathers, as if they had informed us of all
things to be known; and when we are set upon their shoulders, not to see
further than they themselves did. 'Twere a superstitious, a lazy opinion to
think Aristotle's works the bounds and limits of all humane invention, beyond
which there could be no possibility of reaching. Certainly there are yet many
things left to discovery, and it cannot be any inconvenience for us, to
maintain a new truth, or rectify an ancient error.

But the position (say some) is directly against Scripture, for

1. Moses tells us but of one world, and his History of the Creation had been
very imperfect, if God had made another.

2. Saint John speaking of Gods works, says he made the world, in the singular
number, and therefore there is but one: it is the argument of Aquinas, Part 1.
Q. 47. Art. 3.
and he thinks that none will oppose it, but such who with Democritus esteem
some blind chance, and not any wise providence to be the framer of all things.

3. The opinion of more worlds has in ancient times been accounted a heresy,
and Baronius affirms that for this very reason Virgilius was cast out of his
Bishopric, and excommunicated from the Church. Annal. Eccl. A. D. 748.


4. A fourth argument there is urged by Aquinas; if there be more worlds than
one, then they must either be of the same, or of a diverse nature; but they are
not of the same kind; Ibid.
for this were needless, and would argue an improvidence, since one would have
no more perfection than the other; not of diverse kinds, for then one of them
could not be called the world or universe, since it did not contain universal
perfection. I have cited this argument, because it is so much stood upon by
Julius Caesar la Galla, De Phaenom in orb Lunae.
one that has purposely writ a Treatise against this opinion which I now
deliver; but the Dilemma is so blunt that it cannot cut on either side, and the
consequences so weak that I dare trust them without an answer; And (by the
way) you may see this later Author in that place, where he endeavors to prove
a necessity of one world, does leave the chief matter in hand, and take much
needless pains to dispute against Democritus, who thought that the world was
made by the casual concourse of atoms in a great vacuum. It should seem that
either his cause or his skill was weak, or else he would have ventured upon a
stronger adversary. These arguments which I have set down, are the chiefest
which I have met with against this subject, and yet the best of these has not
force enough to endanger the truth that I have delivered.

Unto the two first it may be answered, that the negative authority of
Scripture is not prevalent in those things which are not the fundamentals of
Religion.

But you will reply, though it do not necessarily conclude, yet it is probable if
there had been another world, we should have had some notice of it in
Scripture.

I answer, it is as probable that the Scripture should have informed us of the
planets, they being very remarkable parts of the Creation; and yet neither
Moses, nor Job, nor the Psalms (the places most frequent in Astronomicall
observations) nor any other Scripture mention any of them but the Sun and
Moon. Because the difference betwixt them and the other stars, was known
only to those who were learned men, and had skill in Astronomy. As for that
expression in Job (...) the stars of the morning, Job 38 7.
it is in the plural number, and therefore cannot properly be applied to
Venus. And for that in Isaiah (...), it is confessed to be a word of obscure
interpretation, Isai. 14. 12.
and therefore is but by guess translated in that sense. It being a true and
common rule, Fromond. Vesta. t. 3. cap. 2.
that Hebraei reisideralis minime curiosi coelestium nominum penuria laborant.
The Jews being but little skilled in Astronomy, So 2 Reg. 23. 5.
their language dos want proper expressions for the heavenly bodies, (...).
Which is interpreted both for the planets and for the 12 signs.
and therefore they are feign sometimes to attribute the same name unto diverse
constellations.

Now if the Holy Ghost had intended to reveal unto us any natural secrets,
certainly he would never have omitted the mention of the planets, Quorum motu
nihilest quod de Conditoris sapientia testatur evidentius apud eos qui capiunt.
Keplar. introduct. in Mart.
Which do so evidently set forth the wisdom of the Creator. And therefore
you must know that it is besides the scope of the old Testament or the new, to
discover any thing unto us concerning the secrets of Philosophy; it is not his
intent in the new Testament, since we cannot conceive how it might any way
belong either to the Historical, exegeticall, or prophetical parts of it: nor
is it his intent in the old Testament, as is well observed by our Countryman
Master WRIGHT. In Epist. ad Gilbert.
Non Mosis aut Prophetarum institutum fuisse videtur Mathematicas aliquas aut
Physicas subtilitates promulgare, sed ad vulgi captum and loquendi morem,
quemadmodum nutrices infantulis solent, sese accommodare. It Is not the
endeavor of Moses or the Prophets to discover any Mathematical or
Philosophical subtilties, but rather to accommodate themselves to vulgar
capacities, and ordinary speech, as nurses are wont to use their Infants. True
indeed, Moses is there to handle the History of the Creation. But it is certain
(says Calvin) that his purpose is to treat only of the visible form of the
world, Calvin in 1 Genesis
and those parts of it which might be most easily understood by the ignorant
and ruder sort of people, and therefore we are not thence to expect the
discovery of any natural secret. Arts reconditas aliunde discat qui volet;
hic spiritus Dei omnes simul sine exceptione docere voluit. As for more hidden
Arts, they must be looked for elsewhere; the Holy Ghost did here intend to
instruct all without exception. And therefore it is observed, that Moses does
not any where meddle with such matters as were very hard to be conceived; for
being to inform the common people as well as others, he does it after a vulgar
way, as it is commonly noted, declaring the original chiefly of those things
which are obvious to the sense, and being silent of other things which then
could not well be apprehended. And therefore Pererius proposing the question,
Com. in 1 Genesis 11.
why the Creation of plants and herbs is mentioned, but not of mettalls and
mineralls?

Answers. Quia istarum rerum generatio est vulgo occulta and ignota. Because
these things are not so commonly known as the other; and he adds, Moses non
omnia, sed manifesta omnibus enarranda suscepit. Moses did not intend to relate
unto us the beginnings of all things, but those only which were most evident
unto all men. Part 1. Q. 68. Art. 3.
And therefore too, Aquinas observes that he writes nothing of the air,
because that being invisible, the people knew not whether there were any such
body or no. And for this very reason, St. Ierom also thinks that there is
nothing expressed concerning the Creation of Angels, Epist. 139. ad Cypri.
because the rude and ignorant vulgar were not so capable of apprehending their
natures. So Pererius in 2 Genesis
And yet notwithstanding, these are as remarkable parts of the Creation, and as
fit to be known as another world. And therefore the Holy Ghost too uses such
vulgar expressions, which set things forth rather as they appear, than as they
are, as when he calls the Moon one of the greater lights, Genesis 1. 16.
whereas it is the least that we can see in the whole heavens. So afterward
speaking of the great rain which drowned the world; Genesis 11.
he says, Mala. 3. 10.
The windows of heaven were opened, because it seemed to come with that
violence, Sir Walter Rawly c. 7. sect. 6.
as if it were poured out from windows in the Firmament.

And in reference to this, a drowth is described in sundry other Deuteronomy. 11. 17.
places by the heavens being shut up. 1 Reg. 3. 35
So that the phrases which the Holy Ghost uses concerning these things, Luke 4.
25.
are not to be understood in a literal sense; but rather as vulgar
expressions; and this rule is set down by Saint Austin, l. 2. in Genesis Psalm.
136. 6
where speaking concerning that in the Psalm, who stretched the earth upon the
waters, he notes that when the words of Scripture shall seem to contradict
common sense or experience, there are they to be understood in a qualified
sense, and not according to the letter. And it is observed, that for want of
this rule, some of the Ancients have fastened strange absurdities upon the words
of the Scripture. Hexamer. lib. 2.
So Saint Ambrose esteemed it a heresy to think that the Sun and Stars
were not very hot, Item. Basil. Hom. 3. in Genes.
as being against the words of Scripture, Wisd. 2. 4. 17. 5.
Psalm. 19. 6. where the Psalmist says, Ecclus. 43. 3. 4.
that there is nothing that is hid from the heat of the Sun. So others there
are that would prove the heavens not to be round, out of that place, Psalm. 104.
2. He stretched out the heavens like a curtain. Com. in c. 1. Genesis
So Procopius also was of opinion, that the earth was founded upon the waters;
nay, he made it part of his faith, proving it out of Psalm. 24. 2. He has
founded the earth upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. These and
such like absurdities have followed, when men look for the grounds of
Philosophy in the words of Scripture. So that, from what has been said, I may
conclude that the silence of Scripture concerning any other world, is not
sufficient argument to prove that there is none. Thus for the two first
arguments.

Unto the third, I may answer, that this very example is quoted by others, to
show the ignorance of those primitive times, who did sometimes condemn what
they did not understand, and have often censured the lawful and undoubted
parts of Mathematics for heretical, because they themselves could not
perceive a reason of it. And therefore their practice in this particular, is no
sufficient testimony against us.

But lastly, I answer to all the above named objections, that the term (World)
may be taken in a double sense, more generally for the whole Universe, as it
implies in it the elementarie and aethereall bodies, the stars and the earth.
Secondly, more particularly for an inferior World consisting of elements.

Now the maine drift of all these arguments, is to confute a plurality of
Worlds in the first sense, and if there were any such, it might, perhaps, seem
strange, that Moses, or St. John should either not know, or not mention its
creation. And Virgilius was condemned for this opinion, because he held quod
sit alius mundus sub terra, aliusque Sol and Luna, (as Baronius) that within
our globe of earth, there was another world, another Sun and Moon, and so he
might seem to exclude this from the number of the other creatures.

But now there is no such danger in this opinion, which is here delivered,
since this World is said to be in the Moon, whose creation is particularly
expressed.

So that in the first sense I yield, that there is but one world, which is all
that the arguments do prove; but understand it in the second sense, and so I
affirm there may be more, nor do any of the above named objections prove the
contrary.

Neither can this opinion derogate from the divine Wisdom (as Aquinas thinks)
but rather advance it, showing a compendium of providence, that could make the
same body a world, and a Moon; a world for habitation, and a Moon for the use
of others, and the ornament of the whole frame of Nature. For as the members of
the body serve not only for the preservation of themselves, but for the use
and convenience of the whole, Cusanus dc doct. ignor. l. 2. c. 12.
as the hand protects the head as well as saves it self; so is it in the parts
of the Universe, where each one may serve as well for the conservation of that
which is within it, as the help of others without it.

Mersennus a late Jesuit, Comment. in Genesis Qu. 19. Art. 2.
proposing the question whether or no the opinion of more worlds than one, be
heretical and against the faith? He answers it negatively, because it does not
contradict any express place of Scripture, or determination of the Church. And
though (says he) it seems to be a rash opinion, as being against the consent
of the Fathers; yet if this controversy be chiefly Philosophical, then their
authorities are not of such weight. Unto this it may be added, that the consent
of the Fathers is prevalent only in such points as were first controverted
amongst them, and then generally decided one way, and not in such other
particulars as never fell under their examination and dispute.

I have now in some measure, showed that a plurality of worlds does not
contradict any principle of reason or place of Scripture, LIB. I. Cap. 3.
and so cleared the first part of that supposition which is implied in the
opinion.

It may next be enquired, whether it is possible there may be a globe of
elements in that which we call the aethereall parts of the Universe; for if
this (as it is according to the common opinion) be privileged from any change
or corruption, it will be in vain then to imagine any element there; and if we
will have another world, we must then seek out some other place for its
situation. The third Proposition therefore shall be this.

Proposition 3.
That the heavens do not consist of any such pure matter, which can privilege
them from the like change and corruption, as these inferior bodies are liable
unto.

IT has been often questioned amongst the ancient Fathers and Philosophers,
what kind of matter that should be of which the heavens are framed. Some think
that they consist of a fifth substance distinct from the four elements, De
Coelo li. 1. cap. 2.
as Aristotle holds, and with him some of the late Schoolmen, whose subtle
brains could not be content to attribute to those vast glorious bodies but
commonmaterialls, and therefore they themselves had rather take pains to
prefer them to some extraordinary nature; whereas notwithstanding, all the
arguments they could invent, were not able to convince a necessity of any such
matter, as is confessed by their own Colleg. Connimb. de coeto. l. 1. c. 2. q.
6. art. 3.
side. It were much to be desired, that these men had not in other cases, as
well as this, multiplied things without necessity, and as if there had not
been enough to be known in the secrets of nature, have spunne out new
subjects from their own brains, to find more work for future ages; I shall
not mention their arguments, since it is already confessed, that they are none of
them of any necessary consequence; and besides, you may see them set down in
any of the books de Coelo.

But it is the general consent of the Fathers, and the opinion of Lombard,
that the heavens consist of the same matter with these sublunary bodies. St.
Ambrose is so confident of it, In Hexam. lib. 4.
that he esteems the contrary a heresy. True indeed, they differ much among
themselves, some thinking them to be made of fire, others of water, and others
of both; but herein they generally agree, that they are all framed of some
element or other. Enarrat. in Genes. art. 10.
Which Dionysius Carthusianus collects from that place in Genesis, where the
heavens are mentioned in their creation, as divided only in distance from the
elementary bodies, and not as being made of any new matter. To this purpose
others cite the derivation of the Hebrew word (...), quasi (...) ibi and (...)
aquae or quasi (...) ignis and (...) aquae. Because they are framed out of
these elements. But concerning this, you may see sundry discourses more at
large in Ludovicus Molina, Eusebius Nirembergius, with diverse others. In opere
6. dierum. disput. 5.
The venerable Bede thought the Planets to consist of all the four elements;
and it is likely that the other parts are of an aereous substance, as will be
showed afterward; however, In lib. de Mundi constit.
I cannot now stand to recite the arguments for either; I have only urged
these Authorities to countervaile Aristotle, and the Schoolmen, and the better
to make way for a proof of their corruptibility.

The next thing then to be enquired after, 2 Pet. 3. 12
is, whether they be of a corruptible nature, not whether they can be destroyed
by God; for this, Scripture puts out of doubt.

Nor whether or no in a long time they would wear away and grow worse; for
from any such fear they have been lately privileged. By Doctor Hakewill. Ap.
l. lib. 2.
But whether they are capable of such changes and vicissitudes, as this
inferior world is liable unto?

The two chief opinions concerning this, have both erred in some extremity, the
one side going so far from the other, that they have both gone beyond the
right, whilst Aristotle has opposed the truth, as well as the Stoics.

Some of the Ancients have thought, that the heavenly bodies have stood in need
of nourishment from the elements, by which they were continually fed, and so had
diverse alterations by reason of their food; this is fathered on Heraclitus,
Plutarch. de plac. philos. l. 2. c. 17.
followed by that great Naturalist Pliny, and in general attributed to all the
Stoics. You may see Seneca expressly to this purpose iu these words. Not Hist.
l 2. c. 9.
Ex illa alimenta omnibus animalibus, omnibus satis, Not. quaest. lib. 2. cap. 5
omnibus stellis dividuntur; hinc profertur quo sustineantur tot Sidera tam
exercitata, tam avida, per diem, noctemque, ut in opere, ita in pastu. Speaking
of the earth, he says, from thence it is that nourishment is divided to all
the living creatures, the Plants and the Stars; hence were sustained so many
constellations, so laborious, so greedy, both day and night, as well in their
feeding as working. Thus also Lucan sings, Necnon Oceano pasci Phoebumque
polumque Credimus.

Unto these Ptolomie also that learned Egyptian seemed to agree, 1. Apostcl.
when he affirms that the body of the Moon is moister, and cooler than any
of the other Planets, by reason of the earthly vapors that are exhaled unto
it. You see these Ancients thought the Heavens to be so far from this
imagined incorruptibility, that rather like the weakest bodies they stood in
need of some continual nourishment, without which they could not subsist.

But Aristotle and his followers were so far from this, De caelo. l. 1. c. 3.
that they thought those glorious bodies could not contain within them any
such principles as might make them liable to the least change or corruption;
and their chief reason was, because we could not in so long a space discern
any alteration amongst them; But unto this I answer.

1. Supposing we could not, yet would it not hence follow that there were
none, as he himself in effect does confess in another place; for speaking
concerning our knowledge of the Heavens, De coelo. l. 2 cap. 3.
he says, it is very imperfect and difficult, by reason of the vast distance of
those bodies from us, and because the changes which may happen unto them, are
not either big enough, or frequent enough to fall within the apprehension and
observation of our senses; no wonder then if he himself be deceived in his
assertions concerning these particulars. But yet, in this he implies, that if
a man were nearer to these heavenly bodies, he would be a fitter Judge to
decide this controversy than himself. Now its our advantage, that by the help
of Galileus his glass, we are advanced nearer unto them, and the heavens are
made more present to us than they were before. However, as it is with us where
there be many vicissitudes and successions of things, though the earth abides
for ever: So likewise may it be amongst the planets, in which though there
should be diverse alterations, yet they themselves may still continue of the
same quantity and light.

2. Though we could not by our senses see such alterations, yet our reason
might perhaps sufficiently convince us of them. Nor can we well conceive how
the Sun should reflect against the Moon, and yet not produce some alteration
of heat. Diogenes the Philosopher was hence persuaded, that those scorching
heats had burnt the Moon into the form of a Pumice-stone.

3. I answer, that there have been some alterations observed there; witness
those comets which have been seen above the Moon. As also those spots or
clouds that encompasse the body of the Sun, amongst which, there is a frequent
succession by a corruption of the old, and a generation of new. So that though
Aristotle's consequence were sufficient, when he proved that the heavens were
not corruptible, because there have not any changes been discovered in them;
yet this by the same reason must be as prevalent, that the Heavens are
corruptible, because there have been so many alterations observed there; But
of these, together with a farther confirmation of this proposition, I shall
have occasion to speak afterward; In the mean space, I will refer the
Reader to that work of Sheiner, a late Jesuit which he titles his Rosa Vrsina,
Lib. 4. par. 2 cap 24. 35.
where he may see this point concerning the corruptibility of the Heavens
largely handled, and sufficiently confirmed.

There are some other things, on which I might here take an occasion to enlarge
my self; but because they are directly handled by many others, and do not
immediately belong to the chief matter in hand, I shall therefore refer the
Reader to their Authors, and omit any large proof of them my self, as
desiring all possible brevity.

1. The first is this: That there are no solid Orbs. If there be a habitable
world in the Moon (which I now affirm) it must follow, that her Orb is not
solid as Aristotle supposed; and if not hers, why any of the other. I rather
think that they are all of a fluid (perhaps aereous) substance. Saint Ambrose,
Isa. 51. 6.
and Saint Basil did endeavor to prove this out of that place in I say, Ant.
lect. l. 1. c. 4.
where they are compared to smoke, as they are both quoted by Rhodiginus.
Eusebius Nicembergius does likewise from that place confute the solidity and
incorruptibility of the Heavens, Hist. not. l. 2. c. 11. 13.
and cites for the same interpretation the authority of Eustachius of Antioch;
and Saint Austin, I am sure, in one place seems to assent unto this opinion,
In lib sup. ^. Genesis ad lit.
though he does often in his other works contradict it.

If you esteem the testimony of the ancient Fathers, to be of any great force
or consequence in a Philosophical dispute, you may see them to this purpose in
Sixtus Senensis lib. 5. Biblioth. annot. 14. The chief reasons, that are
commonly urged for the confirmation of it, are briefly these three.

1 From the altitude of diverse comets, which have been observed to be above
the planets, thorough whose Orbs (if they had been solid) there would not have
been any passage. To these may be added those lesser planets lately discovered
about Jupiter and Saturn, for which Astronomers have not yet framed any Orbs.

2 From that uncertainty of all Astronomicall observations, which will follow
upon the supposition of such solid spheres. For then we should never discern
any Star but by a multitude of refractions, and so consequently we could not
possibly find their true situations either in respect of us, or in regard of
one another: Since what ever the eye discernes by a refracted beam, it
apprehends to be in some other place than wherein it is. But now this would be
such an inconvenience, as would quite subvert the grounds and whole Art of
Astronomy, and therefore is by no means to be admitted.

Unto this it is commonly answered, that all those Orbs are equally diaphanous,
though nor of a continued quantity. We reply, that supposing they were, yet
this cannot hinder them from being the causes of refraction, which is produced
as well by the diversity of superficies, as the different perspicuity of
bodies. Two glasses put together, will cause a diverse refraction from another
single one that is but of equal thickness and perspicuity.

3 From the different height of the same planet at several times. For if
according to the usual Hypothesis, there should be such distinct, solid Orbs,
then it would be impossible that the planets should entrench upon one another
Orbs, or that two of them at several times should be above one another, which
notwithstanding has bin proved to be so by later experience. Tycho has
observed, that Venus is sometimes nearer to us than the Sun or Mercury, and
sometimes farther off than both; which appearances Regiomontanus himself does
acknowledge, and withal, does confess that they cannot be reconciled to the
common Hypothesis.

But for your better satisfaction herein, I shall refer you to the above
named Scheiner, Lib. 4 p. 11. 2. cap 7. 26 30.
in his Rosa Vrsina, in whom you may see both authorities and reason, very
largely and distinctly set down for this opinion. For the better confirmation
of which he adjoynes also some authentical Epistles of Fredericus Caesius
Lynceus, a Noble Prince, written to Bellarmine, containing diverse reasons to
the same purpose. You may also see the same truth set down by Johannes Pena,
in his Preface to Euclids Optics, and Christoph. Rothmannus, both who thought
the Firmament to be only air: De stella l. 15. 72. l. 1. c. 9.
and though the noble Tycho do dispute against them, yet he himself holds
Quod propius ad veritatis penetralia accedit haec opinio, quam Aristotelica
vulgariter approbata, quae coelum pluribus realibus atque imperviis orbibus
citra rem replevit. That this opinion comes nearer to the truth, than that
common one of Aristotle which has to no purpose filled the Heavens with such
real and impervious Orbs.

2. There is no element of fire, which must be held with this opinion here
delivered; for if we suppose a world in the Moon, then it will follow, that
the sphere of fire, either is not there where it is usually placed in the
concavity of his Orb, or else that there is no such thing at all, which is
most probable, since there are not any such solid Orbs, that by their swift
motion might heat and enkindle the adjoining air, which is imagined to be the
reason of that element. The arguments that are commonly urged to this purpose,
are these.

1 That which was before alleged concerning the refractions which will be
caused by a different medium. For if the matter of the heavens be of one
thickness, and the element of fire another, and the upper Region of air
distinct from both these, and the lower Region several from all the rest,
there will then be such a multiplicity of refractions, as must necessarily
destroy the certainty of all Astronomicall observations. All which
inconveniences might be avoided by supposing (as we do) that there is only
one Orb of vaporous air which encompasses our earth, all the rest being
Aethereall and of the same perspicuity.

2 The situation of this element does no way agree with Aristotle's own
principles, or that common providence of nature, which we may discern in
ordinary matters. For if the heavens be without all elementary qualities, as is
usually supposed, then it would be a very incongruous thing for the element of
fire to be placed immediately next unto it: Since the heat of this is the most
powerful and vigorous quality that is amongst all the rest; And Nature in her
other works, does not join extremes, but by something of a middle
disposition. So in the very frame of our bodies, the bones which are of a hard
substance, and the flesh of a soft, are not joined together but by the
intercession of membranes and grissels, such as being of a middle nature may
fitly come betwixt.

3 It Is not conceiveable for what use or benefit there should be any such
element in that place, and certain it is that Nature does not do any thing in
vain.

4 Betwixt two extremes there can be but one Medium, and therefore between
those two opposite elements of earth and water, it may seem more convenient to
place only the air, which shall partake of middle qualities different from
both.

5 Fire does not seem so properly and directly to be opposed to any thing as
Ice, and if the one be not an element, why should the other?

If you object that the fire which we commonly use, does always tend upwards.
I answer, This cannot prove that there is a natural place for such an element,
since our adversaries themselves do grant that culinary and elementary fire
are of different kinds. The one does burn, shine, and corrupt its subject; the
other disagrees from it in all these respects. And therefore from the ascent of
the one, we cannot properly infer the being or situation of the other.

But for your farther satisfaction herein, you may peruse Cardan, Johannes Pena
that learned Frenchman, the noble Tycho, with diverse others who have purposely
handled this proposition.

3. I might add a third, viz. that there is no Music of the spheres; for if
they be not solid, how can their motion cause any such sound as is conceived? I
do the rather meddle with this, because Plutarch speaks as if a man might
very conveniently hear that harmony, if he were an inhabitant in the Moon.
But I guess that he said this out of incogitancy, and did not well consider
those necessary consequences which depended upon his opinion. However, the
world would have no great loss in being deprived of this Music, unless at
sometimes we had the privilege to hear it: Then indeed Philo the Jew thinks it
would save us the charges of diet, De somniis.
and we might live at an easy rate by feeding at the ear only, and receiving
no other nourishment; and for this very reason (says he) was Moses enabled to
tarry forty days and forty nights in the Mount without eating any thing,
because he there heard the melody of the Heavens. -- Risum teneatis. I know
this Music has had great Patrons, both sacred and profane Authors, such as
Ambrose, Bid, Boethius, Anselme, Plato, Cicero, and others; but because it is
not now, I think, affirmed by any, I shall not therefore bestow either pains
or time in arguing against it.

It may suffice that I have only named these three last, and for the two more
necessary, have referred the Reader to others for satisfaction. I shall in the
next place proceed to the nature of the Moons body, to know whether that be
capable of any such conditions, as may make it possible to be inhabited, and
what those qualities are wherein it more nearly agrees with our earth. LIB. 1.
Cap. 4.


Proposition 4.
That the Moon is a solid, compacted, opacous body.

I Shall not need to stand long in the proof of this Proposition, since it is
a truth already agreed on by the general consent of the most and the best
Philosophers.

1 It is solid, in opposition to fluid, as is the air; for how otherwise could
it beat back the light which it receives from the Sun?

But here it may be questioned, whether or no the Moon bestow her light upon
us by the reflection of the Sunbeames from the superficies of her body, or else
by her own illumination? Some there are who affirm this latter part. So De
coelo. l. 2. com. 49
Averroes, Ant. lection. li. 20. c. 4.
Caelius Rhodiginus, De phaenom. Lunae. c. 11.
Julius Caesar, etc. And their reason is, because this light is discerned in
many places, whereas those bodies which give light by reflection, can there only
be perceived where the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence,
and this is only in one place; as in a looking-glass, those beams which are
reflected from it, cannot be perceived in every place where you may see the
glass, but only there where your eye is placed on the same line whereon the
beams are reflected.

But to this I answer, That the argument will not hold of such bodies whose
superficies is full of unequal parts and gibbosities as the Moon is. Wherefore
it is as well the more probable as the more common opinion, that her light
proceeds from both these causes, from reflection and illumination; nor does it
herein differ from our earth, since that also has some light by illumination:
for how otherwise would the parts about us in a Sunshine day appear so
bright, when as the rays of reflection cannot enter into our eye?

For the better illustration of this, we may consider the several ways whereby
diverse bodies are enlightened. Either as water by admitting the beams into its
substance; or as air and thin clouds, by transmitting the rays quite through
their bodies; or as those things that are of an opacous nature and smooth
superficies, which reflect the light only in one place; or else as those things
which are of an opacous nature and rugged superficies, which by a kind of
circumfluous reflection, are at the same time discernable in many places, as our
Earth and the Moon.

2. It is compact, and not a spungie and porous substance* But this is denied
by Plut. de pla. phil. l. 2. c. 13.
Diogenes, Opt. lib. 4.
Vitellio, and Com. Purbac. Theo. p. 164.
Reinoldus, and some others, who held the Moon to be of the same kind of
nature as a Pumice stone; and this, say they, is the reason why in the Suns
eclipses there appears within her a duskish ruddy color, because the Sun
beams being refracted in passing through the pores of her body, must
necessarily be represented under such a color.

But I reply, if this be the cause of her redness, then why does she not
appear under the same form when she is about a Sextile Aspect, and the
darkened part of her body is discernable? for then also do the same rays pass
through her, and therefore in all likelihood should produce the same effect;
and notwithstanding those beams are then diverted from us, that they cannot
enter into our eyes by a straight line, yet must the color still remain
visible in her body. And besides, according to this opinion, the spots would
not always be the same, but diverse as the various distance of the Sun
requires. Scaliger Exercit. 80 sect. 13.
Again, if the Sun beams did pass through her, why then has she not a tail
(says Scaliger) as the Comets? why does she appear in such an exact round?
and not rather attended with a long flame, since it is merely this penetration
of the Sun beams, that is usually attributed to be the cause of beards in
blazing stars.

3. It is opacous, transparent or diaphanous like Crystal or glass, as
Empedocles thought, Plut. de facie Lunae.
who held the Moon to be a globe of pure congealed air, like hail enclosed in
a sphere of fire; for then,

1. Why does she not always appear in the full? since the light is dispersed
through all her body?

2. How can the interposition of her body so darken the Sun, Thucid. Livij.
or cause such great eclipses as have turned day into night, Plut. de facis
Lunae.
that have discovered the stars, and frighted the birds with such a sudden
darkness, that they fell down upon the earth, as it is related in diverse
Histories. And therefore Herodotus telling of an eclipse which fell in Xerxes
time, describes it thus: Herodot. l. 7 c 37.
(...). The Sun leaving his wonted seat in the heavens, vanished away: all
which argues such a great darkness, as could not have been, if her body had
been perspicuous. Yet some there are who interpret all these relations to be
hyberbolicall expressions; and the noble Tycho thinks it naturally impossible
that any eclipse should cause such darkness, because the body of the Moon can
never totally cover the Sun. However, in this he is singular, all other
Astronomers (if I may believe Keplar) being on the contrary opinion, by reason
the Diameter of the Moon does for the most part appear bigger to us than the
Diameter of the Sun.

But here Julius Caesar once more, De phaenom. Lunae. c. 11.
puts in to hinder our passage. The Moon (says he) is not altogether opacous,
because it is still of the same nature with the heavens which are incapable of
total opacity: and his reason is, because perspicuity is an inseparable
accident of those purer bodies; and this he thinks must necessarily be
granted; for he stops there, and proves no further; but to this I shall defer
an answer, till he has made up his argument.

We may frequently see, that her body does so eclipse the Sun, as our Earth
does the Moon. And besides, the mountains that are observed there, do cast a
dark shadow behind them, Prop. 9.
as shall be showed afterward. Since then the like interposition of them both,
does produce the like effect, they must necessarily be of the like natures,
that is, alike opacous, which is the thing to be showed; and this was the
reason (as the Interpreters guess) why Aristotle affirmed the Moon to be of
the Earths nature, In lib. de animalib.
because of their agreement in opacity, LIB. 1. Cap. 5.
whereas all the other elements save that, are in some measure perspicuous.

But, the greatest difference which may seem to make our Earth altogether
unlike the Moon, is, because the one is a bright body, and has light of its
own, and the other a gross dark body which cannot shine at all. It Is
requisite therefore that in the next place I clear this doubt, and show that
the Moon has no more light of her own than our Earth.

Proposition 5.
That the Moon has not any light of her own.

It Was the fancy of some of the Jews, and more especially of Rabbi Simeon,
Tostatus in 1 Genesis
that the Moon was nothing else but a contracted Sun, Hyeron. de Sancta
fide. Hebraeomast. l. 2. c. 4
and that both those planets at their first creation, were equal both in light
and quantity. For, because God did then call them both great lights, therefore
they inferred that they must be both equal in bigness. But a while after (as
the tradition goes) the ambitious Moon put up her complaint to God against the
Sun, showing that it was not fit there should be two such great lights in the
heavens; a Monarchy would best become the place of order and harmony. Upon
this, God commanded her to contract her self into a narrower compass; but
she being much discontented hereat, replies, What! because I have spoken that
which is reason and equity, must I therefore be diminished? This sentence could
not choose but much trouble her; and for this reason was she in great distress
and grief for a long space; but that her sorrow might be some way pacified,
God bid her be of good cheer, because her privileges and Charter should be
greater than the Suns; he should appear in the day time only, she both in
the day and night; but her melancholy being not satisfied with this, she
replied again, That, that alas was no benefit; for in the day time she should
be either not seen, or not noted. Wherefore, God to comfort her up, promised,
that his people the Israelites should celebrate all their feasts and holy days
by a computation of her months; but this being not able to content her, she
has looked very melancholy ever since; however, she has still reserved much
light of her own.

Others there were, that did think the Moon to be a round globe; the one half
of whose body was of a bright substance, the other half being dark; and the
diverse conversions of those sides toward our eyes, caused the variety of her
appearances: of this opinion was Berosus, as he is cited by Lib. 9.
Architecturae.
Vitruvius; and Narratio Psalmorum. item. ep. 119.
St. Austin thought it was probable enough. But this fancy is almost equally
absurd with the former, and both of them sound rather like fables, than
Philosophical truths. You may commonly see how this latter does contradict
frequent and easy experience; for it is observed, that that spot which is
perceived about her middle when she is in the increase, may be discerned in
the same place when she is in the full: whence it must follow, that the same
part which was before darkened, is after enlightened, and that the one part is
not always dark, and the other light of it self. But enough of this, I would
be loath to make an enemy, that I may afterward overcome him, or bestow time in
proving that which is already granted; I suppose now, that neither of them has
any patrons, and therefore need no confutation.

It Is agreed upon by all sides, that this Planet receives most of her light
from the Sun; but the chief controversy is, whether or no she has any of
her own? The greater multitude affirm this. Cardan amongst the rest, De
Subtle. lib. 3.
is very confident of it, and he thinks that if any of us were in the Moon at
the time of her greatest eclipse, Lunam aspiceremus non secus ac innumeris
cereis splendidissimis accensis, atque in eas oculis defixis caecutiremus; We
should perceive so great a brightness of her own, that would blind us with
the mere sight, and when she is enlightened by the Sun, then no Eagles eye (if
there were any there) is able to look upon her. This Cardan says, and he does
but say it, without bringing any proof for its confirmation. However, I will
set down the arguments that are usually urged for this opinion, and they are
taken either from Scripture, or reason; from Scripture is urged that place, 1
Cor. 15. where it is said, There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory
of the Moon. Ulysses Albergettus urges that in Math. 24. 29. (...), The Moon
shall not give her light: therefore (says he) she has some of her own.

But to these we may easily answer, that the glory and light there spoken of,
may be said to be hers, though it be derived, as you may see in many other
instances.

The arguments from reason are taken either.

1. From that light which is discerned in her, when there is a total eclipse
of her own body, or of the Sun.

2. From the light which is discerned in the darker part of her body, when she
is but a little distant from the Sun.

1. For when there are any total eclipses, there appears in her body a great
redness, and many times light enough to cause a remarkable shade, as common
experience does sufficiently manifest: but this cannot come from the Sun, since
at such times either the earth or her own body shades her from the Sunbeams;
therefore it must proceed from her own light.

2. Two or three days after the new Moon, we may perceive light in her whole
body, whereas the rays of the Sun reflect but upon a small part of that which
is visible; therefore it is likely that there is some light of her own.

In answering to these objections, I shall first show, that this light cannot
be her own, and then declare that which is the true reason of it.

That it is not her own, appears.

1 Because then she would always retain it, but she has been sometimes
altogether invisible, when as notwithwanding some of the fixed Stars of the
fourth or fifth magnitude might easily have been discerned close by her,
Keplar. epit. Astron. cop. l. 6. p. 5. sect. 2.
As it was in the year 1620.

2 This may appear likewise from the variety of it at diverse times; for it is
commonly observed that sometimes it is of a brighter, sometimes of a darker
appearance, now redder, and at another time of a more duskish color. The
observation of this variety in diverse eclipses, you may see set down by Keplar
and many others. Opt. Astron. c. 7. number. 3.
But now this could not be, if that light were her own, that being constantly
the same, and without any reason of such an alteration: So that thus I may
argue.

If there were any light proper to the Moon, then would that Planet appear
brightest when she is eclipsed in her Perige being nearest to the earth, and so
consequently more obscure and duskish when she is in her Apoge or farthest
from it; the reason is, because the nearer any enlightened body comes to the
sight, by so much the more strong are the species and the better perceived.
This sequel is granted by some of our adversaries, De nova stella. lib. 1. c.
10.
and they are the very words of noble Tycho, Si Luna genuino gauderet lumine,
utique cum in umbra terrae esset, illud non amitteret, sed eo evidentius
exereret; omne enim lumen in tenebris, plus splendet cum alio majore fulgore
non praepeditur. If the Moon had any light of her own, then would she not lose
it in the earths shadow, but rather shine more clearly; since every light
appears greater in the dark, when it is not hindered by a more perspicuous
brightness.

But now the event falls out clean contrary, Reinhold Comment. in Purb. Theor
page 164.
(as observation does manifest, and our opposites themselves do grant) the
Moon appearing with a more reddish and clear light when she is eclipsed,
being in her Apoge or farthest distance, and a more blackish iron color when
she is in her Perige or nearest to us, therefore she has not any light of her
own. Nor may we think that the earths shadow can cloud the proper light of
the Moon from appearing, or take away any thing from her inherent brightness;
for this were to think a shadow to be a body, an opinion altogether
misbecomming a Philosopher, as Tycho grants in the forecited place, Nec umbra
terrae corporeum quid est, aut densa aliqua substantia, ut Lunae lumen
obtenebrare possit, atque id visui nostro praeripere, sed est quaedam privatio
luminis solaris, ob interpositum opacum corpus terrae. Nor is the earths shadow
any corporal thing, or thick substance, that it can cloud the Moons
brightness, or take it away from our sight; but it is a mere privation of the
Suns light by reason of the interposition of the earths opacous body.

3 If she had any light of her own, then that would in it self be either such
a ruddy brightness as appears in the eclipses, or else such a leaden duskish
light as we see in the darker parts of her body, when she is a little past
the conjunction. (That it must be one of these may follow from the opposite
arguments) but it is neither of these, therefore she has none of her own.

1 It Is not such a ruddy light as appears in eclipses; for then why can we not
see the like redness, when we may discern the obscurer parts of the Moon?

You will say, perhaps, that then the neerenesse of that greater light takes
away that appearance.

I reply, this cannot be; for then why does Mars shine with his wonted
redness, when he is near the Moon? or why cannot her greater brightness
make him appear white as the other Planets? nor can there be any reason given
why that greater light should represent her body under a false color.

2. It Is not such a duskish leaden light, as we see in the darker part of her
body, when she is about a sextile Aspect distant from the Sun; for then why
does she appear red in the eclipses, since mere shade cannot cause such
variety? for it is the nature of darkness by its opposition, rather to make
things appear of a more white and clear brightness than they are in
themselves. Or if it be the shade, yet those parts of the Moon are then in the
shade of her body, and therefore in reason should have the like redness. Since
then neither of these lights are hers, it follows that she has none of her
own. Nor is this a singular opinion, but it has had many learned Patrons;
Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 20.
such was Macrobius, who being for this quoted of Rhodiginus, he calls him vir
reconditissimae scientiae, Lect. antiq. l. 1. c. 15.
a man who knew more than ordinary Philosophers, thus commending the opinion in
the credit of the Author. To him assents the venerable Bede, upon whom the
gloss has this comparison. In lib. de nature. rerum.
As the Looking-glass represents not any image within it self unless it
receive some from without; so the Moon has not any light, but what is
bestowed by the Sun. To these agreed De 4. Coaevis. Q. 4 Art. 21.
Albertus Magnus, Exercit. 62.
Scaliger, Epitom. Astron. l. 4. p. 2.
Maeslin, Keplar, and more especially Epit. Astro. Cop. l. 6 part. 5. sect. 2.
Mulapertius, whose words are more pat to the purpose than others, and
therefore I shall set them down as you may find them in his Preface to his
Treatise concerning the Austriaca sydera; Luna, Venus, and Mercurius,
terrestris and humidae sunt substantiae, ideoque de suo non lucere, sicut nec
terra. The Moon, Venus, and Mercury (says he) are of an earthly and moist
substance, and therefore have no more light of their own, then the earth has.
Nay, some there are, who think, (though without ground) that all the other
Stars do receive that light, whereby they appear visible to us, from the
Sun: so Ptolomie, Originum l. 3. c. 60.
Isidore Hispalensis, De Coelo. l. 2.
Albertus Magnus, and De ratione tempor. c. 4.
Bid; much more then must the Moon shine with a borrowed light.

But enough of this. I have now sufficiently showed what at the first I
promised, Item Pliny lib. 2. ca. 6.
that this light is not proper to the Moon. Hugo de Sancto Victore.
It remains in the next place, that I tell you the true reason of it. Annot.
in Genesis 6.
And here, I think it is probable that the light which appears in the Moon at
the eclipses, is nothing else but the second species of the Suns rays which
pass through the shadow unto her body: and from a mixture of this second light
with the shadow, arises that redness which at such times appears unto us. I
may call it Lumen crepusculinum, the Aurora of the Moon, or such a kind of
blushing light, that the Sun causes when he is near his rising, when he
bestows some small light upon the thicker vapors. Thus we see commonly the
Sun being in the Horizon, and the reflection growing weak, how his beams make
the waters appear very red.

The Moabites in Iehorams time, 2 King. 3. 22.
when they rose early in the morning, and beheld the waters afar off,
mistook them for blood. Et causa hujus est quia radius solaris in Aurora
contrahit quandam rubedinem, 2. Quaest. in hoc cap.
propter vapores combustos manentes circa superficiem terrae, per quos radij
transeunt, and ideo cum repercutiantur in aqua ad oculos nostros, trahunt secum
eundem ruborem, and faciunt apparere locu^ aquarum, in quo est repercussio,
esse rubrum, says Tostatus. The reason is, because of his rays, which being
in the lower vapors, those do convay an imperfect mixed light upon the
waters. Thus the Moon being in the earths shadow, and the Sun beams which
are round about it, not being able to come directly unto her body, yet some
second rays there are, which passing through the shadow, make her appear in
that ruddy color: So that she must appear brightest when she is eclipsed,
being in her Apoge or greatest distance from us, because then the cone of the
earths shadow is less, and the refraction is made through a narrower medium.
So on the contrary, she must be represented under a more dark and obscure
form when she is eclipsed, being in her Perige or nearest to the earth,
because then she is involved in a greater shadow, or bigger part of the cone,
and so the refraction passing through a greater medium, the light must needs be
weaker which does proceed from it. If you ask now, what the reason may be of
that light which we discern in the darker part of the new Moon? I answer,
it is reflected from our earth, which returns as great a brightness to that
Planet, as it receives from it. This I shall have occasion to prove afterward.

I have now done with these propositions which were set down to clear the
passage, and confirm the suppositions implied in the opinion; LIB. 1. Cap. 6.
I shall in the next place proceed to a more direct treating of the chief
matter in hand.

Proposition 6.
That there is a World in the Moon, has been the direct opinion of many
ancient with some modern Mathematicians, and may probably be deduced from the
tenants of others.

SInce this opinion may be suspected of singularity, I shall therefore first
confirm it by sufficient authority of diverse Authors, both ancient and
modern, that so I may the better clear it from the prejudice either of an
upstart fancy, or an absolute error. This is by some attributed to Orpheus,
one of the most ancient Greek Poets. Who speaking of the Moon, says thus,
Plut. de plac. phil. l. 2. c. 13.
(...), That it has many mountains, and cities, and houses in it. To him
assented Anaxagoras, Democritus, and Heraclides, Ibid. c. 25.
all who, thought it to have firm solid ground, like to our earth, containing
in it many large fields, Diog. Laert. l. 2. and l. 9.
champion grounds, and diverse Inhabitants.

Of this opinion likewise was Xenophanes, Divin Inst. lib. 3. c. 23.
as he is cited for it by Lactantius; though that Father (perhaps) did mistake
his meaning whilst he relates it thus Dixit Xenophanes, intra concavum Lunae
esse aliam terram, and ibi aliud genus hominum simili modo vivere sicut nos in
hac terra, etc. As if he had conceived the Moon to be a great hollow body, in
the midst of whose concavity, there should be another globe of sea and land,
inhabited by men, as our earth is. Whereas it seems to be more likely by the
relation of others, that this Philosophers opinion is to be understood in the
same sense, as it is here to be proved. True indeed, the Father condemns this
assertion as an equal absurdity to that of Anaxagoras, who affirmed the snow
to be black: but no wonder, for in the very next Chapter it is that he does so
much deride the opinion of those who thought there were Antipodes. So that his
ignorance in that particular may perhaps disable him from being a competent
Judge in any other the like point of Philosophy. Unto these agreed Pythagoras,
who thought that our earth was but one of the Planets which moved round about
the Sun, De Coelo. l. 2. cap. 13.
(as Aristotle relates it of him) and the Pythagoreans in general did affirm
that the Moon also was terrestrial, and that she was inhabited as this lower
world; That those living creatures and plants which are in her, exceed any of
the like kind with us in the same proportion, as their days are longer than
ours: viz. by 15 times. This Pythagoras was esteemed by all, Plut. ibid. cap.
30.
of a most divine wit, as appears especially by his valuation amongst the
Romans, who being commanded by the Oracle to erect a statue to the wisest
Grecian, the Senate determined Pythagoras to be meant, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 34.
cap. 6.
preferring him in their judgments before the divine Socrates, whom their Gods
pronounced the wisest. Some think him a Jew by birth; but most agree that he
was much conversant amongst the learneder sort and Priests of that Nation, by
whom he was informed of many secrets, and (perhaps) this opinion which he
vented afterward in Greece, where he was much opposed by Aristotle in some
worded disputations, but never confuted by any solid reason.

To this opinion of Pythagoras did Plato also assent, when he considered that
there was the like eclipse made by the earth; and this, that it had no light of
its own, that it was so full of spots. Plat. de conviviis.
And therefore we may often read in him and his followers, of an aetherea
terra, Macrob.
and lunares populi, An aethereall earth, Somn. Scip. lib. 1. c. 11.
and inhabiters in the Moon; but afterward this was mixed with many ridiculous
fancies: For some of them considering the mysteries implied in the number 3,
concluded that there must necessarily be a Trinity of worlds, whereof the first
is this of ours; the second in the Moon, whose element of water is represented
by the sphere of Mercury, the air by Venus, and the fire by the Sun. And
that the whole Universe might the better end in earth as it began, they have
contrived it, that Mars shall be a sphere of the fire, Jupiter of air,
Saturn of water; and above all these, the Elysian fields, spacious and
pleasant places appointed for the habitation of those unspotted souls, that
either never were imprisoned in, or else now have freed themselves from any
commerce with the body. Exercit. 62.
Scaliger speaking of this Platonic fancy, quae in tres trientes mundum quasi
assem divisit, thinks it is confutation enough, to say, it is Plato's. However,
for the first part of this assertion, it was assented unto by many others, and
by reason of the grosnesse and inequality of this planet, 'twas frequently
called quasi terra coelestis, as being esteemed the sediment and more imperfect
part of those purer bodies; De facie Lunae.
you may see this proved by Plutarch, in that delightful work which he
properly made for the confirmation of this particular. Iustit. ad discip. Plat.
Coel. Rhodig. l. 1. c. 4.
With him agreed Alcinous and Plotinus, later Writers.

Thus Lucian also in his discourse of a journey to the Moon, where though he
does speak many things out of mirth and in a jesting manner: yet in the
beginning of it he does intimate that it did contain some serious truths
concerning the real frame of the Universe.

The Cardinal Cusanus and Iornandus Brunus, Cusa. de doct. ign. l. 2 cap. 12.
held a particular world in every Star, and therefore one of them defining
our earth, he says, it is stella quaedam nobilis, quae lunam and calorem and
influentiam habet aliam, and diversam ab omnibus aliis stellis; A noble Star
having a distinct light, heat, and influence from all the rest. Unto this
Nichol. Hill, a Country man of ours, was inclined, Philos. Epicur. part. 434.
when he said Astrea terrae natura probabilis est: That it is probable the earth
has a starry nature.

But the opinion which I have here delivered, was more directly proved by In
Thesibus.
Maeslin, Dissertatio cum Nunc.
Keplar, and Nuncius Sydereus.
Galilaeus, each of them late Writers, and famous men for their singular skill
in Astronomy. Keplar calls this World by the name of Levania from the Hebrew
word (...) which signifies the Moon, Somn. Astr.
and our earth by the name of Volva a volvendo, because it does by reason of
its diurnall revolution appear unto them constantly to turn round, and
therefore he styles those who live in that Hemisphere which is toward us, by
the title of Subvolvani, because they enjoy the sight of this earth; and the
others Privolvani, quia sunt privati conspectu volvae, because they are
deprived of this privilege. But Julius Caesar, whom I have above quoted,
speaking of their testimony whom I cite for this opinion, viz. Keplar and
Galilaeus, affirms that to his knowledge they did but jest in those things
which they write concerning this, Dephaenom. lunae. c. 4.
and as for any such world, he assuredly knows they never so much as dreamt of
it. But I had rather believe their own words, than his pretended knowledge.

It Is true indeed, in some things they do but trifle, but for the maine scope
of those discourses, it is as manifest they seriously meant it, as any
indifferent Reader may easily discern; As for Galilaeus, it is evident that he
did set down his own judgment and opinion in these things; otherwise sure
Campanella (a man as well acquainted with his opinion, and perhaps his person
as Caesar was) would never have writ an Apology for him. And besides it is very
likely if it had been but a jest, Galilaeus would never have suffered so much
for it as report says afterward he did.

And as for Keplar, I will only refer the Reader to his own words as they
are set down in the Preface to the fourth book of his Epitome, where his
purpose is to make an Apology for the strangeness of those truths that he was
there to deliver, amongst which there are diverse things to this purpose
concerning the nature of the Moon. He professes that he did not publish them
either out of a humor of contradiction, or a desire of vaineglory, or in a
jesting way, to make himself or others merry, but after a considerate and
solemn manner for the discovery of the truth.

Now as for the knowledge which Caesar pretends to the contrary, you may guess
what it was by his strange confidence in other assertions, Cap. 7.
and his boldness in them may well derogate from his credit in this. For
speaking of Ptolome's Hypothesis, he pronounces this verdict, Impossible est
excentricorum and epicyclorum positio, nec aliquis est ex Mathematicis adeo
stultus qui veram illam existimet. The position of Excentrickes and Epicycles
is altogether impossible, nor is there any Mathematician such a fool as to
think it true. I should guess he could not have knowledge enough to maintain
any other Hypothesis, who was so ignorant in Mathematics as to deny that any
good Author held this. For I would feign know whether there were never any that
thought the Heavens to be solid bodies, and that there were such kinds of
motion as is by those fained Orbs supplied; if so, Caesar la Galla was much
mistaken. I think his assertions are equally true, that Galilaeus and Keplar
did not hold this, and that there were none which ever held that other. Thus
much for the testimony of those who were directly of this opinion.

But, in my following discourse I shall most insist on the observation of
Galilaeus, the inventor of that famous Perspective, whereby we may discern the
Heavens hard by us; whereby those things which others have formerly guest at,
are manifested to the eye, and plainly discovered beyond exception or doubt;
of which admirable invention, these latter Ages of the world may justly boast,
and for this expect to be celebrated by posterity. It Is related of Eudoxus,
that he wished himself burnt with Phaeton, so he might stand over the Sun
to contemplate its nature; had he lived in these days, he might have enjoyed
his wish at an easier rate, and scaling the heavens by this glass, might
plainly have discerned what he so much desired. Keplar considering those
strange discoveries which this Perspective had made, could not choose but cry
out in a (...) and rapture of admiration, O multiscium and quovis sceptro
pretiosius perspicillum! an qui te dextra tenet, ille non dominus constituatur
operum Dei? De macula in sole obser.
And Johannes Fabricius an elegant Writer, speaking of the same glass, and for
this invention preferring our age before those former times of greater
ignorance, says thus; Adeo sumus superiores veteribus, ut quam illi carminis
magici pronunciatu demissam representasse putantur, nos non tantum innocenter
demittamus, sed etiam familiari quodam intuitu ejus quasi conditionem
intueamur. So much are we above the Ancients, that whereas they were feign by
their Magical charms to represent the Moons approach, we cannot only bring
her lower with a greater innocence, but may also with a more familiar view
behold her condition. And because you shall have no occasion to question the
truth of those experiments, which I shall afterward urge from it; I will
therefore set down the testimony of an enemy, and such a witness has
always been accounted prevalent: you may see it in the abovenamed Caesar la
Galla, whose words are these: Mercurium caduceum gestantem, De phaenom. cap. 1.
coelestia nunciare, and mortuorum animas ab inferis revocare sapiens finxit
antiquitas. Galilaeum vero novum Iovis interpretem Telescopio caduceo
instructum Sydera aperire, and veterum Philosophorum manes ad superos revocare
solers nostra aetas videt and admiratur. Wise antiquity fabled Mercury carrying
a rod in his hand to relate news from Heaven, and call back the souls of the
dead; but it has been the happiness of our industrious Age to see and admire
Galilaeus the new Ambassador of the Gods furnished with his Perspective to
unfold the nature of the Stars, and awaken the ghosts of the ancient
Philosophers. So worthily and highly did these men esteem of this excellent
invention.

Now, if you would know what might be done by this glass, in the sight of such
things as were nearer at hand, the same Author will tell you, when he says,
Ibid. c. 6.
that by it those things which could scarce at all be discerned by the eye at
the distance of a mile and a half, might plainly and distinctly be perceived
for 16 Italian miles, and that as they were really in themselves, without any
transposition or falsifying at all. So that what the ancient Poets were feign
to put in a Fable, our more happy Age has found out in a truth, and we may
discern as far with these eyes which Galilaeus has bestowed upon us, as
Lynceus could with those which the Poets attributed unto him. But if you yet
doubt whether all these observations were true, the same Author may confirm
you, when he says they were showed Non uni aut alteri, Cap. 1.
sed quamplurimis, neque gregariis hominibus, sed praecipuis atque disciplinis
omnibus, necnon Mathematicis and Opticis praeceptis optime instructis sedula ac
diligenti inspectione. Not to one or two, but to very many, and those not
ordinary men, but to those who were well versed in Mathematics and Optics,
and that not with a mere glance, but with a sedulous and diligent inspection.
And least any scruple might remain unanswered, or you might think the men who
beheld all this though they might be skillful, yet they came with credulous
minds, and so were more easy to be deluded: He adds that it was showed Viris
qui ad experimenta haec contradicendi animo accesserant. Cap. 5.
To such as were come with a great deal of prejudice, and an intent of
contradiction. Thus you may see the certainty of those experiments which were
taken by this glass. I have spoken the more concerning it, because I shall
borrow many things in my farther discourse, from thsoe discoveries which were
made by it.

I have now cited such Authors both ancient and modern, who have directly
maintained the same opinion. I told you likewise in the Proposition that it
might probably be deduced from the tenants of others: such were Aristarchus,
See the second book. 1. Prop.
Philolaeus, and Copernicus, with many other later Writers who assented to
their hypothesis; so Ioach. Rhelicus, David Origanus Lansbergius, Guil.
Gilbert, and (if I may believe Campanella) Innumeri alij Angli and Galli,
Apologia pro Galilaeo.
Very many others, both English and French, all who affirmed our Earth to be
one of the Planets, and the Sun to be the Center of all, about which the
heavenly bodies did move. And how horrid soever this may seem at the first,
yet is it likely enough to be true, nor is there any maxim or observation in
Optics (says Pena) that can disprove it.

Now if our earth were one of the Planets (as it is according to them) then why
may not another of the Planets be an earth?

Thus have I showed you the truth of this Proposition. Before I proceed
farther, it is requisite that I inform the Reader, what method I shall follow
in the proving of this chief assertion, that there is a World in the Moon.

The order by which I shall be guided, will be that which Aristotle uses in his
book De mundo (if that book were his.)

First, (...) of those chief parts which are in it; not the elementary and
aethereall (as he does there) since this does not belong to the present
question, but of the Sea and Land, etc. Secondly, (...), of those things which
are extrinsecall to it, as the seasons, meteors, and inhabitants.

Proposition 7.
That those spots and brighter parts which by our sight may be distinguished in
the Moon, do show the difference betwixt the Sea and Land in that other World.

FOr the clear proof of this Proposition, I shall first reckon up and refute
the opinions of others concerning the matter and form of those spots, and then
show the greater probability of this present assertion, and how agreeable it is
to that truth, which is most commonly received; As for the opinions of other
concerning these, they have been very many; I will only reckon up those which
are common and remarkable.

Some there are that think those spots do not arise from any deformity of the
parts, but a deceit of the eye, which cannot at such a distance discern an
equal light in that Planet; but these do but only say it, and show not any
reason for the proof of their opinion: Others think that there are some bodies
betwixt the Sun and Moon, So Bid in l. de Mund. constit.
which keeping off the light in some parts, do by their shadow produce these
spots which we there discern.

Others would have them to be the figure of the seas or mountains here below,
represented there as in a looking-glass. But none of those fancies can be
true, because the spots are still the same, and not varied according to the
difference of places; and besides, Cardan thinks it is impossible that any
image should be conveyed so far as there to be represented unto us at such a
distance. De subtle. lib. 3.
But it is commonly related of Pythagoras, that he by writing what he pleased in
a glass, by the reflection of the same species, would make those letters to
appear in the circle of the Moon, where they should be legible by any other,
who might at that time be some miles distant from him. Occulta. Philos. l. 1.
cap. 6.
Agrippa affirms this to be possible, and the way of performing it not
unknown to himself, with some others in his time. It may be, that Bishop
Godwine did by the like means perform those strange conclusions, which he
professes in his Nuncius inanimatus, where he pretends, that he can inform his
friends of what he pleases, though they be an hundred miles distant, forte
etiam, vel milliare millesimum, (they are his own words) and, perhaps, a
thousand, and all this in a little space, quicker than the Sun can move.

Now, what conveyance there should be, for so speedy a passage, I cannot
conceive, unless it be carried with the light, than which we know not any
thing quicker; But of this only by the way; however, whether those images can
be represented so or not, yet certain it is, those spots are not such
representations. Some think that when God had at first created too much earth
to make a perfect globe, not knowing well where to bestow the rest, he placed
it in the Moon, which ever since has so darkened it in some parts; but the
impiety of this is sufficient confutation, since it so much detracts from the
divine power and wisdom.

The Plut. de placit. phil. l. 2. c. 25.
Stoics held that Planet to be mixed of fire and air, and in their opinion,
the variety of its composition caused her spots: Being not ashamed to style the
same body a Goddess, calling it Diana, Minerva, etc. and yet affirm it be an
impure mixture of flame, and smoke, and fuliginous air.

-- But this Planet cannot consist of fire (says Plutarch) because there is
not any fuel to maintain it. And the Poets have therefore fained Vulcan to
be lame, because he can no more subsist without wood or other fuel than a
lame man without a staff.

Anaxagoras thought all the stars to be of an earthly nature, mixed with some
fire; and as for the Sun, he affirmed it to be nothing else but a fiery
stone; for which later opinion, the Athenians sentenced him to death; Josephus
l. 2. con.
those zealous Idolaters counting it a great blasphemy to make their God a
stone, App. August. de Civit. Dei. l 18. c 41.
whereas notwithstanding, they were so senseless in their adoration of Idols,
as to make a stone their God. This Anaxagoras affirmed the Moon to be more
terrestrial than the other Planets, but of a greater purity than anything here
below, and the spots he thought were nothing else, but some cloudy parts,
intermingled with the light which belonged to that Planet; but I have above
destroyed the supposition on which this fancy is grounded. Not. Hist. l. 2. c.
9.
Pliny thinks they arise from some drossie stuff, mixed with that moisture
which the Moon attracts unto her self; but he was of their opinion who
thought the stars were nourished by some earthly vapors, which you may
commonly see refuted in the Commentators on the books de Coelo.

Vitellio and Reinoldus affirm the spots to be the thicker parts of the Moon,
Opt. lib. 9. Comment. in Purb. page 164.
into which the Sun cannot infuse much light; and this (say they) is the
reason why in the Suns eclipses the spots and brighter parts are still in some
measure distinguished, because the Sun beams are not able so well to penetrate
through those thicker, as they may through the thinner parts of that Planet. Of
this opinion also was Caesar la Galla, whose words are these; The Moon does
there appear clearest, where she is transpicuous, not only through the
superficies, Ex qua part luna est transpicua non solum secundum superficiem,
sed etiam secundum substantiam, eatenus clara, ex qua autem part opaca est,
eatenus obscura videtur. De Phaenom. cap. 11.
but the substance also, and there she seems spotted, where her body is most
opacous. The ground of this his assertion was, because he thought the Moon
did receive and bestow her light by illumination only, and not at all by
reflection, but this, together with the supposed penetration of the Sunbeams,
and the perspicuity of the Moons body I have above answered and refuted.

The more common and general opinion is, that the spots are the thinner parts
of the Moon, Albert. mag. de Coaevis. Q. 4. Art. 21.
which are less able to reflect the beams that they receive from the Sun,
and this is most aggreeable to reason; for if the stars are therefore
brightest, Colleg. Con.
because they are thicker and more solid than their orbs, then it will follow,
that those parts of the Moon which have less light, have also less
thickness. It was the providence of nature (say some) that so contrived that
planet to have these spots within it, for since that is nearest to those lower
bodies which are so full of deformity, it is requisite that it should in some
measure agree with them, and as in this inferior world, the higher bodies are
the most complete, so also in the heavens perfection is ascended unto by
degrees, and the Moon being the lowest, De Somniis
must be the least pure, and therefore Philo the Jew interpreting Jacobs dream
concerning the ladder, does in an allegory show, how that in the fabric of
the world, all things grow perfecter as they grow higher, and this is the
reason (says he) why the Moon does not consist of any pure simple matter, but
is mixed with air, which shows so darkely within her body.

But this cannot be a sufficient reason; for though it were true that nature
did frame every thing perfecter as it was higher, yet is it as true that nature
frames every thing fully perfect for that office to which she intends it. Now,
had she intended the Moon merely to reflect the Sunne-beames and give light,
the spots then had not so much argued her providence, as her unskilfulnesse and
oversight, as if in the haste of her work she could not tell how to make that
body exactly fit for that office to which she intended it. Scalig. exercit. 62.


It Is likely then that she had some other end which moved her to produce this
variety, and this in all probability was her intent to make it a fit body for
habitation with the same conveniences of sea and land, as this inferior world
does partake of. For since the Moon is such a vast, such a solid and opacous
body, like our earth (as was above proved) why may it not be probable, that
those thinner and thicker parts appearing in her, do show the difference
betwixt the sea and land in that other world? and Galilaeus doubts not, but
that if our earth were visible at the same distance, there would be the like
appearance of it.

If we consider the Moon as another habitable earth, then the appearances of
it will be altogether exact, and beautiful, and may argue unto us that it is
fully accomplished for all those ends to which Providence did appoint it. But
consider it barely as a star or light, and then there will appear in it much
imperfection and deformity, as being of an impure dark substance, and so
unfit for the office of that nature.

As for the form of those spots, some of the vulgar think they represent a
man, and the Poets guess it is the boy Endymion, whose company she loves so
well, that she carries him with her, others will have it only to be the face
of a man as the Moon is usually pictured, but Albertus thinks rather, that it
represents a Lion with his tail toward the East, and his head the West, and
Eusebius Nicremb. Hist. Not. l. 8. c. 15.
some others have thought it to be very much like a Fox, and certainly it is, as
much like a Lion as that in the Zodiake, or as Vrsa major is like a Bear.

I should guess that it represents one of these as well as another, and any
thing else as well as any of these, since it is but a strong imagination, which
fancies such images as schoole-boyes usually do in the marks of a wall,
whereas there is not any such similitude in the spots themselves, LIB. 1. Cap.
8.
which rather like our Sea, in respect of the land, appears under a rugged and
confused figure, and does not represent any distinct image, so that both in
respect of the matter, and the form it may be probable enough, that those
spots and brighter parts may show the the distinction betwixt the Sea and Land
in that other world.

Proposition 8.
The spots represent the Sea, and the brighter parts the Land.

WHen I first compared the nature of our earth and water with those appearances
in the Moon; I concluded contrary to the proposition, that the brighter parts
represented the water, and the spots the land; of this opinion likewise was
Keplar at the first. Opt. Astro. c. 6 number 9 D^^^^t cum nuncio Gal.
But my second thoughts, and the reading of others, have now convinced me (as
after he was) of the truth of that proposition which I have now set down.
Before I come to the confirmation of it, I shall mention those scruples which
at first made me doubt the truth of this opinion.

1. It may be objected, it is probable, if there be any such sea and land as
ours, that it bears some proportion and similitude with ours: but now this
proposition takes away all likeness betwixt them. For whereas the superficies
of our earth is but the third part of the whole surface in the globe, Exercit.
38
two parts being overspread with the water (as Scaliger observes) yet here,
according to this opinion, the Sea should be less than the land, since there
is not so much of the bespotted, as there is of the enlightened parts,
wherefore it is probable, that there is no such thing at all, or else that the
brighter parts are the Sea.

2. The water, by reason of the smoothness of its superficies, seems better
able to reflect the Sunbeams than the earth, which in most places is so full
of ruggedness of grass and trees, and such like impediments of reflection; and
besides, common experience shows, that the water shines with a greater and
more glorious brightness than the earth; therefore it should seem that the
spots are the earth, and the brighter parts the water. But to the first it may
be answered.

1. There is no great probability in this consequence, that because it is so
with us, therefore it must be so with the parts of the Moon, for since there
is such a difference betwixt them in diverse other respects, they may not
perhaps agree in this.

2. That assertion of Scaliger is not by all granted for a truth. De Metcoris
l. 5. c. 1. Art. 1.
Fromondus with others think that the superficies of the Sea and Land in so
much of the world as is already discovered, is equal and of the same extension.

3. The Orb of thick and vaporous air which inco^passes the Moon, makes the
brighter parts of that Planet appear bigger than in themselves they are; as I
shall show afterward.

To the second it may be answered, that, that though the water be of a smooth
superficies, and so may seem most fit to reverberate the light, yet because
it is of a perspicuous nature, LIB. 1. Cap. 6
therefore the beams must sink into it, and cannot so strongly and clearly
be reflected. Sicut in speculo ubi plumbum abrasum fuerit, (says Cardan) as in
Looking-glasses where part of the lead is razed off, and nothing left behind to
reverberate the image, the species must there pass through and not back
again; so it is where the beams penetrate and sink into the substance of the
body, there cannot be such an immediate and strong reflection, as when they are
beat back from the superficies, and therefore the Sun causes a greater heat
by far upon the Land than upon the water. Now as for that experiment where it
is said, that the waters have a greater brightness than the Land: I answer,
it is true only there where they represent the image of the Sun or some
bright cloud, and not in other places, especially if we look upon them at any
great distance, as is very plain by common observation.

And it is certain that from any high mountain the land dos appear a great
deal brighter than any lake or river. LIB. 1. Cap. 8


This may yet be farther illustrated by the similitude of a looking glass
hanging upon a wall in the Sunshine, where, if the eye be not placed in the
just line of reflection from the glass, it is manifest that the wall will be of
a brighter appearance than the glass. True indeed in the line of reflection,
the light of the glass is equal almost unto that which comes immediately from
the Sun it self; but now this is only in one particular place and so is not
like that brightness which we discern in the Moon, because this dos appear
equally in several situations, like that of the wall which do seem bright as
well from every place as from any one. And therefore the ruffnesse of the wall,
or (as it is in the objection) the ruggedness of our earth is so far from
being an hinderance of such a reflection as there is from the Moon, that it is
rather required as a necessary condition unto it. We may conceive that in every
rough body there are, as it were innumerable superficies, disposed unto an
innumerable diversity of inclinations. Ita ut nullus sit locus, Galilaeus
System. coll. 1.
ad quem non pertingant plurimi radii reflexi a plurimis superficieculis, per
omnem corporis scabri radiis luminosis percussi superficiem dispersis. So that
there is not any place unto which there are not some beams reflected from these
diverse superficies, in the several parts of such a rugged body. But yet (as I
said before) the earth dos receive a great part of its light by illumination,
as well as by reflection.

So that notwithstanding those doubts, yet this proposition may remain true,
that the spots may be the Sea, and the brighter parts the Land. Of this opinion
was Plutarch: De facio lun.
unto him assented Keplar and Galilaeus, Dissertatio. Nunc. Syd.
whose words are these, Si quis veterum Pythagoreorum sententiam exuscitare
velit, lunam scilicet esse quasi tellurem alteram, ejus pars lucidior terrenam
superficiem, obscurior vero aqueam magis congrue repraesentet. Mihi autem
dubium fuit nunquam terrestris globi a long conspecti, atque a radiis
solaribus perfusi, terream superficiem clariorem, obscuriorem vero aqueam sese
in conspectum daturam. If any man have a mind to renew the opinion of the
Phythagoreans, that the Moon is another earth, then her brighter parts may
fitly represent the earths superficies, and the darker part the water: and for
my part, I never doubted but that our earthly globe being shined upon by the
Sun, and beheld at a great distance, the Land would appear brightest, and
the Sea more obscurely. The reasons may be.

1. That which I urged about the foregoing chapter, because the water is the
thinner part, and therefore must give less light.

Since the Stars and Planets, by reason of their brightness, are usually
concluded to be the thicker parts of their orb.

2. Water is in it self of a blacker color (says Aristotle) and therefore
more remote from light than the earth. In lib. de coloribus.
Any parts of the ground being moistened with rain, dos look much more darkely
than when it is dry.

3. It Is observed that the secondary light of the Moon (which afterward is
proved to proceed from our earth) is sensibly brighter unto us, for two or
three days before the conjunjunction, in the morning when she appears
Eastward, than about the same time after the conjunction, when she is seen in
the West. The reason of which must be this, because that part of the earth
which is opposite to the Moon in the East, has more land in it than Sea.
Whereas on the contrary, the Moon when she is in the West, is shined upon by
that part of our earth where there is more Sea than Land, from whence it will
follow with good probability that the earth dos cast a greater light than the
water.

4. Because observation tells us, that the spotted parts are always smooth and
equal, having every where an equality of light when once they are enlightened
by the Sun, whereas the brighter parts are full of rugged gibbosities and
mountains, having many shades in them, as I shall show more at large
afterward.

That in this Planet there must be Seas, Campanella endeavors to prove out of
Scripture interpreting the waters above the Firmament spoken in Genesis,
Apologia pro Galilaeo.
to be meant of the Sea in this world. For (says he) it is not likely that
there are any such waters above the Orbs to moderate that heat which they
receive from their swift motion (as some of the Fathers think.) Nor did Moses
mean the Angels which may be called spiritual waters, as Origin and Austin
would have it, Vide Ieron. epist. ad Pammachium.
for both these are rejected by the general consent: Nor could he mean any
waters in the second region, Confession. l. 13. c. 32. Retracted. lib. 2. Retr.
cap. 6.
as most Commentators interpret it. For first there is nothing but vapors,
which though they are afterward turned into water, yet while they remain
there, they are only the matter of that element, which may as well be fire or
earth or air. 2 Those vapors are not above the expansum but in it. So that
he thinks there is no other way to salve all, but by making the Planets
several worlds with Sea and Land, with such Rivers and Springs as we have here
below: Especially since Esdras speaks of the springs above the Firmament. 2
Esdr 4. 7.
But I cannot agree with him in this, nor do I think that any such thing can
be proved out of Scripture.

Before I proceed to the next position, I shall first answer some doubts which
might be made against the generality of this truth, whereby it may seem
impossible that there should be either Sea or Land in the Moon; for since she
moves so swiftly as Astronomers observe, why then does there nothing fall from
her, or why does she not shake something out by the celerity of her revolution?
I answer, you must know that the inclination of every heavy body to its proper
Center, does sufficiently tie it unto its place; so that suppose any thing were
separated, yet must it necessarily return again. And there is no more danger
of their falling into our world than there is fear of our falling into the
Moon.

But yet there are many fabulous relations of such things as have dropped
thence. There is a tale of the Nemean Lion that Hercules slew, which first
rushing among the herds out of his unknown den in the Mountain of Cytheron
in Boeotia, Vide Guli: Nubrigens. de rebus Anglica: lib. 1.
the credulous people thought he was sent from their Goddess the Moon. And
if a whirlewinde did chance to snatch any thing up, and afterward rain it
down again, the ignorant multitude were apt to believe that it dropped from
Heaven. Thus Avicenna relates the story of a Calfe which fell down in a
storm, the beholders thinking it a Moone-calfe, and that it fell thence. So
Cardan traveling upon the Apennine Mountains, a sudden blast took off his
hat, which if it had been carried far, he thinks the peasants who had
perceived it to fall, would have sworn it had rained hats. After some such
manner, many of our prodigies come to pass, and the people are willing to
believe any thing, which they may relate to others as a very strange and
wonderful event. I doubt not but the Trojan Palladium, the Roman Minerva, and
our Ladies Church at Loretto, with many sacred relics preserved by the
Papists might drop from the Moon as well as any of these.

But it may be again objected, suppose there were a bullet shot up in that
world, would not the Moon run away from it, before it could fall down,
since the motion of her body (being every day round our earth) is far swifter
than the other, and so the bullet must be left behind, and at length fall down
to us? To this I answer,

1. If a bullet could be shot so far till it came to the circumference of
those things which belong to our center, then it would fall down to us.

2. Though there were some heavy body a great height in that air, yet would
the motion of its center belong by an attractive virtue still hold it within
its convenient distance, so that whether their earth moved or stood still, yet
would the same violence cast a body from it equally far. That I may the plainer
express my meaning, I will set down this Diagramme.



Suppose this earth were A, which was to move in the circle C D. and let the
bullet be supposed at B. within its proper verge; I say, whether this earth did
stand still or move swiftly toward D, yet the bullet would still keep at the
same distance by reason of that Magnetic virtue of the center (if I may so
speak) whereby all things within its sphere are attracted with it. So that
the violence to the bullet, LIB. 1. Cap. 9.
being nothing else but that whereby it is removed from its center, therefore an
equal violence can carry a body from its proper place, but at an equal
distance, whether or no this earth where its center is, dos stand still or move.

The impartial Reader may find sufficient satisfaction for this and such
other arguments as may be urged against the motion of that earth, in the
writings of Copernicus and his followers, unto whom for brevities sake I will
refer them.

Proposition 9.
That there are high Mountains, deep Valleys, and spacious Plains in the
body of the Moon.

THough there are some, who think Mountains to be a deformity to the earth,
as if they were either beat up by the Flood, or else cast up like so many
heaps of rubbish left at the Creation; yet if well considered, they will be
found as much to conduce to the beauty and convenience of the universe, as any
of the other parts. Nature (says Pliny) purposely framed them for many
excellent uses: Not. hist. l. 36. c. 1.
partly to tame the violence of greater Rivers; to strengthen certain joints
within the veins and bowels of the earth, to break the force of the Seas
inundation, and for the safety of the earths inhabitants, whether beasts or
men. That they make much for the protection of beasts, the Psalmist testifies,
Psalm. 104. v. 18.
The highest hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for conies.
The Kingly Prophet had likewise learned the safety of these by his own
experience, when he also was feign to make a mountain his refuge from the fury
of his Master Saul, who persecuted him in the wilderness.

True indeed, such places as these keep their neighbors poor, as being most
barren, but yet they preserve them safe, as being most strong; witness our
unconquered Wales and Scotland, whose greatest protection has been the
natural strength of their Country, so fortified with Mountains, that these
have always been unto them sure retraites from the violence and oppression of
others. Wherefore a good Author does rightly call them natures bulwarks, cast up
at God Almighties own charges, the scorns and curbes of victorious armies;
which made the Barbarians in Curtius so confident of their own safety, when
they were once retired to an inaccessible mountain, that when Alexanders
Legate had brought them to a parley, and persuading them to yield, told them of
his masters victories, what Seas and Wildernesses he had passed; they replied,
that all that might be, but could Alexander fly too? Over the Seas he might
have ships, and over the land horses, but he must have wings before he could
get up thither. Such safety did those barbarous nations conceive in the
mountains whereunto they were retired. Certainly then such useful parts were
not the effect of man's sin, or produced by the Worlds curse, the Flood, but
rather at the first created by the goodness and providence of the Almighty.

This truth is usually concluded from these and the like arguments.

1. Because the Scripture it self, in the description of that general deluge,
tells us, it overflowed the highest mountains.

2. Because Moses who writ long after the Flood, dos yet give the same
description of places and rivers, as they had before; which could not well have
been if this had made so strange an alteration.

3. It Is evident that the trees did stand as before. For otherwise Noah could
not so well have concluded, that the waters were abated, from this reason,
because the Dove brought an Olive leaf in her mouth, when she was sent forth
the second time: whereas had the trees been rooted up, she might have taken it
the first time, from one of them as it was floating on the top of the waters.
Now if the motion of the water was not so violent as to subvert the trees, much
less was it able to cast up such vast heaps as the mountains.

4. When the Scripture does set forth unto us the power and immensisitie of God
by the variety or usefulness of the creatures which he has made, amongst
the rest it does often mention the mountains. Psalm. 104. 8. item. 148. 9.
Isai. 40. 12. And therefore it is probable they were created at the first. Unto
this I might add that in other places Divine Wisdom in showing of its own
antiquity, Prove. 8. 25.
says that he was From the beginning, before the earth or the mountains were
brought forth. Psalm. 90. 2.


5. If we may trust the relations of Antiquity, Joseph. Ant. lib. ^^. c. 3.
there were many monuments left undefaced after the Flood.

So that if I intend to prove that the Moon is such a habitable world as this
is; it is requisite that I show it to have the same conveniences of habitation
as this has; and here if some Rabbi or Chymick were to handle the point, they
would first prove it out of Scripture, from that place in Moses his blessing,
where he speaks of the ancient mountains and lasting hills, Deuteronomy. 33. (...)
for having immediately before mentioned those blessings which should happen
unto Joseph by the influence of the Moon, he does presently exegetically
iterate them in blessing him with the chief things of the ancient mountains
and lasting hills; you may also see the same expression used in Jacobs blessing
of Joseph. Genesis 49. 26.


But however we may deal pro or con in Philosophy, yet we must not be too
bold with divine truths, or bring Scripture to patronize any fancy of our own,
though, perhaps, it be a truth. I am not of their mind who think it a good
course to confirm Philosophical secrets from the letter of the Scripture, or
by abusing some obscure text in it. Me thinks it savors too much of that
Melancholy humor of the Chymicks, who, aiming in all their studies at the
making of gold, do persuade themselves, that the most learned and subtle of
the ancient Authors, in all their obscure places do mean some such sense as
may make to their purpose. And hence it is that they derive such strange
mysteries from the fables of the Poets, and can tell you what great secret it
was that antiquity did hide under the fiction of Jupiter being turned into a
shower of gold: of Mercuries being made the interpreter of the gods: of the
Moons descending to the earth for the love of Endymion: with such ridiculous
interpretations of these and the like fables, which any reasonable considering
man cannot conceive to proceed from any but such as are distracted. No less
fantastical in this kind are the Jewish Rabbis, amongst whom is not any
opinion, whether in nature or policy, whether true or false, but some of them,
by a Cabalisticall interpretation can father it upon a dark place of
Scripture, or (if need be) upon a text that is clean contrary. There being
not any absurdity so gross and incredible, for which these abusers of the
text, will not find out an argument. Whereas, it is the more natural way, and
should be observed in all controversies, to apply unto every thing, the proper
proofs of it; and when we deal with Philosophical truths, to keep our
selves within the bounds of humane reason and authority.

But this by the way. For the better proof of this proposition, I might here
cite the testimony of Diodorus, who thought the Moon to be full of rugged
places, velut terrestribus tumulis superciliosam; but he erred much in some
circumstances of this opinion, especially where he says, there is an Island
amongst the Hyperboreans, wherein those hills may to the eye be plainly
discovered; and for this reason Lect. aut. l. 1. c. 15.
Caelius calls him a fabulous Writer. But you may see more express authority
for the proof of this in the opinions of Anaxagoras and Democritus, Plut. de
plac. l. 2. c. 25.
who held that this Planet was full of champion* grounds, mountains and
valleys. And this seemed likewise probable unto Augustinus Nifus, De Coelo. l.
2. part. 49.
whose words are these: Forsitan non est remotum dicere lunae parts esse
diversas, veluti sunt parts terrae, quarum aliae sunt vallosae, aliae
montosae, ex quarum differentia effici potest facies illa lunae; nec est
rationi dissonum, nam luna est corpus imperfecte Sphaericum, cum sit corpus ab
ultimo coelo elongatum, ut supra dixit Aristoteles. Perhaps, it would not be
amiss to say that the parts of the Moon were diverse, as the parts of this
earth, whereof some are valleys, and some mountains, from the difference of
which, some spots in the Moon may proceed; nor is this against reason; for
that Planet cannot be perfecty sphericall, since it is so remote a body from the
first orb, as Aristotle had said before. You may see this truth assented unto
by Blancanus the Jesuit, De Mundi fab. pars 3. c. 4.
and by him confirmed with diverse reasons. Keplar has observed in the Moons
eclipses, Astron. Opt. c. 6. number. 9.
that the division of her enlightened part from the shaded, was made by a
crooked unequal line, of which there cannot be any probable cause conceived,
unless it did arise from the ruggednes of that Planet; for it cannot at all be
produced from the shade of any mountains here upon earth, because these would
be so lessened before they could reach so high in a conicall shadow, that they
would not be at all sensible unto us (as might easily be demonstrated) nor can
it be conceived what reason of this difference there should be in the Sun.
Wherefore there being no other body that has any thing to do in eclipses, we
must necessarily conclude, that it is caused by a variety of parts in the Moon
it self, and what can these be but its gibbosi^^ties? Now if you should ask a
reason why there should be such a multitude of these in that Planet, the same
Keplar shall jest you out an answer. Supposing (says he) that those
inhabitants are bigger than any of us in the same proportion, as their days
are longer than ours, viz. by fifteen times it may be, for want of stones to
erect such vast houses as were requisite for their bodies, they are feign to
dig great and round hollowes in the earth, where they may both procure water
for their thirst, and turning about with the shade, Kep append. Selenogra.
may avoid those great heats which otherwise they would be liable unto; or if
you will give Caesar la Galla leave to guess in the same manner, he would
rather think that those thirsty nations cast up so many and so great heaps of
earth in digging of their wine cellars; but this only by the way.

I shall next produce the eyewitness of Galilaeus, Nuncius Sydereus.
on which I most of all depend for the proof of this Proposition, when he
beheld the new Moon through his perspective, it appeared to him under a rugged
and spotted figure, seeming to have the darker and enlightened parts divided by
a tortuous line, having some parcels of light at a good distance from the
other; and this difference is so remarkable, that you may easily perceive it
through one of those ordinary perspectives, which are commonly sold amongst us;
but for your better apprehending of what I deliver, I will set down the Figure
as I find it in Galilaeus.



Suppose A B C D to represent the appearance of the Moons body being in a
sextile, you may see some brighter parts separated at a pretty distance from
the other, which can be nothing else but a reflection of the Sun beams upon
some parts that are higher than the rest, and those obscure gibbosities which
stand out toward the enlightened parts, must be such hollow and deep places
whereto the rays cannot reach. But when the Moon is got farther off from the
Sun, and come to that fullness as this line B D does represent her under,
then do these parts also receive an equal light, excepting only that
difference which does appear betwixt their sea and land. And if you do
consider how any rugged body would appear being enlightened, you would easily
conceive that it must necessarily seem under some such gibbous unequal form,
as the Moon is here represented. Now for the infallibility of these
appearances, I shall refer the reader to that which has been said in the
sixth Proposition.

But Caesar la Galla affirms, that all these appearances may consist with a
plain superficies, if we suppose the parts of the body to be some of them
Diaphanous, and some Opacous; and if you object that the light which is convayd
to any diaphanous part in a plain superficies, must be by a continued line,
whereas here there appear many brighter parts among the obscure at some
distance from the rest. To this he answers, it may arise from some secret
conveyances and channels within her body, that do consist of a more diaphanous
matter, which being covered over with an opacous superficies, the light passing
through them may break out a great way off; whereas the other parts betwixt,
may still remain dark. Just as the River Arethusa in Sicily which runs
under ground for a great way, and afterward breaks out again. But because
this is one of the chiefest fancies, whereby he thinks he has fully answered
the argument of this opinion; I will therefore set down his answer in his own
words, least the Reader might suspect more in them than I have expressed. Cap.
11.
Non est impossible coecos ductus diaphani and perspicui corporis, sed opaca
superficie protendi, usque in diaphanam aliquam ex profundo in superficiem
emergentem partem, per quos ductus lume nlongo postmodum interstitio erumpat,
etc. But I reply, if the superficies betwixt these two enlightened parts
remain dark because of its opacity, then would it always be dark, and the
Sun could not make it partake of light more than it could of perspicuity: But
this contradicts all experience, as you may see in Galilaeus, who affirms that
when the Sun comes nearer to his opposition, then, that which is betwixt them
both, is enlightened as well as either. Nay, this opposes his own eyewitness,
for he confesses himself that he saw this by the glass. He had said before,
that he came to see those strange sights discovered by Galilaeus his glass,
with an intent of contradiction, and you may read that confirmed in the
weakness of this answer, which rather bewrayes an obstinate, than a persuaded
will; for otherwise sure he would never have undertook to have destroyed such
certain proofs with so groundless a fancy.

That instance of Galilaeus, Syst. mundi coll. 1.
would have been a better evasion had this Author been acquainted with it; who
might then have compared the Moon to that which we call mother of pearl,
which though it be most exactly polished in the superficies of it; yet will
seem unto the eye as if there were diverse swellings and risings in its
several parts. But yet, this neither would not well have shifted the
experiment of the perspective. For these rugged parts do not only appear upon
one side of the Moon, but as the Sun dos turn about in diverse places, so
do they also cast their shadow. When the Moon is in her increase, then do
they cast their shadows to the East. When she is in the decrease, and the
Sun on the other side of her, then likewise may we discover these brighter
parts casting their shadows Westward. Whereas in the full Moon there are none
of all these to be seen.

But it may be objected, that it is almost impossible, and altogether unlikely,
that in the Moon there should be any mountains so high, as those
observations make them. For do but suppose according to the common principles,
that the Moons diameter unto the Earths, is very near to the proportion of 2
to 7. Suppose withal that the Earths diameter contains about 7000. Italian
miles, and the Moons 2000 (as is commonly granted.) Now Galilaeus has
observed, that some parts have been enlightened, when they were the twentieth
part of the diameter distant from the common term of illumination. From
whence, it must necessarily follow that there may be some Mountains in the
Moon, so high, that they are able to cast a shadow a 100 miles off. An opinion
that sounds like a prodigy or a fiction; wherefore it is likely that either
those appearances are caused by somewhat else besides mountains, or else those
are fallible observations, from whence may follow such improbable,
inconceiveable consequences.

But to this I answer:

1. You must consider the height of the Mountains is but very little, if you
compare them to the length of their shadows. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 11.
Sir Walter Rawleigh observes that the Mount Athos now called Lacas, cast its
shadow 300 furlongs, which is above 37 miles; and yet that Mount is none of the
highest. Nay Solinus (whom I should rather believe in this kind) affirms that
this Mountain gives his shadow quite over the Sea, Poly. histor. c. 21.
from Macedon to the I Will of Lemnos, which is 700 furlongs or 84 miles, and yet
according to the common reckoning it does scarce reach 4 miles upwards, in its
perpendicular height.

2. I affirm that there are very high Mountains in the Moon. Keplar and
Galilaeus think that they are higher than any which are upon our earth. But I
am not of their opinion in this; because I suppose they go upon a false
ground, whilst they conceive that the highest mountain upon the earth is not
above a mile perpendicular.

Whereas it is the common opinion and found true enough by observation, that
Olympus, Atlus, Tauras and Emus, with many others, are much above this height.
Tenariffa in the Canary Islands, is commonly related to be above 8 miles
perpendicular, and bout this height (say some) is the mount Perjacaca in
America. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 11.
Sir Walter Rawleigh seems to think, that the highest of these is near 30
miles upright: nay, Meteor. l. 1. c. 11.
Aristotle speaking of Caucasus in Asia, affirms it to be visible for 560
miles, as some interpreters find by computation; from which it will follow,
that it was 78 miles perpendicularly high, Comparatio Arist. cum. Platone.
Sect. 3. c. 5.
as you may see confirmed by Iacobus Mazonius, and out of him in Blancanus the
Jesuit. But this deviates from the truth more in excess, Expost. in loc.
Math. Arlis loc. 148.
than the other does in defect. However, though these in the Moon are not so
high as some amongst us; yet certain it is they are of a great height, and
some of them at the least four miles perpendicular. This I shall prove from
the observation of Galilaeus, whose glass can show to the senses a proof
beyond exception; and certainly that man must needs be of a most timorous faith
who dares not believe his own eye.

By that perspective you may plainly discern some enlightened parts (which are
the mountains) to be distant from the other about the twentieth part of the
diameter. From whence it will follow, that those mountains must necessarily be
at the least four Italian miles in height.



For let B D E F be the body of the Moon, A B C will be a ray or beam of the
Sun, which enlightens a mountain at A, and B is the point of contingency;
the distance betwixt A and B, must be supposed to be the twentieth part of
the diameter, which is an 100 miles, for so far are some enlightened parts
severed from the common term of illumination. Now the aggregate of the
quadrate from A B a hundred, and B G a 1000 will be 1010000; unto which the
quadrate arising from A G must be equal; according to the 47 proposition in
the first book of elements. Therefore the whole line A G is somewhat more than
104, and the distance betwixt H A must be above 4 miles, which was the thing to
be proved.

But it may be again objected, if there be such rugged parts, and so high
mountains, why then cannot we discern them at this distance? why does the
Moon appear unto us so exactly round, and not rather as a wheel with teeth?

I answer, by reason of too great a distance; for if the whole body appear to
our eye so little, then those parts which bear so small a proportion to the
whole, will not at all be sensible.

But it may be replied, if there were any such remarkable hills, why does not
the limb of the Moon appear like a wheel with teeth, to those who look
upon it through the great perspective, on whose witness you so much depend? or
what reason is there that she appears as exactly round through it, as she
does to the bare eye? certainly then, either there is no such thing as you
imagine, or else the glass fails much in this discovery.

To this I shall answer out of Galilaeus.

1. You must know that there is not merely one rank of mountains, about the
edge of the Moon, but diverse orders, one mountain behind another, and so
there is somewhat to hinder those void spaces which otherwise, perhaps, might
appear.

Now, where there be many hills, the ground seems even to a man that can see
the tops of all. Thus when the sea rages, and many vast waves are lifted up,
yet all may appear plain enough to one that stands at the shore. So where
there are so many hills, the inequality will be less remarkable, if it be
discerned at a distance.

2. Though there be mountains in that part which apeares unto us to be the
limb of the Moon, as well as in any other place, yet the bright vapors hide
their appearance: for there is an orb of thick vaporous air that does
immediately compass the body of the Moon; which though it have not so great
opacity, as to terminate the sight, yet being once enlightened by the Sun, it
does represent the body of the Moon under a greater form, and hinders our
sight, from a distinct view of her true circumference. But of this in the next
Chapter.

3. Keplar has observed, Somn. Astr. not. 207.
that in the solary Eclipses, when the rays may pass thorough this vaporous
air, there are some gibbosities to be discerned in the limb of the Moon.

I have now sufficiently proved, that there are hills in the Moon, and hence
it may seem likely that there is also a world; for since providence has some
special end in all its works, certainly then these mountains were not
produced in vain; and what more probable meaning can we conceive there should
be, LIB. 1. Cap. 10.
than to make that place convenient for habitation?

Proposition 10.
That there is an Atmo-sphaera, or an orb of gross, vaporous air,
immediately encompassing the body of the Moon.

AS that part of our air which is nearest to the earth, is of a thicker
substance than the other, by reason it is always mixed with some vapors, which
are continually exhaled into it. So is it equally requisite, that if there be a
world in the Moon, that the air about that, should be alike qualified with
ours. Now, that there is such an orb of gross air, was first of all (for
ought I can read) observed by Meslin, afterward assented unto by Keplar and
Galilaeus, Vide Eusebius. Nicrem. de Not.
and since by Baptista Cisacus, Sheiner with others, all of them confirming it
by the same arguments which I shall only cite, Hist. l. 2. c. 11.
and then leave this Proposition.

1. It Is not improbable that there should be a sphere of grosser air about the
Moon; because it is observed, that there are such kind of evaporations which
proceed from the Sun it self. For there are discovered diverse moveable spots,
like clouds, that do encompasse his body: which those Authors, who have been
most frequently versed in these kind of experiments and studies, do conclude
to be nothing else but evaporations from it. The probability and truth of
which observations may also be inferred from some other appearances. As,

1. It has been observed that the Sun has sometimes for the space of four
days together, So. A. D. 1547. April 24. to the 28.
appeared as dull and ruddy almost as the Moon in her Ecclipses; In so much
that the Stars have been seen at midday. Nay, he has been constantly darkened
for almost a whole year, and never shined, but with a kind of heavy and
duskish light, so that there was scarce heat enough to ripen the fruits. As it
was about the time when Caesar was killed. Which was recorded by some of the
Poets. Thus Virgil, speaking of the Sun.

Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam, Virgil Georg. lib. 1.

Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque aeternam timueruut saecula noctem.
He pitying Rome when as great Caesar did,
His head within a mourning veil did hide.
And thus the wicked guilty world did fright,
With doubtful fears of an eternal night.
Ovid likewise speaking of his death -- Solis quoque tristis imago
Lurida sollicitis praebebat lumina terris. Metam. lib. 15:

-- The Suns sad image then
Did yield a lowering light to fearful men.


Now these appearances could not arise from any lower vapor. For then 1. They
would not have been so universal as they were, being seen through all Europe;
or else 2. that vapor must have covered the stars as well as the Sun, which
yet notwithstanding were then plainly discerned in the day time. You may see
this argument illustrated in another the like case. Chap. 12. Hence then it
will follow, that this fuliginous matter, which did thus obscure the Sun,
must needs be very near his body; and if so, then, what can we more probably
guess it to be, than evaporations from it?

2. It Is observed, that in the Suns total Ecclipses, when there is no part of
his body discernable, yet there dos not always follow so great a darkness, as
might be expected from his total absence. Now it is probable, that the reason
is, because these thicker vapors, being enlightened by his beams, do convey
some light unto us, notwithstanding the interposition of the Moon betwixt his
body and our earth.

3. This likewise is by some guest to be the reason of the crepusculum or that
light which we have before the Suns rising.

Now, if there be such evaporations from the Sun, much more then from the
moon, which does consist of a more gross and impure substance. The other
arguments are taken from several observations in the Moon herself, and do
more directly tend to the proof of this proposition.

2. It Is observed, that so much of the Moon as is enlightened, is always part
of a bigger circle, than that which is darker. The frequent experience of
others has proved this, and an easy observation may quickly confirm it. But
now this cannot proceed from any other cause so probable, as from this orb of
air; especially when we consider how that Planet shining with a borrowed
light, does not send forth any such rays as may make her appearance bigger
than her body.

3. When the Moon being half enlightened, begins to cover any Star, if the
Star be toward the obscurer part, then may it by the perspective be
discerned, to be nearer unto the center of the moon, than the outward
circumference of the enlightened part. But the moon being in the full; then dos
it seem to receive these stars, within its limb.

4. Though the Moon do sometime appear the first day of her change when so
much as appears enlightened, cannot be above the 80 part of her diameter, yet
then will the horns seem at least to be of a fingers breadth in extension.
Which could not be, unless the air about it were illuminated.

5. It Is observed in the Solary ecclipses, that there is sometimes a great
trepidation about the body of the Moon, from which we may likewise argue an
Atmo-sphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause there
should be of such an appearance as this, Quod radii Solares a vaporibus Lunam
ambientibus fuerint intercis^, Scheiner. Ros. Vis. l. 4. pars 2. c. 27.
that the Sunne-beames were broken and refracted by the vapors that
encompassed the Moon.

6. I may add the like argument taken from another observation which will be
easily tried and granted. When the Sun is eclipsed, we discern the Moon as
she is in her own natural bigness; but then she appears somewhat less
than when she is in the full, though she be in the same place of her supposed
excentrick and epicycle; and therefore Tycho has calculated a Table for the
Diameter of the diverse new Moons. But now there is no reason so probable, to
salve this appearance, as to place an orb of thicker air, near the body of
that Planet, which may be enlightened by the reflected beams, and through
which the direct rays may easily penetrate.

But some may object, that this will not consist with that which was before
delivered, where I said, that the thinnest parts had least light.

If this were true, how comes it to pass then, that this air should be as
right as any of the others parts, when as it is the thinnest of all?

I answer, if the light be received by reflection only, then the thickest body
has most, because it is best able to beat back the rays; but if the light
be received by illumination (especially if there be an opacous body behind,
which may double the beams by reflection) as it is here, LIB. 1. Cap. 11.
then I deny not but a thin body may retain much light; and perhaps, some of
those appearances, which we take for fiery comets, are nothing else but a
bright cloud enlightened; So that probable it is, there may be such air without
the Moon; and hence it comes to pass, that the greater spots are only visible
toward her middle parts, and none near the circumference; not but that there
are some as well in those parts as elsewhere, but they are not there
perceiveable, by reason of those brighter vapors which hide them.

Proposition 11.
That as their world is our Moon, so our world is their Moon.

I Have already handled the first thing that I promised, according to the
Method which Aristotle uses in his Book de Mundo, and showed you the necessary
parts that belong to this world in the Moon. In the next place it is requisite
that I proceed to those things which are extrinsecall unto it, as the Seasons,
the Meteors, and the Inhabitants.

1. Of the Seasons;

And if there be such a world in the Moon, it is requisite then that their
seasons should be some way correspondent unto ours, that they should have
Winter and Summer, night and day, as we have.

Now that in this Planet there is some similitude of Winter and Summer, is
affirmed by Aristotle himself, De gen animal. l. 4. 12.
since there is one hemispheare that has always heat and light, and the
other that has darkness and cold. True indeed, their days and years are
always of one and the same length (unless we make one of their years to be 19
of ours, Golden Number.
in which space all the Stars do arise after the same order.) But it is so
with us also under the Poles, and therefore that great difference is not
sufficient to make it altogether unlike ours; nor can we expect that every
thing there should be in the same manner as it is here below, as if nature had
no way but one to bring about her purposes. We have no reason then to think it
necessary that both these worlds should be altogether alike, but it may suffice
if they be correspondent in something only. However, it may be questioned
whether it does not seem to be against the wisdom of Providence, to make
the night of so great a length, when they have such a long time unfit for
work? I answer, no; since it is so, and more with us also under the poles; and
besides, the general length of their night is somewhat abated in the bigness
of their Moon which is our earth. For this returns as great a light unto that
Planet, as it receives from it. But for the better proof of this, I shall
first free the way from such opinions as might otherwise hinder the speed of a
clearer progress.

Plutarch one of the chief patrons of this world in the Moon, Plut. de fac.
lunae.
does directly contradict this proposition; affirming, that those who live
there, may discern our world, as the dreggs and sediment of all other
creatures, appearing to them through clouds and foggy mists, and that
altogether devoid of light, being base and unmovable, so that they might well
imagine the dark place of damnation to be here situate, and that they only
were the inhabiters of the world, as being in the midst betwixt Heaven and Hell.

To this I may answer, it is probable that Plutarch spoke this inconsiderately,
and without a reason; which makes him likewise fall into another absurdity,
when he says our earth would appear immovable; whereas questionless, though
it did not, yet would it seem to move, and theirs to stand still, as the Land
does to a man in a Ship; according to that of the Poet: Provehimur portu,
terraeque urbesque recedunt.

And I doubt not but that ingenuous Author would easily have recanted, if he
had been but acquainted with those experiences which men of latter times have
found out, for the confirmation of this truth.

2. Unto him assents Macrobius, whose words are these; Terra accepto solis
lumine clarescit tantummodo, Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 19.
non relucet. The earth is by the Sunne-beames made bright, but not able to
enlighten any thing so far. And his reason is, because this being of a thick
and gross matter, the light is terminated in its superficies, and cannot
penetrate into the substance; whereas the Moon does therefore seem so bright
to us, because it receives the beams within it self. But the weakness of
this assertion, may be easily manifest by a common experience; for polished
steel (whose opacity will not give any admittance to the rays) reflects a
stronger heat than glass, and so consequently a greater light.

3. It Is the general consent of Philosophers, that the reflection of the
Sunne-beames from the earth does not reach much above half a mile high, where
they terminate the first region, so that to affirm they might ascend to the
Moon, were to say, there were but one region of air, which contradicts the
proved and received opinion.

Unto this it may be answered:

That it is indeed the common consent, that the reflection of the Sunne-beames
reach only to the second region; but yet some there are, and those too,
Philosophers of good note, who thought otherwise. Thus Plotinus is cited by
Caelius, Ant. lect. l. 1. c. 4.
Si concipias te in sublimi quopiam mundi loco, unde oculis subjiciatur terrae
moles aquis circumfusa, and solis syderumque radiis illustrata, non aliam
profecto visam iri probabile est, quam qualis modo visatur lunaris globi
species. If you conceive your self to be in some such high place, where you
might discern the whole Globe of the earth and water, when it was enlightened
by the Suns rays, it is probable it would then appear to you in the same
shape as the Moon does now unto us. In epist. ad Sebast. Fantonum.
So Paulus Foscarinus. Terra nihil aliud est quam altera Luna, vel Stella,
talisque nobis appareret, si ex convenienti elongatione eminus conspiciretur,
in ipsaque observari possent eaedem aspectuum varietates, quae in Luna
apparent. The earth is nothing else but another Moon or Star, and would
appear so unto us if it were beheld at a convenient distance with the same
changes and varieties as there are in the Moon. Thus also Carolus Malapertius,
Praefat. ad Austriaca syd.
whose words are these, Terra haec nostra, si in luna constituti essemus,
splendida prorsus quasi non ignobilis planeta, nobis appareret. If we were
placed in the Moon, and from thence beheld this our earth, it would appear
unto us very bright, like one of the nobler Planets. Meteor. l. 1. c. 2. Art. 2.
Unto these does Fromondus assent, when he says, Credo equidem quod si oculus
quispiam in orb lunari foret, globum terrae and aquae instar ingentis syderis
a sole illustrem conspiceret. I believe that this globe of earth and water
would appear like some great Star to any one, who should look upon it from
the Moon. Now this could not be, nor could it shine so remarkably, unless
the beams of light were reflected from it. And therefore the same Fromondus
expressly holds, that the first region of air is there terminated, where the
heat caused by reflection begins to languish, whereas the beams themselves do
pass a great way further. The chief argument which does most plainly
manifest this truth, is taken from a common observation which may be easily
tried.

If you behold the Moon a little before or after the conjunction, when she is
in a sextile with the Sun, you may discern not only the part which is
enlightened, but the rest also to have in it a kind of a duskish light; but if
you choose out such a situation, where some house or chimney (being some 70 or
80 paces distant from you) may hide from your eye the enlightened horns, you
may then discern a greater and more remarkable shining in those parts unto
which the Sun beams cannot reach; nay there is so great a light, that by the
help of a good perspective you may discern its spots. In so much that
Blancanus the Jesuit speaking of it, says, De mundi fab. p. 3. c. 3.
Haec experientia ita me aliquando fefellit, ut in hunc fulgorem casu ac
repent incidens, existimarim novo quodam miraculo tempore adolescentis lunae
factum esse plenilunium. This experiment did once so deceive me, that
happening upon the sight of this brightness upon a sudden, I thought that by
some new miracle the Moon had been got into her full a little after her
change.

But now this light is not proper to the Moon; it does not proceed from the
rays of the Sun which does penetrate her body, nor is it caused by any other
of the Planets and Stars. Therefore it must necessarily follow, that it comes
from the earth. The two first of these I have already proved, and as for the
last, it is confidently affirmed by Caelius, Ant. Lect. l. 20. c. 5.
Quod si in disquisitionem evocet quis, an lunari syderi lucem foenerent
planetae item alii, asseveranter astruendum non foenerare. If any should ask
whether the other Planets lend any light to the Moon? I answer, they do not.
True indeed, the noble Tycho discussing the reason of this light attributes it
to the Planet Venus; Progym. 1.
and I grant that this may convey some light to the Moon; but that it is not
the cause of this whereof we now discourse, is of it self sufficiently
plain, because Venus is sometimes over the Moon, when as she cannot convey
any light to that part which is turned from her.

It does not proceed from the fixed stars; for then it would retain the same
light in ecclipses, whereas the light at such times is more ruddy and dull.
Then also the light of the Moon would not be greater or lesser, according to
its distance from the edge of the earths shadow, since it did at all times
equally participate this light of the stars.

In brief, this is neither proper to the Moon, nor does it proceed from any
penetration of the Suns rays, or the shining of Venus, or the other Planets, or
the fixed stars. Now because there is no other body in the whole Universe,
save the earth, it remains that this light must necessarily be caused by that,
which with a just gratitude repaies to the Moon such illumination as it
receives from her.

And as loving friends equally participate of the same joy and grief, so do
these mutually partake of the same light from the Sun, and the same
darkness from the eclipses, being allo severally helped by one another in
their greatest wants: For when the Moon is in conjunction with the Sun, and
her upper part receives all the light, then her lower Hemispheare (which would
otherwise be altogether dark) is enlightened by the reflection of the
Sunne-beames from the earth. When these two Planets are in opposition, then
that part of the earth which could not receive any light from the Sunne-beames,
is most enlightened by the Moon, being then in her full; and as she does most
illuminate the earth when the Sunne-beames cannot, so the grateful earth
returns to her as great (nay greater) light when she most wants it; so that
always that visible part of the Moon which receives nothing from the Sun,
is enlightened by the earth, as is proved by Galilaeus, with many more
arguments, in that Treatise which he calls Systema mundi. True indeed, when the
Moon comes to a quartile, then you can neither discern this light, nor yet
the darker part of her body, and that for a double reason.

1. Because the nearer it comes to the full, the less light dos it receive
from the earth, whose illumination dos always decrease in the same proportion
as the Moon dos increase.

2. Because of the exuperancy of the light in the other parts. Quippe
illustratum medium speciem recipit valentiorem, Scal. exerc. 62.
the clearer brightness involves the weaker, it being with the species of
sight, as it is with those of sound; and as the greater noise drowns the less,
so the brighter object hides that which is more obscure. But as they do always
in their mutual vicissitudes participate of one another light; so also do
they partake of the same defects and darknings; for when our Moon is eclipsed,
then is their Sun darkened; and when our Sun is eclipsed, the^ is their Moon
deprived of its light, as you may see affirmed by Meslin. Quod si terram nobis
ex alto liceret intueri, Epit. Astro. l. 4. part. 2.
quemadmodum deficientem lunam ex longinquo spectare possumus, videremus
tempore eclipsis solis terrae aliquam partem lumine solis deficere, eodem plane
modo sicut ex opposito luna deficit. If we might behold this globe of earth at
the same distance, as we do the Moon in her defect, we might discern some
part of it darkened in the Suns eclipses, just so as the Moon is in hers.
For as our Moon is eclipsed by the interposition of our earth, so is their
Moon eclipsed by the interposition of theirs. The manner of this mutual
illumination betwixt these two you may plainly discern in this Figure
following.



Where A represents the Sun, B the Earth, and C the Moon; Now suppose the
Moon C to be in a sextile of increase, when there is only one small part of
her body enlightened, then the earth B will have such a part of its visible
Hemispheare darkened, as is proportionable to that part of the Moon which is
enlightened; and as for so much of the Moon, as the Sunbeams cannot reach
unto, it receives light from a proportional part of the earth which shines
upon it, as you may plainly perceive by the Figure.

You see then that agreement and similitude which there is betwixt our earth
and the Moon. Now the greatest difference which makes them unlike, is this,
that the Moon enlightens our earth round about, whereas our earth gives light
only to that Hemispheare of the Moon which is visible unto us, as may be
certainly gathered from the constant appearance of the same spots, which could
not thus come to pass, if the Moon had such a diurnall motion about its own
axis as perhaps our earth has. And though some suppose her to move in an
epicycle, yet this does not so turn her body round, that we may discern both
Hemispheares; for according to that hypothesis (say they) the motion of her
eccentrick does turn her face toward us, as much as the other does from us.

But now, if any question what they do for a Moon who live in the upper part
of her body? I answer, the solving of this, is the most uncertain and
difficult thing that I know of, concerning this whole matter. But yet unto me
this seems a probable conjecture.

That the upper Hemispheare of the Moon does receive a sufficient light from
those Planets about it; and amongst these, Venus (it may be) bestows a more
especial brightness, since Galilaeus has plainly discerned that she suffers
the same increases and decreases; as the Moon has, and it is probable that
this may be perceived there, without the help of a glass, because they are
far nearer it than we. When Venus (says Keplar) lies down in the Perige or
lower part of her supposed Epicycle, then is she in conjunction with her
husband the Sun, from whom after she has departed for the space of ten
months, she gets plenum uterum, and is in the full.

But you will reply, though Venus may bestow some light when she is over the
Moon, and in conjunction, yet being in opposition, she is not visible to them,
and what shall they then do for light?

I answer, then they have none; nor does this make so great a difference
betwixt those two Hemispheares, as there is with us, betwixt the places under
the poles, and the line. And besides, it is considerable, that there are two
kind of Planets.

1. Primarie, such whose proper circles do encompasse the body of the Sun,
whereof there are six. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Ceres or the Earth, Venus,
Mercury. As in the Frontispice.

2. Secondary, such whose proper circles are not about the Sun, but some of
the other primarie Planets. Thus are there two about Saturn, four about
Jupiter, and thus likewise dos the Moon encompasse our earth. Now it is probable
that these lesser, secondary Planets, are not so accommodated with all
conveniences of habitation, as the others that are more principal.

But it may seem a very difficult thing to conceive, how so gross and dark a
body as our earth, should yield such a clear light as proceeds from the Moon;
and therefore the Cardinal de Cusa (who thinks every Star to be a several
wo^ld) is of opinion that the light of the Sun is not able to make them
appear so bright; De doct. ig. l. 2. c. 12.
but the reason of their shining is, because we behold them at a great
distance through their regions of fire which do set a shining luster upon
those bodies that of themselves are dark. Vnde si quis esset extra regionem
ignis, terra ista in circumferentia suae regionis per medium ignis lucida
stella appareret. So that if a man were beyond the region of fire, this earth
would appear through that, as a bright Star. But if this were the only
reason, then would the Moon be freed from such increases and decreases as she
is now liable unto.

Keplar thinks that our earth receives that light whereby it shines, from the
Sun, but this (says he) is not such an intended clear brightness as the Moon
is capable of, and therefore he guesses, that the earth there, is of a more
chokie soil, like the I Will of Crete, and so is better able to reflect a
stronger light, whereas our earth must supply this intention with the quantity
of its body. But this I conceive to be a needless conjecture, since our
earth, if all things were well considered, will be found able enough to
reflect as great a light. For

1. Consider its opacity; if you mark these sublunary things, you shall
perceive that amongst them, those that are most perspicuous, are not so well
able to reverberate the Sunne-beames, as the thicker bodies. The rays pass
singly through a diaphanous matter, but in an opacous substance they are
doubled in their return, and multiplied by reflection. Now if the moon and the
other Planets can shine so clearly by beating back the Sunne-beames, why may
not the earth also shine as well, which agrees with them in the cause of this
brightness their opacity?

2. Consider what a clear light we may discern reflected from the earth in
the midst of Summer, and withal conceive how much greater that must be
which is under the line, where the rays are more directly and strongly
reverberated.

3. It Is considerable that though the Moon dos in the night time seem to be of
so clear a brightness, yet when we look upon it in the day, it appears
like some little whitish cloud: Not but that at both times, she is of an equal
light in her self. The reason of this difference is, because in the night we
look upon it through a dark and obscure medium, there being no other
enlightened body, whose brightness may abate from this: Whereas in the day
time, the whole heavens round about it, are of an equal clearenesse, and so
make it to appear with a weaker light. Now because we cannot see how the
enlightened parts of our earth do look in the night, therefore in comparing it
with the Moon, we must not consider her, as she is beheld through the
advantage of a dark medium, but as she seems in the daytime: Now, in any
clear Sun-shine-day, our earth does appear as bright as the Moon, which at
the same time does seem like some duskish cloud (as any little observation may
easily manifest.) Therefore we need not doubt but that the earth is as well
able to give light, as the Moon. To this, it may be added that those very
clouds, which in the daytime seem to be of an equal light to the moon, do
in the evening become as dark as our earth; and as for those of them, which
are looked upon at any great distance, they are often mistaken for the
mountains.

4. It Is considerable, that though the moon seem to be of so great a
brightness in the night, by reason of its neerenesse unto those several
shadows which it casts, yet is it of it self weaker than that part of
twilight, which usually we have for half an hour after Sunne-set, because
we cannot till after that time discern any shadow to be made by it.

5. Consider the great distance at which we behold the Planets, for this must
needs add much to their shining; and therefore Cusanus (in the above cited
place) thinks that if a man were in the Sun, that Planet would not appear so
bright to him, as now it does to us, because then his eye could discern but
little, whereas here, we may comprehend the beams as they are contracted in a
narrow body. Keplar beholding the earth from a high mountain when it was
enlightened by the Sun, confesses that it appeared unto him of an incredible
brightness, whereas then he could only see some small parts of it; but how much
brighter would it have appeared if he might in a direct line behold the whole
globe of earth and these rays gathered together? So that if we consider that
great light which the earth receives from the Sun in the Summer, and then
suppose we were in the Moon, where we might see the whole earth hanging in
those vast spaces, where there is nothing to terminate the sight, but those
beams which are there contracted into a little compass; I say, if we do well
consider this, we may easily conceive that our earth appears as bright to
those other inhabitants in the Moon, as theirs does to us.

But here it may be objected, that with us, for many days in the year, the
heavens are so overclowded, that we cannot see the Sun at all, and for the
most part, in our brightest days, there are many scattered clouds which shade
the earth in sundry places; so that in this respect, it must needs be unlike
the Moon and will not be able to yield so clear, unintermitted a light, as it
receives from that planet.

To this I answer.

1. As for those lesser brighter clouds which for the most part are scattered
up and down in the clearest days, these can be no reason why our earth should
be of a darker appeara^ce, because these clouds being near unto the earth, and
so not distinguishable at so great a distance from it, and likewise being
illuminated on their back parts by the Sun that shines upon them, LIB. 1.
Cap. 12.
must seem as bright to those in the Moon, as if the beams were immediately
reflected from our earth.

2. When these clouds that are interposed, are of any large extension or great
opacity, as it is in extraordinary lasting and great rains, then there must be
some discernable alteration in the light of our earth; But yet this dos not
make it to differ from the Moon: since it is so also with that Planet, as is
showed in the later part of the next chapter.

Proposition. 12.
That it is probable there may be such Meteors belonging to that world in the
Moon, as there are with us.

PLutarch discussing this point, affirms that it is not necessary there should
be the same means of growth and fructifying in both these worlds, since nature
might in her policy find out more ways than one how to bring about the same
effect. But however, he thinks it is probable that the Moon her self sends
forth warm winds, and by the swiftness of her motion there should breathe out
a sweet and comfortable air, pleasant dewes, and gentle moisture, which might
serve for refreshing and nourishment of the inhabitants and plants in that
other world.

But since they have all things alike with us, as sea and land, and vaporous
air encompassing both, I should rather therefore think that nature there
should use the same way of producing meteors as she does with us (and not by a
motion as Plutarch supposes:) because she does not love to vary from her
usual operations without some extraordinary impediment, but still keeps her
beaten path unless she be driven thence.

One argument whereby I shall manifest this truth, may be taken from those new
Stars which have appeared in diverse ages of the world, and by their paralax
have been discerned to have been above the Moon, such as was that in
Cassiopeia, that in Sagittarius, with many others betwixt the Planets.
Hipparchus in his time took especial notice of such as these, Plin. not.
hist. l. 2. c. 26.
and therefore fancied out such co^stellations in which to place the Stars,
showing how many there were in every asterisme, that so afterward, posterity
might know whether there were any new Star produced, or any old one missing.
Now the nature of these Comets may probably manifest, that in this other world
there are other meteors also; for these in all likelihood are nothing else but
such evaporations caused by the Sun from the bodies of the Planets. I shall
prove this by showing the improbabilities and inconveniences of any other
opinion.

For the better pursuit of this it is in the first place requisite, that I
deal with our chief adversary, Caesar la Galla, who does most directly oppose
that truth which is here to be proved. He endeavoring to confirm the
incorruptibility of the Heavens, and being there to satisfy the argument which
is taken from these Comets, He answers it thus: Aut argumentum desumptum ex
paralaxi, non est efficax, aut si est efficax, eorum instrumentorum usum
decipere, vel ratione astri, vel medii, vel distantiae, aut ergo erat in
suprema part aeris, aut si in coelo, tum forsan factum erat ex reflectione
radiorum Saturni and Iovis, qui tunc in conjunctione fuerant. Either the
argument from the paralax is not efficacious, or if it be, yet the use of the
instruments might deceive, either in regard of the star, or the medium, or the
distance, and so this comet might be in the upper regions of the air; or if it
were in the heavens, there it might be produced by the reflection of the rays
from Saturn and Jupiter, who were then in conjunction. You see what shifts he
is driven to, how he runs up and down to many starting holes, that he may
find some shelter, and in stead of the strength of reason, he answers with a
multitude of words, thinking (as the Proverb is) that he may use hail, when
he has no thunder. Nihil turpius (says Epist. 95.
Seneca) dubio and incerto, pedem modo referente, modo producente. What can
there be more unseemely in one that should be a fair disputant, than to be
now here, now there, and so uncertain, that one cannot tell where to find him?
He thinks that there are not Comets in the heavens, because there may be many
other reasons of such appearances; but what he knows not; perhaps (he says)
that argument from the paralax is not sufficient, Vide Galilaeum. Syst. mundi.
Colloq 3.
or if it be, then there may be some deceit in the observation. To this I may
safely say, that he may justly be accounted a weak Mathematician who
mistrusts the strength of this argument; nor can he know much in Astronomy,
who understands not the paralax, which is a foundation of that Science; and I
am sure that he is a timorous man, who dares not believe the frequent
experience of his senses, or trust to a demonstration.

True indeed, I grant it is possible, that the eye, the medium, and the distance
may all deceive the beholder; but I would have him show which of all these was
likely to cause an error in this observation? Merely to say they might be
deceived, is no sufficient answer; for by this I might confute the positions of
all Astronomers, and affirm the stars are hard by us, because it is possible
they may be deceived in their observing distance. But I forbear any further
reply; my opinion is of that Treatise, that either it was set forth purposely
to tempt a confutation, that he might see the opinion of Galilaeus confirmed
by others, or else it was invented with as much haste and negligence as it was
printed, there being in it almost as many faults as lines.

Others think that these are not any new Comets, but some ancient stars that
were there before, which now shine with that unusual brightnesle, by reason of
the interposition of such vapors, which do multiply their light; and so the
alteration will be here only, and not in the heavens. Thus Aristotle thought
the appearance of the milkie way was produced. For he held that there were
many little stars, which by their influence did constantly attract such a
vapor toward that place of heaven, so that it always appeared white. Now by
the same reason may a brighter vapor be the cause of these appearances.

But how probable soever this opinion may seem, yet if well considered, you
shall find it to be altogether absurd and impossible: for,

1. These stars were never seen there before, and it is not likely that a
vapor being hard by us, can so multiply that light which could not before be
at all discerned.

2. This supposed vapor cannot be either contracted into a narrow compass, or
dilated into a broad: 1. it could not be within a little space, for then that
star would not appear with the same multiplied light to those in other
climates. 2. it cannot be a dilated vapor, for then other stars which were
discerned through the same vapor, would seem as big as that; this argument
is the same in effect with that of the paralax, as you may see in this Figure.



Suppose A B to be a Hemispheare of one earth, C D to be the upper part of the
highest region, in which there might be either a contracted vapor, as G, or
else a dilated one, as H I. Suppose E F likewise to represent half the
heavens, wherein was this appearing Comet at K. Now I say, that a contracted
vapor, as G, could not cause this appearance, because an inhabitant at M could
not discern the same star with this brightness, but perhaps another at L,
betwixt which the vapor is directly interposed. Nor could it be caused by a
dilated vapor, as H I, because then all the stars that were discerned
through it, would be perceived with the same brightness.

It Is necessary therefore that the cause of this appearance should be in the
heavens. And this is granted by the most and best Astronomers. But, say some,
this does not argue any natural alteration in those purer bodies, since it is
probable that the concourse of many little vagabond stars, by the union of
their beams may cause so great a light. Of this opinion were Anaxagoras and
Zeno amongst the ancient, and Baptista Cisatus, Blancanus, with others amongst
our modern Astronomers. For, say they, when there happens to be a concourse of
some few stars, then do many other fly unto them from all the parts of
heaven like so many Bees unto their King. But 1. it is not likely that amongst
those which we count the fixed stars, there should be any such uncertain
motions, that they can wander from all parts of the heavens, as if Nature had
neglected them, or forgot to appoint them a determinate course. 2. If there be
such a conflux of these, as of Bees to their King, then what reason is there,
that they do not still tarry with it, that so the Comet may not be dissolved?
But enough of this. You may commonly see it confuted by many other arguments.
Clavius in sphaeram. cap. 1.
Others there are, who affirm these to be some new created stars, produced
by an extraordinary supernatural power. I answer, true indeed, it is possible
they might be so, but however, it is not likely they were so, since such
appearances may be salved some other way; wherefore to fly unto a miracle for
such things, were a great injury to nature, and to derogate from her skill; an
indignity much mis-becoming a man who professes himself to be a Philosopher.
Miraculum (says one) est ignorantiae Asylum, a miracle often serves for the
receptacle of a lazy ignorance; which any industrious Spirit would be ashamed
of, if being but an idle way to shift off the labor of any further search. But
here is the misery of it, we first tie our selves unto Aristotle's principles,
and then conclude that nothing could contradict them, but a miracle; whereas
'twould be much better for the Commonwealth of learning, if we would ground
our principles rather upon the frequent experiences of our own, than the bare
authority of others.

Some there are who think, that these Comets are nothing else, but exhalations
from our earth, carried up into the higher parts of the Heaven. So Peno, Tycho
Progym. l. 1. c. 9.
Rothmannus and Galilaeus. But this is not possible, since by computation it is
found, that one of them is above 300 times bigger than the whole Globe of Land
and Water. Others therefore have thought that they did proceed from the body of
the Sun, and that that Planet only is Cometarum officinae, unde tanquam
emissarii and exploratores emitterentur, brevi ad solemn redituri: The shop or
forge of Comets from whence they were sent, like so many spies, that they might
in some short space return again. But this cannot be, since if so much matter
had proceeded from him alone, it would have made a sensible diminution in his
body. The Noble Tycho therefore thinks that they consist of some such fluider
parts of the Heaven, as the milky way is framed of, which being condenst
together, yet not attaining to the consistency of a Star, is in some space of
time rarifyed again into its wonted nature. But this is not likely; because
the appearance of the milky way dos not arise from some fluider parts of the
heaven (as he supposes) but from the light of many lesser stars which are
thereabouts. Fromond. Meteor. l. 2. c. 5. art. 2.
And therefore it is usually thus described. Item Vesta tract. 5. c. 2.
Via lactea nihil aliud est quam innumerabiles stellarum fixarum greges qui
confuso and pallenti lumine tractum illum inalbant. The milky way is nothing
else but the pale and confused light of many leser stars, whereby some parts
of the heaven are made to appear white.

And beside, what likely cause can we conceive of this condensation, unless
there be such qualities there, as there are in our air, and then why may not
the Planets have the like qualities as our earth? and if so, then it is more
probable that they are made by the ordinary way of nature, as they are with us,
and consist of such exhalations from the bodies of the Planets, as being very
much rarefied, may be drawn up, through the orb of gross vaporous air that
incompasses them. Nor is this a singular opinion; but it seemed most likely to
Camillus Gloriosus. De Comet. l. 5. c. 4. Apol. pro Galil.
Th. Campanella, Fromondus, with some others. But if you ask, whither shall
all these exhalations return? Meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6.
I answer every one into his own Planet. If it be again objected, that then
there will be so many centers of gravity, and each several Planet will be a
distinct world; I reply, we have not like probability concerning the rest;
but yet, perhaps all of them are so, except the Sun, La^tant. Inst. l. 3. c
23.
though Cusanus and some others think there is one also; and later times have
discovered some lesser clouds moving round about him. But as for Saturn, he
has two Moons on each side. Jupiter has four, that incircle him with their
motion. Which are likewise ecclipsed by the interposition of his body, as the
Moon is by our earth. Venus is observed to increase and decrease as the Moon.
LIB. 1. Cap. 11.
And this perhaps has been noted by former ages, as may be guest by that
relation of Saint Austin out of Varro. De Civit.
Mars, and all the rest, Dei l. 21. cap. 8.
derive their light from the Sun. Concerning Mercury, there has been little
or no observation, because for the most part, he lies hid under the
Sunne-beames, and seldom appears by himself. But when he dos, yet the
compass of his body is so little, and his light of so clear a brightness, by
reason of his neerenesse to the Sun, that the perspective cannot make the
same discoveries upon him, as from the rest.

So that if you consider their quantity, their opacity, or these others
discoveries, you shall find it probable enough, that each of them may be a
several world. Especially, since every one of them is allotted to a several
orb, and not altogether in one, as the fixed stars seem to be. But this
would be too much for to vent at the first: the chief thing at which I now
aim in this discourse, is to prove that there may be one in the Moon. LIB.
1. Cap. 12.


It has been before confirmed, that there was a sphere of thick vaporous air
encompassing the Moon, as the first and second regions do this earth. I have
now showed, that thence such exhalations may proceed as do produce the Comets:
now from hence it may probably follow, that there may be wind also and rain,
with such other Meteors as are common amongst us. This consequence is so
dependant, that Fromondus dares not deny it, though he would (as he confesses
himself;) De meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6.
for if the Sun be able to exhale from them such fumes as may cause Comets,
why not then such as may cause winds, and why not such also as may cause rain,
since I have above showed, that there is Sea and Land, as with us? Now, rain
seems to be more especially requisite for them, since it may allay the heat
and scorchings of the Sun, when he is over their heads. And nature has thus
provided for those in Peru, with the other inhabitants under the line.

But if there be such great, and frequent alterations in the Heavens, why
cannot we discern them?

I answer:

1. There may be such, and we not able to perceive them, because of the
weakness of our eye, and the distance of those places from us; they are the
words of Fienus (as they are quoted by Fromondus in the above cited place)
Possunt maximae permutationes in coelo fieri, etiamsi a nobis non
conspiciantur; hoc visus nostri debilitas and immensa coeli distantia faciunt.
And unto him assents Fromondus himself, when a little after he says, Si in
sphaeris planetarum degeremus, plurima forsan coelestium nebularum vellera toto
aethere passim dispersa videremus, quorum species jam evanescit nimia spatii
intercapedine. If we did live in the spheres of the Planets, we might there
perhaps discern many great clouds dispersed through the whole Heavens, which
are not now visible by reason of this great distance.

2. Maeslin and Keplar affirm, that they have seen some of these alterations.
The words of Maeslin are these (as I find them cited.) In eclipsi Lunari
vespere Dominicae Palmarum Anni 1605. LIB. 1. Cap. 11.
in corpore Lunae versus Boream, nigricans quaedam macula conspecta fuit,
Dissert. 2. cum nunc. Galil. item. Somn. Astron. nota ultima
obscurior caetero toto corpore, quod candentis ferri figuram repraesentabat;
dixisses nubila in multam regionem extensa pluviis and tempestuosis imbribus
gravida, cujusmodi ab excelsorum montium jugis in humiliorae convallium loca
videre non raro contingit. In that lunary eclipse which happened in the even of
Palme-sunday, in the year 1605, there was a certain blackish spot discerned
in the Northerly part of the Moon, being darker than any other place of her
body, and representing the color of red hot iron; You might conjecture that it
was some dilated cloud, being pregnant with showers; for thus do such lower
clouds appear from the tops of high mountains.

And a little before this passage, the same Author speaking of that vaporous
air about the Moon, tells us. Quod circumfluus ille splendour diversis
temporibus apparet limpidior plus minusve. That it dos at diverse times appear
of a different clearness, sometimes more, and sometimes less; which he
guesses to arise from the clouds and vapors that are in it.

Unto this I may add another testimony of Bapt. Cisatus, as he is quoted by
Nicrembergius, grounded upon an observation taken 23 years after this of
Maeslin, and writ to this Eusebius. Nicremberg. in a letter by that diligent and
judicious Astronomer. Hist. not. l. 2. c. 11.
The words of it run thus; Et quidem in eclipsi nupera solari quae fuit ipso
die natali Christi, observavi clare in luna soli supposita, quidpiam quod valde
probat id ipsum quod Cometae quoque and maculae solares urgent, nempe coelum
non esse a tenuitate and variationibus aeris exemptum; nam circa lunam adverti
esse sphaeram seu orbem quendam vaporosum, non secus atque circum terram,
adeoque sicut ex terra in aliquam usque sphaeram vapores and exhalationes
expirant, it a quoque ex luna. In that solary eclipse which happened on
Christmas day, when the Moon was just under the Sun, I plainly discerned that
in her, which may clearly confirm what the Comets and Suns spots do seem to
prove, LIB. 1. Cap. 13.
viz. that the heavens are not so solid, nor freed from those changes which our
air is liable unto; for, about the Moon I perceived such an orb, or vaporous
air, as that is which does encompasse our earth; and as vapors and
exhalations are raised from our earth into this air, so are they also from the
Moon.

You see what probable grounds, and plain testimonies I have brought for the
confirmation of this Proposition: many other things in this behalf might be
spoken, which for brevity sake I now omit, and pass unto the next.

Proposition 13.
That it is probable there may be inhabitants in this other World, but of what
kind they are, is uncertain.

I Have already handled the Seasons, and Meteors belonging to this new World:
it is requisite that in the next place I should come unto the third thing which I
promised, and say somewhat of the inhabitants; Concerning whom there might be
many difficult questions raised; as; whether that place be more inconvenient
for habitation than our World (as Keplar thinks;) whether they are the seed of
Adam; whether they are there in a blessed estate, or else what means there may
be for their salvation? with many other such uncertain enquiries, which I
shall willingly omit, leaving it to their examination who have more leisure and
learning for the search of such particulars.

Being for mine own part content only to set down such notes belonging unto
these, which I have observed in other Writers. De doct. ignorantia. l. 2. c. 12.
Cum tot a illa regio nobis ignota sit, remanent inhabitatores illi ignoti
penitus (says Cusanus) since we know not the regions of that place, we must
be altogether ignorant of the inhabitants. There has not yet been any such
discovery concerning these, upon which we may build a certainty, or good
probability: well may we guess at them, and that too very doubtfully, but we
can know nothing; for, if we do hardly guess aright at things which be upon
earth, Wisd. 9. 16.
if with labor we do find the things that are at hand, how then can we
search out those things that are in heaven? What a little is that which we
know, in respect of those many matters contained within this great Universe?
This whole globe of earth and water, though it seem to us to be of a large
extent, yet it bears not so great a proportion unto the whole frame of Nature,
as a small sand does unto it; and what can such little creatures as we,
discern, who are tied to this point of earth? or what can they in the Moon
know of us? If we understand any thing (says Esdras) it is nothing but that
which is upon the earth; 2 Esd. 4. 21.
and he that dwells above in the heavens, may only understand the things
that are above in the height of the heavens.

So that 'twere a very needelesse thing for us to search after any particulars;
however, we may guess in the general that there are some inhabitants in that
Planet: for why else did providence furnish that place with all such
conveniences of habitation as have been above declared?

But you will say, perhaps; is there not too great and intolerable a heat,
since the Sun is in their Zenith every month, and does tarry there so long
before he leaves it?

I answer, 1. This may, perhaps, be remedied (as it is under the line) by the
frequency of midday showers, which may cloud their Sun, and cool their
earth. 2. The equality of their nights does much temper the scorching of the
day; and the extreme cold that comes from the one, requires some space before
it can be dispelled by the other, so that the heat spending a great while
before it can have the victory, has not afterward much time to rage in.
Wherefore notwithstanding this doubt, yet that place may remain habitable. And
this was the opinion of the Cardinal de Cusa, when speaking of this Planet, he
says, De doct. ign. l. 2. c. 12.
Hic locus Mundi est habitatio hominum and animalium atque vegetabilium. This
part of the world is inhabited by men, and beasts, and plants. To him assented
Campanella; but he cannot determine whether they were men or rather some other
kind of creatures. If they were men, then he thinks they could not be infected
with Adams sin; yet perhaps, they had some of their own, which might make
them liable to the same misery with us, out of which, it may be, they were
delivered by the same means as we, the death of Christ; and thus he thinks that
place of the Ephesians may be interpreted, where the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.
10.
God gathered all things together in Christ, both which are in earth, and which
are in the heavens: So also that of the same Apostle to the Colossians, where
he says, Col. 1. 20.
that it pleased the Father to reconcile all things unto himself by Christ,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

But I dare not jest with divine truths, or apply these places according as
fancy directs. As I think this opinion does not any where contradict
Scripture; so I think likewise, that it cannot be proved from it. Wherefore
Campanella's second conjecture may be more probable, that the inhabitants of
that world, are not men as we are, but some other kind of creatures which
bear some proportion, and likeness to our natures. Or it may be, they are of
a quite different nature from any thing here below, such as no imagination can
describe; our understandings being capable only of such things as have entered
by our senses, or else such mixed natures as may be composed from them. Now,
there may be many other species of creatures beside those that are already
known in the world; there is a great chasme betwixt the nature of men and
Angels; It may be the inhabitants of the Planets are of a middle nature
between both these. It Is not improbable that God might create some of all
kinds, that so he might more completely glorify himself in the works of his
Power and Wisdom.

Cusanus too, thinks they differ from us in many respects; I will set down his
words as they may be found in the above cited place, Suspicamur in regione
solis magis esse solares, claros and illuminatos intellectuales habitatores,
spiritualiores etiam quam in luna, ubi magis lunatici, and in terra magis
materiales and crassi, ut illi intellectualis naturae solares sint multum in
actu and parum in potentia, terreni vero magis in potentia, and parum in actu,
lunares in medio fluctuantes. Hoc quidem opinamur ex influentia ignili solis,
aquatica simul and aerea lunae, and gravedine materiali terrae, and
consimiliter de aliis stellarum regionibus, suspicantes nullam habitationibus
carere, quasi tot sint parts particulares mundiales unius universi, quot sunt
stellae quarum non est numerus, nisi apud eum qui omnia in numero creavit.

We may conjecture (says he) the inhabitants of the Sun are like to the
nature of that Planet, more clear and bright, more intellectual than those in
the Moon where they are nearer to the nature of that duller Planet, and those
of the earth being more gross and material than either, so that these
intellectual natures in the Sun, are more form than matter, those in the
earth more matter than form, and those in the Moon betwixt both. This we may
guess from the fiery influence of the Sun, the watery and aereous influence
of the Moon, as also the material heaviness of the earth. In some such
manner likewise is it with the regions of the other stars; for, we conjecture
that none of them are without inhabitants, but that there are so many
particular worlds and parts of this one universe, as there are stars, which
are innumerable, unless it be to him who created all things in number.

For he held that the stars were not all in one equal orb as we commonly
suppose; but that some were far higher than others, which made them appear
less; and that many others were so far above any of these, that they were
altogether invisible unto us. An opinion which (as I conceive) has not any
great probability for it, nor certainty against it.

The Priest of Saturn relating to Plutarch (as he faignes it) the nature of
these Selenites, told him they were of diverse dispositions, some desiring to
live in the lower parts of the Moon, where they might look downwards upon
us, while others were more surely mounted aloft, all of them shining like the
rays of the Sun, and as being victorious, are crowned with garlands made
with the wings of Eustathia or Constancy.

It has been the opinion amongst some of the Ancients, that their heavens and
Elysian fields were in the Moon where the air is most quiet and pure. Not.
Com. l. 3. c. 19.
Thus Socrates, thus Plato, with his followers, did esteem this to be the
place where those purer souls inhabit, who are freed from the Sepulcher, and
contagion of the body. And by the Fable of Ceres, continually wandering in
search of her daughter Proserpina, is meant nothing else but the longing desire
of men, who live upon Ceres earth, to attain a place in Proserpina, the Moon
or heaven.

Plutarch also seems to assent unto this; but he thinks moreover, that there
are two places of happiness answerable to those two parts which he fancies to
remain of a man when he is dead, the soul and the understanding; the soul
he thinks is made of the Moon; and as our bodies do so proceed from the
dust of this earth, that they shall return to it hereafter; so our souls were
generated out of that Planet, and shall be resolved into it again; whereas the
understanding shall ascend unto the Sun, out of which it was made, where it
shall possess an eternity of well-being, and far greater happiness than
that which is enjoyed in the Moon. So that when a man dies, if his soul be
much polluted, then must it wander up and down in the middle region of the
air where hell is, and there suffer unspeakable torments for those sins
whereof it is guilty. Whereas the souls of better men, when they have in some
space of time been purged from that impurity which they did derive from the
body, then do they return into the Moon, where they are possessed with such a
joy, as those men feel who profess holy mysteries, from which place (says
he) some are sent down to have the superintendance of oracles, being diligent
either in the preservation of the good, either from, or in, all perils, and
the prevention or punishment of all wicked actions; but if in these employments
they mis-behave themselves, then are they again to be imprisoned in a body,
otherwise they remain in the Moon, till their souls be resolved into it, and
the understanding being cleared from all impediments, ascends to the Sun
which is its proper place. But this requires a diverse space of time, according
to the diverse affections of the soul. As for those who have been retired and
honest, addicting themselves to a studious and quiet life, these are quickly
preferred to a higher happiness. But as for such who have busied themselves in
many broils, or have been vehement in the prosecution of any lust, as the
ambitious, the amorous, the wrathful man, these still retain the glimpses and
dreams of such things as they have performed in their bodies, which makes them
either altogether unfit to remain there, where they are, or else keeps them
long ere they can put off their souls. Thus you see Plutarchs opinion
concerning the inhabitants and neighbors of the Moon, which (according to the
manner of the Academicks) he delivers in a third person; you see he makes
that Planet an inferior kind of heaven, and though he differ in many
circumstances, yet does he describe it to be some such place, as we suppose
Paradise to be. You see likewise his opinion concerning the place of the damned
spirits, that it is in the middle region of the air; and in neither of these
is he singular, but some more late and Orthodox Writers have agreed with him.
As for the place of Hell, many think it may be in the air, as well as any
where else.

True indeed, De Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 16.
S. Austin affirms that this place cannot be discovered; But others there are
who can show the situation of it out of Scripture; Some holding it to be in
another world without this, Mat. 25. 30.
because our Savior calls it (...) outward darkness. Ephesians. 4. 9.
But the most will have it placed toward the center of our earth, because it is
said, Christ descended into the lower parts of the earth; and some of these are
so confident, that this is its situation, that they can describe you its
bigness also, and of what capacity it is. Francis Ribera in in his Comment on
the Revelations, speaking of those words, where it is said, Rev. 14. 20.
that the blood went out of the winepresse, even unto the horses-bridles by the
space of one thousand and six hundred furlongs, interprets them to be meant of
hell, and that that number expresses the diameter of its concavity, which is
200 Italian miles; De Morib. div. l. 13. c. 24.
But Lessius thinks that this opinion gives them too much room in hell, and
therefore he guesses that it is not so wide; for (says he) the diameter of one
league being cubically multiplied, will make a sphere capable of 800000
millions of damned bodies, allowing to each six foot in the square; whereas
(says he) it is certain, that there shall not be one hundred thousand millions
in all that shall be damned. You see the bold Jesuit was careful that every
one should have but room enough in hell, and by the strangeness of the
conjecture, you may guess that he had rather be absurd, than seem either
uncharitable or ignorant. I remember there is a relation in Pliny, how that
Dionysiodorus a Mathematician, being dead, did send a letter from this place to
some of his friends upon earth, to certify them what distance there was
betwixt the center and superficies: he might have done well to have prevented
this controversy, and informed them the utmost capacity of that place.
However, certain it is, that that number cannot be known; and probable it is,
that the place is not yet determined, but that hell is there where there is any
tormented soul, which may be in the regions of the air, as well as in the
center: And therefore perhaps it is that the Devil is styled the prince of the
air. But of this only occasionally, and by reason of Plutarchs opinion
concerning those that are round about the Moon; as for the Moon it self, he
esteems it to be a lower kind of heaven, Cu^silent oracula.
and therefore in another place he calls it a terrestrial star, and an
Olympian or celestial earth; answerable, (as I conceive) to the paradise of
the Schoolmen. And, that paradise was either in, or near the Moon, is the
opinion of some later Writers, who derived it (in all likelihood) from the
assertion of Plato, and perhaps, this of Plutarch. Tostatus lays this opinion
upon Isiodor. Sir W. Raw. l. 1. c. 3. sect. 7.
Hispalensis, and the venerable Bede; and Pererius fathers it upon Strabus and
Rabanus his Master. In Genes.
Some would have it to be situated in such a place as could not be
discovered, which caused the penman of Esdras to make it a harder matter to
know the outgoings of Paradise, 2 Esdr. 4. 7.
than to weigh the weight of the fire, or measure the blasts of wind, or call
again a day that is past. But notwithstanding this, there be some others, who
think, that it is on the top of some high mountain under the line; and these
interpreted the torrid Zone to be the flaming sword whereby Paradise was
guarded. It Is the consent of diverse others, that Paradise is situated in some
high and eminet place. So Tostatus: Est etiam Paradisus situ altissima, In
Genes.
supra omnem terrae altitudinem, Paradise is situated in some high place above
the earth: and therefore in his Comment upon the 49 of Genesis, he understands
the blessing of Jacob concerning the everlasting hills to be meant of
Paradise, and the blessing it self to be nothing else but a promise of
Christ's coming, by whose Passion the gates of Paradise should be opened. Unto
him assented Rupertus, Scotus, and most of the other Schoolmen, as I find them
cited by Pererius, and out of him in Sir Walter Rawleigh. Comment. in 2. Genesis
v. 8.
Their reason was this: because in probability, L. 1. c. 3. sect. 6. 7.
this place was not overflowed by the Flood, since there were no sinners there,
which might draw that curse upon it. Nay Tostatus thinks, that the body of
Enoch was kept there; and some of the Fathers, as Tertullian and Austin, have
affirmed, that the blessed souls were reserved in that place till the day of
Judgment; and thereford it is likely that it was not overflowed by the Flood,
It were easy to produce the unanimous consent of the Fathers, to prove that
Paradise is yet really existent. Any diligent peruser of them, may easily
observe how they do generally interpret the Paradise whereto Saint Paul was
wrapped, 2 Cor. 12. 4. Luke 23. 43.
and that wherein our Savior promised the Thief should be with him, to be
locally the same from whence our first parents were banished. Now there cannot
be any place on earth designed where this should be: And therefore it is not
altogether improbable that it was in this other world.

And besides, since all men should have went naked if Adam had not fell, it is
requisite therefore that it should be situated in some such place where it
might be privileged from the extremities of heat and cold. But now this could
not be (they thought) so conveniently in any lower, as it might in some higher
air. For these and such like considerations, have so many affirmed, that
Paradise was in a high elevated place. Which some have conceived could be
nowhere but in the Moon: For it could not b^ in the top of any mountain; nor
can we think of any other body separated from this earth, which can be a more
convenient place for habitation than this Planet; therefore they concluded that
it was there.

It could not be on the top of any mountain.

1. Because we have express Scripture, Genesis 7. 19.
that the highest of them was overflowed.

2. Because it must be a greater extension, and not some small patch of ground,
since it is likely all men should have lived there, if Adam had not fell. But for
a satisfaction of the argum^ets, together with a farther discourse of Paradise,
I shall refer you to those who have written purposely upon this subject.
Being content for my own part to have spoken so much of it, as may conduce to
show the opinion of others concerning the inhabitants of the Moon; I dare not
my self affirm any thing of these Selenites, because I know not any ground
whereon to build any probable opinion. But I think that future ages will
discover more; and our posterity, perhaps, may invent some means for our
better acquaintance with these inhabitants.

Proposition 14.
That it is possible for some of our posterity, to find out a conveyance to this
other world; and if there be inhabitants there, to have commerce with them.

ALL that has been said, concerning the people of the new world, is but
conjecturall, and full of uncertainties; nor can we ever look for any evident
or more probable discoveries in this kind, unless there be some hopes of
inventing means for our conveyance thither. The possibility of which, shall
be the subject of our enquiry in this last Proposition.

And, if we do but consider by what steps and leisure, all arts do usually
rise to their growth, we shall have no cause to doubt why this also may not
hereafter be found out amongst other secrets. It has constantly yet been the
method of providence, not presently to show us all, but to lead us on by
degrees, from the knowledge of one thing to another.

'Twas a great while, ere the Planets were distinguished from the fixed stars
and some time after that, ere the morning and evening star were found to be
the same. And in greater space (I doubt not) but this also, and other as
excellent mysteries will be discovered. Time, who has always been the father
of new truths, and has revealed unto us many things, which our Ancestors were
ignorant of, will also manifest to our posterity, Not. Qu. l. 7. cap. 25.
that which we now desire, but cannot know. Veniet tempus (says Seneca) quo
ista quae nunc latent, in lucem dies extrahet, and longioris aevi diligentia.
Time will come, when the endeavors of after ages, shall bring such things to
light as now lie hid in obscurity. Arts are not yet come to their solstice.
But the industry of future times, assisted with the labors of their
forefathers, may reach that height which we could not attain to. Veniet
tempus quo posteri nostri nos tam aperta nescisse mirentur. As we now wonder
at the blindness of our Ancestors, who were not able to discern such things,
as seem plain and obvious unto us; so will our posterity, admire our
ignorance in as perspicuous matters.

In the first ages of the world the Ilanders thought themselves either to be
the only dwellers upon earth, or else if there were any other, they could not
possibly conceive how they might have any commerce with them, being severed by
the deep and broad Sea. But after times found out the invention of ships, in
which notwithstanding, none but some bold, daring men durst venture, according
to that of the Tragoedian. Sen. Med. act. 1.


Audax nimium qui freta primus
Rate tam fragili perfida rupit. Vide Hora. Od. 3.

Too bold was he, Iuvenal. sat. 12.
who in a ship so frail,
First venturd on the treacherous waves to sail. Claud. praef ad 1. lib. de
rap. Proscr.

And yet now, how easy a thing is this even to a timorous and cowardly nature?
And questionless, the invention of some other means for our conveiance to the
Moon, cannot seem more incredible to us, than this did at first to them, and
therefore we have no just reason to be discouraged in our hopes of the like
success.

Yea, but (you will say) there can be no sailing thither, unless that were
true which the Poets do but feign, that she made her bed in the Sea. We have
not now any Drake, or Columbus, to undertake this voyage, or any Daedalus to
invent a conveiance through the air.

I answer, Though we have not, yet why may not succeeding times, raise up some
spirits as eminent for new attempts and strange inventions, as any that were
before them? It Is the opinion of Keplar, Disserta. cum Nun. Syder.
that as soon as the art of flying is found out, some of their nation will
make one of the first Colonies, that shall transplant into that other world. I
suppose, his appropriating this pre-eminence to his own Countrymen, may arise
from an overpartiall affection to them. But yet thus far I agree with him, That
when ever that Art is invented, or any other, whereby a man may be conveyed some
twenty miles high, or thereabouts, then, it is not altogether improbable that
some or other may be successful in this attempt.

For the better clearing of which I shall first lay down, and then answer
those doubts that may make it seem utterly impossible.

These are chiefly three.

The first, taken from the natural heaviness of a man's body, whereby it is
made unfit for the motion of ascent, together with the vast distance of that
place from us.

2. From the extreme coldness of the aethereall air.

3. The extreme thinness of it. Both which must needs make it impassible,
though it were but as many single miles thither, as it is thousands.

For the first. Though it were supposed that a man could fly, yet we may well
think he would be very slow in it, since he has so heavy a body, and such a
one too, as nature did not principally intend, for that kind of motion. It Is
usually observed, that amongst the variety of birds, those which do most
converse upon the earth, and are swiftest in their running, as a Pheasant,
Partridge, etc. together with all domestical foul, are less able for flight,
than othhrs which are for the most part upon the wing, as a Swallow, swift,
etc. And therefore we may well think, that man being not naturally endowed
with any such condition as may enable him for this motion; and being
necessarily tied to a more especial residence on the earth, must needs be
slower than any foul, and less able to hold out. Thus is it also in swimming;
which Art though it be grown to a good eminence, yet he that is best skilled
in it, is not able either for continuance, or swiftness, to equal a fish;
Because he is not naturally appointed to it. So that though a man could fly,
yet he would be so slow in it, and so quickly weary, that he could never
think to reach so great a journey as it is to the Moon.

But suppose withal that he could fly as fast, and long, as the swiftest
bird: yet it cannot possibly be conceived, how he should ever be able to pass
through so vast a distance, as there is betwixt the Moon and our earth. For
this Planet, according to the common grounds, is usually granted to be at the
least, 52 semidiameters of the earth from us. Reckoning for each semidiameter
3456 English miles, of which the whole space will be about 179712.

So that though a man could constantly keep on in his journey thither by a
strait line, though he could fly a thousand miles in a day; yet he would not
arrive thither under 180 days, or half a year.

And how were it possible for any to tarry so long without diet or sleep?

1. For Diet. I suppose there could be no trusting to that fancy of Philo the
Jew (mentioned before, Prop. 3.
) who thinks that the music of the spheres should supply the strength of food.

Nor can we well conceive how a man should be able to carry so much luggage
with him, as might serve for his Viaticum in so tedious a journey.

2. But if he could: yet he must have some time to rest and sleep in. And I
(...) yet they have not any present inclination or pronesse to one another. And
so consequently, cannot be styled heavy.

The meaning of this will be more clearly illustrated by a similitude. As any
light body (suppose the Sun) dos send forth his beams in an orbicular form;
So likewise any magneticall body, for instance a round loadstone dos cast
abroad his magneticall vigor in a sphere. Gilbert. de Mganete. l. 2. cap. 7.
Thus.



Where suppose the inward circle at A to represent the Loadstone, and the
outward one betwixt B C, the orb that dos terminate its virtue.

Now any other body that is like affected coming within this sphere, as B,
will presently descend toward the center of it, and in that respect may be
styled heavy. But place it without this sphere as C, and then the desire of
union cease, and so consequently the motion also.

To apply then what has been said. This great globe of earth and water, has
been proved by many observations, to participate of Magneticall properties. And
as the Loadstone dos cast forth its own vigor round about its body, in a
magneticall compass: So likewise dos our earth. The difference is, that it is
another kind of affection which causes the union betwixt the Iron and
Loadstone, from that which makes bodies move unto the earth. The former is some
kind of neerenesse and similitude in their natures, for which, Philosophy as
yet has not found a particular name. The latter dos arise from that peculiar
quality, whereby the earth is properly distinguished from the other elements,
which is its Condensitie. Of which the more any thing dos participate, by so
much the stronger will be the desire of union to it. So gold and others
metalls which are most close in their composition, are likewise most swift in
their motion of descent.

And though this may seem to be contradicted by the instance of metalls,
which are of the same weight, when they are melted, and when they are hard: As
also of water, which dos not differ in respect of gravitie, when it is frozen
and when it is fluid: yet we must know that metalls are not rarefied by
melting, but mollified. And so too for frozen waters, they are not properly
condensed, but congealed into a harder substance, the parts being not
contracted closer together, but still possessing the same extension. But yet (I
say) it is very probable, that there is such a sphere about the earth, which dos
terminate its power of attracting other things unto it. So that suppose a body
to be placed within the limits of this sphere, and then it must needs tend
downwards, toward the center of it. But on the contrary, if it be beyond this
compass, then there can be no such mutual attraction; and so consequently,
it must rest immovable from any such motion.

For the farther confirmation of this, I shall propose two pertinent
observations.

The first taken in the presence of many Physicians, and related by an eminent
man in that profession, Lib. de Sympath. and Antip. cap. 7.
Hieron. Fracastorius. There being diverse needles provided of several kinds,
like those in a Mariners Chart, they found, that there was an attractive power,
not only in the magnet; But that iron also and steel, and silver did each of
them draw its own mettle. Whence he concludes, Vid. Bapt. Masul. exer. Acad.
de attract. exer. 4.
Omne trahit quod sibi simile est. And as these peculiar likenesses, have such
a mutual efficacy; so it is probable, that this more general qualification of
condensitie, may be the cause, why things so affected desire union to the
earth. And though it is likely that this would appear betwixt two lesser
condensed bodies, (as suppose two pieces of earth) if they were both placed at
liberty in the aethereall air, yet being near the earth, the stronger
species of this great globe dos as it were drowned the less.

It Is a common experiment, that such a lump of ore or stone, as being on the
ground, cannot be moved by less than six men, being in the bottom of a deep
mine, may be stirred by two. The reason is, because then it is compassed with
attractive beams, there being many above it, Not. Hist. Cent. 1. exper. 33.
as well as below it. Whence we may probably infer (says the learned
Verulam) that the nature of gravitie, dos work but weakly also far from the
earth; Because the appetite of union in dense bodies, must be more dull in
respect of distance. As we may also conclude from the motion of birds, which
rise from the ground but heavily, though with much labor; Whereas being on
high, they can keep themselves up, and soar about by the mere extension of
their wings. Now the reason of this difference, is not (as some falsely
conceive) the depth of air under them. For a bird is not heavier when there is
but a foot of air under him, than when there is a furlong. As appears by a
ship in the water, (an instance of the same nature) which dos not sink deeper,
and so consequently is not heavier, when it has but five fatham depth, than
when it has fifty. But the true reason is, the weakness of the desire of union
in dense bodies at a distance.

So that from hence, there might be just occasion to tax Aristotle and his
followers, for teaching that heavines is an absolute quality of it self, and
really distinct from condensitie: whereas it is only a modification of it, or
rather, another name given to a condensed body in reference to its motion.

For if it were absolute, then it should always be inherent in its subject,
and not have its essence depend upon the bodies being here or there. But it is
not so. For,

1. Nothing is heavy in its proper place, according to his own principle,
Nihil grave est in suo loco. And then

2. Nothing is heavy, which is so far distant from that proper orb to which
it dos belong, that it is not within the reach of its virtue. As was before
confirmed.

But unto this it may be objected. Though a body being so placed, be not heavy
in actu secundo; yet it is in actu primo: because it retains in it an inward
proness to move downwards, being once severed from its proper place. And this
were reason enough why the quality of heaviness should have an absolute being.

I answer, this distinction is only appliable to such natural powers as can
suspend their acts; and will not hold in Elementary qualities, whose very
essence dos necessarily require an exercise of the second act, as you may
easily discern by an induction of all the rest. I cannot say, that body has in
it the quality of heat, coldness, dryness, moisture, hardness, softness,
etc. which for the present, has not the second act of these qualities. And if
you mean by the essence of them, a power unto them: why, there is not any
natural body but has a power to them all.

From that which has been said concerning the nature of gravity, it will
follow; That if a man were above the sphere of this magneticall virtue, which
proceeds from the earth, he might there stand as firmly as in the open air,
as he can now upon the ground: And not only so, but he may also move with a
far greater swiftness, than any living creatures here below, because then
he is without all gravity, being not attracted any way, and so consequently
will not be liable to such impediments, as may in the least manner resist that
kind of motion which he shall apply himself unto.

If you yet enquire, how we may conceive it possible, that a condensed body
should not be heavy in such a place?

I answer, by the same reason as a body is not heavy in its proper place. Of
this I will set down two instances.

When a man is in the bottom of a deep river, though he have over him a
multitude of heavy waters, yet he is not burdened with the weight of them. And
though another body, that should be but of an equal gravity, with these
waters, when they are taken out, would be heavy enough to press him to death;
yet notwithstanding whilst they are in the channel, they do not in the least
manner, crush him with their load. The reason is, because they are both in
their right places; and it is proper for the man being the more condensed body,
to be lower than the waters. Or rather thus, Because the body of the man, dos
more nearely agree with the earth, in this affection, which is the ground of
its attraction, and therefore does that more strongly attract it, than the
waters that are over it. Now, as in such a case, a body may lose the operation
of its gravity, which is, to move, or to press downwards: So may it likewise,
when it is so far out of its place, that this attractive power cannot reach
unto it.

It Is a pretty notion to this purpose, mentioned by Phys. l. 3. Q. 6. art. 2.
Albertus de Saxonia, and out of him by Viridar. l. 4 prob. 47.
Francis Mendoca; That the air is in some part of it navigable. And that upon
this Staticke principle; Vide. Arch. l. de insidentibus humido.
any brass or iron vessel (suppose a kettle) whose substance is much heavier
than that of the water, yet being filled with the lighter air, it will swim
upon it, and not sink. So suppose a cup, or wooden vessel, upon the outward
borders of this elementary air, the cavity of it being filled with fire, or
rather aethereall air, it must necessarily upon the same ground remain
swimming there, and of it self can no more fall, than an empty ship can sink.

It Is commonly granted, that if there were a hole quite through the center of
the earth, though any heavy body (as suppose a millstone) were let fall into it,
yet when it came unto the place of the center, it would there rest immovable
in the air. Now, as in this case, its own condensity, cannot hinder, but that
it may rest in the open air, when there is no other place, to which it should
be attracted: So neither could it be any impediment unto it, if it were placed
without the sphere of the earths magneticall vigor, where there should be no
attraction at all.

From hence then (I say) you may conceive, that if a man were beyond this
sphere, he might there stand as firmly in the open air, as now upon the
earth. And if he might stand there, why might he not also go there? And if
so; then there is a possibility likewise of having other conveniences for
traveling.

And here it is considerable, that since our bodies will then be devoide of
gravity, and other impediments of motion; we shall not at all spend our selves
in any labor, and so consequently not much need the reparation of diet: But
may perhaps live altogether without it, as those creatures have done, who by
reason of their sleeping for many days together, have not spent any spirits,
and so not wanted any food: which is commonly related of Serpents, Crocodiles,
Bears, Cuckoes, Swallows, and such like. To this purpose, Viridar. lib. 4.
prob. 24.
Mendoca reckons up diverse strange relations. As that of Epimenides, who is
storied to have slept 75 yeeares. And another of a rusticke in Germany, who
being accidentally covered with a hay-ricke, slept there for all autumn, and
the winter following, without any nourishment.

Or, if this will not serve: yet why may not a Papist fast so long, as well as
Ignatius or Xaverius? Or if there be such a strange efficacy in the bread of
the Eucharist, as their miraculous relations do attribute to it: why then,
that may serve well enough, for their viaticum.

Or, if we must needs feed upon something else, why may not smells nourish us?
De facie in Luna.
Plutrach, and Not. hist. lib. 7. ca. 2.
Pliny and diverse other ancients, tell us of a nation in India that lived only
upon pleasing odors. And it is the common opinion of Physicians, that these do
strangely both strengthen and repair the spirits. Diog. Laert. lib. 1. ca. 9.
Hence was it that Democritus was able for diverse days together, to feed
himself with the mere smell of hot bread.

Or if it be necessary that our stomachs must receive the food: why then it is
not impossible that the purity of the aethereall air, being not mixed with any
improper vapors, may be so agreeable to our bodies, as to yield us sufficient
nourishment; According to that of the Poet; Virgil.
-- Vescitur aura
Aetherea --


It Was an old Platonicke principle, that there is in some part of the world such
a place where men might be plentifully nourished, by the air they breath:
Which cannot more properly be assigned to any one particular, than to the
aethereall air above this.

I know it is the common opinion that no Element can prove Aliment, Arist. de
Sens. cap. 5.
because it is not proportionate to the bodies of living creatures which are
compounded. But,

1. This aethereall air is not an element; and though it be purer, yet it is
perhaps of a greater agreeableness to man's nature and constitution.

2. If we consult experience and the credible relations of others, we shall
find it probable enough that many things receive nourishment from mere
elements.

First, for the earth; Hist. Animal. lib. 8. cap. 5.
Aristotle and Hist. l. 10. cap. 72.
Pliny, those two great naturalists, tell us of some creatures, The earth
that are fed only with this. And it was the curse of the serpent, Genesis 3. 14.
Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life.

So likewise for the water. The water
De Anim. lib. 7.
Albertus Magnus speaks of a man who lived seven weeks together by the mere
drinking of water. De P^sc. l. 1. cap. 12.
Rondoletius (to whose diligence these later times are much beholding for
sundry observations concerning the nature of Aquatils) affirms that his wife
did keep a fish in a glass of water, without any other food for three years:
In which space it was constantly augmented, till at first it could not come out
of the place at which it was put in, and at length was too big for the glass
it self, though that were of a large capacity. Subtle. l. 9.
Cardan tells us of some worms, that are bred and nourished by the snow, from
which being once separated, they dye.

Thus also is it with the air, The air
which we may well conceive dos chiefly concur to the nourishing of all
vegetables. For if their food were all sucked out from the earth, there must
needs be then, some sensible decay in the ground by them; especially since they
do every year renew their leaves, and fruits: which being so many, and so
often, could not be produced without abundance of nourishment. To this purpose
is the experime^t of trees cut down which will of themselves put forth
sproutes. As also that of Onyons, and the Semper-vive, which will strangely
shoot forth, and grow as they hang in the open air. Polyhistor. cap. 53.
Thus likewise is it with some sensible creatures; the Camelion (says Hist.
li. 8. cap. 33.
Pliny and Lop hist. Ind. Occid. cap 96.
Solinus) is merely nourished by this: And so are the birds of Paradise,
Maiolus Colloq. 3.
treated of by * many; which reside constantly in the air, It Is likely that
these birds do chiefly reside in the aethereall air, where they are nourished
and upheld.
Nature having not bestowed upon them any legs, and therefore they are never
seen upon the ground but being dead. If you ask, how they multiply? It Is
answered, they lay their eggs on the backs of one another, upon which they
sit til their young ones be fledged. De Piscibus. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Rondoletius from the history of Hermolaus Barbarus, tells us of a Priest (of
whom one of the Popes had the custody) that lived forty years upon mere air.
As also of a maid in France, and another in Germany, that for diverse years
together did feed on nothing but this: Nay, he affirms that he himself had
seen one, who lived till ten years of age without any other nourishment. You
may find most of these, and some other examples to this purpose, gathered
together by Mendoca Viridar. lib. 4. Prob. 23, 24. Now, if this elementary air
which is mixed with such improper vapors, may accidentally nourish some
persons; perhaps then, that pure aethereall air may of it self be more
natural to our tempers.

But if none of these conjectures may satisfy; yet there may happily be some
possible means for the conveiance of other food, as shall be showed
afterward.

Again, seeing we do not then spend our selves in any labor, we shall not, it
may be, need the refreshment of sleep. But if we do, we cannot desire a
softer bed than the air, where we may repose our selves firmly and safely as
in our chambers.

But here you may ask, whether there be any means for us to know, how far
this sphere of the earths virtue dos extend it self?

I answer, it is probable that it dos not reach much farther than that orb of
thick vaporous air, that incompasseth the earth; because it is likely the Sun
may exhale some earthly vapors, near unto the utmost bounds of the sphere
alloted to them.

Now there are diverse ways used by Astronomers, to take the altitude of this
vaporous air. As,

1. By observing the height of that air which causes the Crepusculum, or
twilight; For the finding of which, the Ancients used this means: As soon as
ever they could discern the air in the east to be altered with the least
light, they would by the situation of the stars find out how many degrees the
Sun was below the Horizon, which was usually about 18. From whence they would
easily conclude, how high that air must be above us, which the Sun could shine
upon, when he was 18 degrees below us. And from this observation, it was
concluded to be about 52 miles high. Vitell. l. 10. Theo. 7.


But in this Conclusion, the Ancients were much deceived, because they
proceeded upon a wrong ground, whilst they supposed that the shining of the
Suns direct rays upon the air, was the only reason of the Crepusculum;
Keplar. Ep. Coper. l. 1. part. 3.
Whereas it is certain that there are many other things which may also concur
to the causing of it. As,

1. Some bright clouds below the Horizon, which being illuminated by the Sun,
may be the means of conveying some light to our air, before the direct rays
can touch it.

2. The often refraction of the rays, which suffer a frequent repercussion
from the cavitie of this sphere, may likewise yield us some light.

3. And so may the orb of enlightened air compassing the Sun, part of which
must rise before his body.

2. The second way whereby we may more surely find the altitude of this grosser
air, is by taking the highth of the highest cloud: which may be done, 1 Either
as they use to measure the altitude of things that cannot be approached unto,
viz. by two stations, when two persons shall at the same time, in several
places, observe the declination of any cloud from the vertical point.
Stevinnius. Geog. l. 3. prop. 3.
Or, 2. which is the more easy way, when a man shall choose such a station,
where he may at some distance, discern the place on which the cloud dos cast
its shadow, and withal dos observe, how much both the cloud and the Sun
decline from the vertical point. From which he may easily conclude the true
altitude of it, as you may more plainly conceive, by this following Diagram.



Where A B is a perpendicular from the cloud, C the station of him that
measures, D the place where the shadow of the cloud dos fall.

The instrument being directed from the station C, to the cloud at A, the
perpendicular will show the Angle B A C. Then letting the Sun shine through the
sights of your instrument, the perpendicular of it will give the angle B A D.
Afterward having measured the distance C D by paces, Pitisc. Trigon.
you may according to the common rules, find the height B A.

But if without making the observation, you would know of what altitude the
highest of these are found by observation; Subt. l. 17.
Cardan answers, not above two miles; Epit. Coper. l. 1. p. 3.
Keplar, not above 1600 paces, or thereabouts.

3. Another way to find the height of this vaporous air, is, by knowing the
difference of altitude, which it causes, in refracting the beams of any star
near the Horizon. And from this observation also, it is usually concluded to
be about two or three miles high.

But now you must not conceive, as if the orb of magneticall vigor, were
bounded in an exact superficies, or as if it did equally hold out just to such
a determinate line, and no farther. But as it has bin said of the first
region, which is there terminated where the heat of reflection dos begin to
languish: So likewise is it probable, that this magneticall vigor dos remit of
its degrees proportionally to its distance from the earth, which is the cause
of it: And therefore though the thicker clouds may be elevated no higher, yet
this orb may be continued in weaker degrees a little beyond them. We will
suppose it (which in all likelihood is the most) to be about twenty miles
high. So that you see the former Thesis remains probable; that if a man could
but fly, or by any other means get twenty miles upwards, it were possible for
him to reach unto the Moon.

But it may be again objected: Though all this were true; though there were
such an orb of air which did terminate the earths vigor: And though the
heaviness of our bodies could not hinder our passage, through the vast spaces
of the aetheriall air; yet those two other impediments may seem to deny the
possibility of any such voyage.

1. The extreme coldness of that air. If some of our higher mountains for
this reason be not habitable; much more then will those places be so, which
are farther from any cause of heat.

2. The extreme thinness of it, which may make it unfit for expiration. For if
in some mountains (as Aristotle tells us of Olympus, and out him In Genesis ad
literam. li. 3. cap 2.
S. Austine) the air be so thin that men cannot draw their breath, unless it
were through some moistened spunges; much more then must that air be thin,
which is more remotely situated from the causes of impurity and mixture. And
then beside, the refraction that is made by the vaporous air incompassing our
earth, may sufficiently prove that there is a great difference betwixt the
aethereall air and this, in respect of rarity.

To the first of these I answer, that though the second region, be naturally
endowed with so much coldness as may make it fit for the production of
meteors; yet it will not hence follow, that all that air above it, which is
not appointed for the like purpose, should partake of the same condition: But,
it may seem more probable that this ethereal air, is freed from having any
quality in the extremes. And this may be confirmed, from those common
arguments, which are usually brought to prove the warmness of the third
region. As you may see in Meteor. lib. 1. ca. 2. art. 1,
Fromundus, and others who treat of that subject.

It Is the assertion of Pererius, Comment. in Genesis 1. 8.
that the second region, is not cold merely for this reason, because it is
distant from the ordinary causes of heat, but because it was actually made so
at the first, for the condensing of the clouds, and the production of other
meteors that were there to be generated; which (as I conceive) might be
sufficiently confirmed from that order of the creation observed by Moses, who
tells us that the waters above the firmament (by which, in the greatest
probability, we are to understand the clouds in the second region) were made
the second day, Genesis 1. 7, 8. whereas the Sun itself (whose reflection is
the cause of heat) was not created till the fourth day, ver. 16. 19.

To the other objection I answer, that though the air in the second region
(where by reason of its coldness there are many thick vapors) do cause a
great refraction; yet it is probable that the air which is next the earth, is
sometimes, and in some places, of a far greater thinness, nay as thin as the
aethereall air it self; since sometimes there is such a special heat of the
Sun, as may rarifie it in an eminent degree; And in some dry places, there are
no gross impure exhalations to mix with it.

But here it may be objected. If the air in the second region were more
condensed and heavy than this wherein we breath, then that must necessarily
tend downwards and possess the lower place.

To this some answer, that the hanging of the clouds in the open air, is no
less than a miracle. They are the words of Pliny. Quid mirabilius aquis in
caelo stantibus? Hist. l. 31. cap. 1.
what more wonderful thing is there than that the waters should stand in the
heavens? Others prove this from the derivation of the word (...) from (...)
stupescere and (...) aquae: Because the waters do hang there after such a
stupendous inconceivable manner; Which seems likewise to be favored by
Scripture, where it is mentioned as a great argument of Gods omnipotency, that
he holds up the clouds from falling. He binds up the waters in his thick
clouds, Job 26. 8.
and the cloud is not rent under them.

But that which unto me seems full satisfaction against this doubt, is this
consideration; that the natural vigor whereby the earth dos attract dense
bodies unto it, is less efficacious at a distance: and therefore a body of
less density, which is near unto it, as suppose this thin air wherein we
breath, may naturally be lower in its situation, than another of a greater
condensity that is farther of; as suppose the clouds in the second region. And
though the one be absolutely and in it self more fit for this motion of
descent; yet by reason of its distance, the earths magneticall virtue cannot so
powerfully work upon it.

As for that relation of Aristotle; If it were true; yet it dos not prove this
air to be altogether impassible, since moistened spunges might help us against
its thinness: But it is more likely that he took it upon trust, as he did
some other relations concerning the height of the mountains, wherein it is
evident that he was grossly mistaken. As where he tells us of Caucasus,
Meteor. l. 1. c. 11.
that it casts its shadow 560 miles. And this relation being of the same
nature, we cannot safely trust unto him for the truth of it.

If it be here enquired, what means there may be conjectured, for our
ascending beyond the sphere of the earths magneticall vigor.

I answer. 1. It Is not perhaps impossible that a man may be able to fly, by the
application of wings to his own body; As Angels are pictured, as Mercury and
Daedaelus are fained, and as has bin attempted by diverse, particulary by a
Turk in Constantinople, as Busbequius relates. Mr. Burton. Melanch. pa. 2.
sect. 2 mem. 3.


2. If there be such a great Ruck in Madagascar, as Lib. 3. c. 40.
Marcus Polus the Venetian mentions, the feathers in whose wings are twelve
foot long, which can soope up a horse and his rider, or an elephant, as our
kites do a mouse; why then it is but teaching one of these to carry a man, and
he may ride up thither, as Ganymed dos upon an eagle.

3. Or if neither of these ways will serve: Yet I do seriously, and upon good
grounds, affirm it possible to make a flying Chariot. In which a man may sit,
and give such a motion unto it, as shall convey him through the air. And this
perhaps might be made large enough to carry diverse men at the same time,
together with food for their viaticum, and commodities for traffic. It is
not the bigness of any thing in this kind, that can hinder its motion, if the
motive faculty be answerable thereunto. We see a great ship swimmes as well as
a small cork, and an Eagle flies in the air as well as a little gnat.

This engine may be contrived from the same principles by which Archytas made a
wooden dove, and Regiomontanus a wooden eagle.

I conceive it were no difficult matter (if a man had leisure) to show more
particularly, the means of composing it.

The perfecting of such an invention, would be of such excellent use, that it
were enough, not only to make a man famous, but the age also wherein he lives.
For besides the strange discoveries that it might occasion in this other world,
it would be also of inconceiveable advantage for traveling, above any other
conveiance that is now in use.

So that notwithstanding all these seeming impossibilities, it is likely enough,
that there may be a means invented of journying to the Moon; And how happy
shall they be, that are first successful in this attempt? -- Faelicesque
animae quas nubila supra,
Et turpes fumos, plenumque vaporibus orbem,
Inseruit caelo sancti scintilla Promethei.


Having thus finished this discourse, I chanced upon a late fancy to this
purpose under the fained name of Domingo Gonsales, written by a late reverend
and learned Bishop: In which (besides sundry particulars wherein this later
Chapter did unwittingly agree with it) there is delivered a very pleasant and
well contrived fancy concerning a voyage to this other world.

He supposes that there is a natural and usual passage for many creatures
betwixt our earth and this planet. Thus he says; those great multitudes of
locusts, wherewith diverse countries have bin destroyed, do proceed from
thence. And if we peruse the authors who treat of them, we shall find that
many times they fly in numberless troops, or swarms, and for sundry days
together before they fall, are seen over those places in great high clouds,
such as coming nearer, are of extension enough to obscure the day, and hinder
the light of the Sun. From which, together with diverse other such relations,
he concludes, that it is not altogether improbable, they should proceed from the
Moon. Thus likewise he supposes the Swallows, Cuckoes, Nightingales, with
diverse other foul, which are with us only half the year, to fly up thither,
when they go from us. Amongst which kind, there is a wild Swan in the East
Indies, which at certain seasons of the year do constantly take their flight
thither. Now this bird being of great strength, able to continue for a long
flight, as also going usually in flocks, like our wildegeese; he supposes that
many of them together, might be taught to carry the weight of a man; especially
if an engine were so contrived (as he thinks it might) that each of them should
bear an equal share in the burden. So that by this means, it is easily
conceiveable, how once every year a man might finish such a voyage; going
along with these birds at the beginning of winter, and again returning with
them at the Spring.

And here, one that had a strong fancy, were better able to set forth the great
benefit and pleasure to be had by such a journey. And that whether you consider
the strangeness of the persons, language, arts, policy, religion of those
inhabitants, together with the new traffic that might be brought thence. In
brief, do but consider the pleasure and profit, of those later discoveries in
America, and we must needs conclude this to be inconceiveably beyond it.

But such imaginations as these, I shall leave to the fancy of the Reader. --
Sic itur ad astra.
Reptet humi quicunque velit --
Coelo restat iter, coelo tentabimusire.


FINIS.
1. Book. Errata.
Page 47. lin 24. read Scheiner. p. 48. l 22. Nicrembergius p. 50. l. 11. not
for nor p. 52. l. 16. her for his p. 73. l. 22. Malapertius p. 77. l 17.
obsolete for absolute p. 90. l. 12. Philolaus ibid l. 15. Rheticus p. 112. l
20. (Dele its center, and read) motion of that magneticall globe to which it
did belong. p. 137. l. 21. Cisatus p. 143. l. 20. light for right p. 184. l.
23. read in that late p. 202. l 9. must be of p. 219. l. 25. In the margin. 1.
p. 221. l. 15. In the margin. 2. p. 223. l. 17. Plutarch.

The Propositions that are proved in this Discourse.
Proposition 1. THat the strangeness of this opinion is no sufficient reason
why it should be rejected, because other certain truths have been formerly
esteemed ridiculous, and great absurdities entertained by common consent.

By way of Preface.

Proposition 2. That a plurality of worlds dos not contradict any principle of
reason or faith. Proposition 3. That the heavens do not consist of any such
pure matter which can privilege them from the like change and corruption, as
these inferior bodies are liable unto. Prop. 4. That the Moon is a solid,
compacted, opacous body. Prop. 5. That the Moon has not any light of her own.
Prop. 6. That there is a world in the Moon, has been the direct opinion of
many ancient, with some modern Mathematicians, and may probably be deduced
from the tenants of others. Prop. 7. That those spots and brighter parts which
by our sight may be distinguished in the Moon, do show the difference betwixt
the Sea and Land in that other World. Prop. 8. That the spots represent the
Sea; and the brighter parts the Land. Prop. 9. That there are high Mountains,
deep valleys, and spacious plains in the body of the Moon. Prop. 10. That
there is an Atmo-sphaera, or an orb of gross vaporous air, immediately
encompassing the body of the Moon. Prop. 11. That as their world is our Moon,
so our world is their Moon. Prop. 12. That it is probable there may be such
Meteors belonging to that world in the Moon, as there are with us. Prop. 13.
That it is probable there may be inhabitants in this other World; but of what
kind they are, is uncertain. Prop. 14. That it is possible for some of our
posterity to find out a conveyance to this other world, and if there be
inhabitants there, to have commerce with them.
FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE concerning A NEW PLANET. Tending to prove, That it is probable our
Earth is one of the Planets.

The second Book, now first published.

Dignares est Contemplatione, ut sciamus in quo rerum statu scimus: pigerimam
sortiti, an velocissimam sedem: circa nos Deus omnia, an nos agat. Sen. Not.
Quest. Lib. 7. Cap. 2.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for John Maynard, and are to be sold at the George in
Fleetstreet, near S. Dunstans Church. 1640.

To the Reader.
NOt to trouble you with an Invective against those multitudes of Pamphlets
which are every day pressed into the World; or an Apology, why this was published
amongst the rest (the usual matter for such kind of Epistles:) Let me in
brief admonish you something concerning the chief scope and manner of this
following discourse.


1 It Is not the purpose of it, to set down an exact Treatise of this kind of
Astronomy; but rather to remove those common prejudices, which usually deter
men from taking any Argument tending this way, into their considerations. For
we may observe, that in those points which are cried down by the more general
opinion, men do for the most part rest themselves in the superficial
knowledge of things, as they seem at their first appearances, thinking they can
say enough to any Paradox, against which they can urge the most obvious and
easy Objections; and therefore seldom or never search into the depth of these
points, or enter into any serious impartial examination of those grounds on
which they are bottomed. Which as it must needs be a great hinderance to the
proficiencie of all kind of Learning: so more especially is it in this
particular. We might discern a greater comeliness and order in this great
Fabric of the World, and more easily understand the appearances in Astronomy,
if we could with indifferency attend to what might be said for that opinion
of Copernicus, which is here defended.

2 For the manner. It is not maintained with such heat and religion, as if
every one that reads it, were presently bound to yield up his assent: But as it
is in other Wars where victory cannot be had, Men must be content with
peace: So likewise is it in this, and should be in all other Philosophical
contentions. If there be nothing able to convince and satisfy the indifferent
Reader, he may still enjoy his own opinion. All men have not the same way of
apprehending things; but according to the variety of their temper, custom,
and abilities, their Understandings are severally fashioned to different
assents: Which had it been but well considered by some of our hot Fromond. Al.
Ross.
adversaries, they would not have showed more violence in opposing the Persons
against whom they write, than strength in confuting the cause.

It Is an excellent rule to be observed in all disputes, That Men should give
soft Words and hard Arguments, that they would not so much strive to vex, as to
convince an Enemy. If this were but diligently practiced in all cases, and on
all sides, we might in a good measure be freed from those vexations in the
search of Truth, which the wise Solomon, by his own experience did so much
complain of, Ecclesiastes, 1. 18. In much Wisdom there is much Grief, and
he that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow.

To conclude: Though there should be nothing in this discourse conducible to
your Information and Benefit; yet it may serve in the Perusal, as it did in
the Composure for the recreation of such leisure hours, as may conveniently
be spared from more weighty imploiments.

Farewell.
THE PROPOSITIONS that are insisted on in this Discourse.
PROP. I. THat the seeming Novelty and Singularity of this opinion, can be no
sufficient reason to prove it erroneous. PROP. II. That the places of Scripture
which seem to intimate the diurnall motion of the Sun or Heavens, are fairly
capable of another interpretation. PROP. III. That the Holy Ghost in many
places of Scripture, does plainly conform his expressions to the error of our
conceits, and does not speak of sundry things as they are in themselves, but
as they appear unto us. PROP. IV. That diverse learned men have fallen into
great absurdities, whilst they have looked for the grounds of Philosophy from
the grounds of Scripture. PROP. V. That the words of Scripture in their proper
and strict construction, do not any where affirm the immobility of the Earth.
PROP. VI. That there is not any Argument from the words of Scripture,
Principles of Nature, or observations in Astronomy, which can sufficiently
evidence the Earth to be in the center of the Universe. PROP. VII. It Is
probable that the Sun is in the center of the World. PROP. VIII. That there is
not any sufficient reason to prove the Earth incapable of those motions which
Copernicus ascribes unto it. PROP. IX. That it is more probable the Earth does
move, than the Heavens. PROP. X. That this Hypothesis is exactly agreeable to
common appearances.
Imprimatur A. FREVVEN, Vicecan.

Imprimatur LONDINI, SAMUEL BAKER.

That the Earth may be a Planet.
PROP. I.
That the seeming Noveltie and Singularity of this opinion, can be no
sufficient reason to prove it erroneous.

IN the search of Theological Truths, it is the safest method, first of all to
look unto Divine Authority; because that carries with it as clear an evidence
to our Faith, as any thing else can be to our reason. But on the contrary, in
the examination of Philosophical points, it were a preposterous course to
begin at the testimony and opinion of others, and then afterward to descend
unto the reasons that may be drawn from the Nature and Essence of the things
themselves: because these inartificiall Arguments (as the Logicians call them)
do not carry with them any clear and convincing evidence; and therefore
should come after those that are of more necessary dependence, as serving
rather to confirm, than resolve the Judgment.

But yet, so it is, that in those points which are besides the common opinion,
men are carried away at the first by the general cry, and seldom or never
come so far as to examine the reasons that may be urged for them. And
therefore, since it is the purpose of this discourse to remove those prejudices
which may hinder our judgment in the like case, it is requisite that in the
first place there be some satisfaction given to those Arguments that may be
taken from the Authority of others.

Which Arguments are insisted on by our adversaries with much heat and
violence.

What (say they) shall an upstart Noveltie thrust out such a Truth as has
passed by successive tradition through all Ages of the World? and has bin
generally entertained, not only in the opinion of the vulgar, but also of the
greatest Philosophers and most learned men? Alex. Ross. de Terrae motu, contra
Lansb. lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 10.
Shall we think that amongst the multitude of those who in several times
have been eminent for new inventions and strange discoveries, there was none
able to find out such a Secret as this, besides some fabulous Pithagorians,
and of late Copernicus? Is it possible that the World should last for above
five thousand years together, and yet the Inhabitants of it be so dull and
stupid, as to be unacquainted with it is motion? Nay, shall we think that
those excellent men, whom the Holy Ghost made use of in the penning of
Scripture, who were extraordinarily inspired with supernatural Truths, should
notwithstanding be so grossly ignorant of so common a matter as this? Can we
believe, if there were any such thing, that Iosuah, and Job, and David, and
Solomon, etc. should know nothing of it? Certainly it must needs argue a strong
affectation of Singularity, for a man to take up any groundless fancy against
such ancient and general Authority.

I answer: As we should not be so fondly conceited of our selves, and the
extraordinary Abilities of these present ages, as to think every thing that is
ancient to be absolute: Or, as if it must needs be with opinions, as it is
with cloths, where the newest is for the most part best. So neither should we
be so superstitiously devoted to Antiquity, as to take up every thing for
Canonical, which drops from the pen of a Father, or was approved by the
consent of the Ancients. It Is an excellent saying, Alcinous.
(...). It behooves every one in the search of Truth, always to preserve a
Philosophical liberty: not to be so inslaved to the opinion of any man, as to
think what ever he says to be infallible. We must labor to find out what
things are in themselves by our own experience, and a through examination of
their natures, not what another says of them. And if in such an impartial
enquiry, we chance to light upon a new way, and that which is besides the
common rode, this is neither our fault, nor our unhappiness.

Not our fault, because it did not arise from Singularity or Affectation. Not
our unhappiness, because it is rather a Privilege to be the first in finding
out such Truths, as are not discernable to every common eye. If Noveltie should
always be rejected, neither would Arts have arrived to that perfection wherein
now we enjoy them, nor could we ever hope for any future reformation: though
all Truth be in it self Eternal; yet in respect of men's opinions, there is
scarce any so ancient, but had a beginning, and was once counted a Noveltie;
and if for this reason it had been condemned as an error, what a general
darkness and ignorance would then have been in the World, in comparison of
that light which now abounds; according to that of the Poet: Horat. lib. 2. ep.
1.
Quod si tam Antiquis Novit as invisa fuisset,
Quam nobis, quid nunc esset vetus aut quid haberet,
Quod legeret tereretque viritim publicus usus?
If our Forefathers had but hated thus,
All that were new, what had been old to us?
Or, how might any thing confirmed be,
For public use, by it is Antiquity?


But for more full satisfaction of all those scruples that may arise from the
seeming Novelty or Singularity of this opinion, I shall propose these following
considerations.

Suppose it were a Noveltie: Consid. 1.
Yet it is in Philosophy, and that is made up of nothing else; but receives
addition from every days experiment. True indeed, for Divinity we have an
infallible rule that does plainly inform us of all necessary Truths; and
therefore the Primitive Times are of greater Authority, because they were nearer
to those holy Men who were the penmen of Scripture. But now for Philosophy,
there is no such reason: what ever the Schoolmen may talk; yet Aristotle's
works are not necessarily true, and he himself has by sufficient Arguments
proved himself to be liable unto error. Now in this case, if we should
speak properly, Antiquity does consist in the old age of the World, not in the
youth of it. In such Learning as may be increased by fresh experiments and new
discoveries: it is we are the Fathers, and of more Authority than former Ages;
because we have the advantage of more time than they had, and Truth (we say)
is the Daughter of Time. However, there is nothing in this opinion so
Magisterially proposed, but the Reader may use his own liberty; and if all the
reasons considered together, do not seem convincing unto him, he may freely
reject it.

In those natural points which carry with them any doubt or obscurity, it is
the safest way to suspend our assents: and though we may dispute pro or con;
yet not to settle our opinion on either side.

In weighing the Authority of others, it is not their multitude that should
prevail, Consid. 2.
or their skill in some things that should make them of credit in every thing,
but we should examine what particular insight and experience they had in those
times for which they are cited. Now it is plain, that common people judge by
their senses; and therefore, their voices are altogether unfit to decide any
Philosophical doubt, which cannot well be examined or explained without
discourse and reason. And as for the ancient Fathers, though they were men very
eminent for their holy lives and extraordinary skill in Divinity; yet they
were most of them very ignorant in that part of Learning which concerns this
opinion, as appears by many of their gross mistakes in this kind, as that
concerning the Antipodes, etc. and therefore it is not their opinion neither,
in this business, that to an indifferent seeker of Truth will be of any
strong Authority.

But against this it is Alex. R^ss. l. 1. sect. c. 8.
objected, That the instance of the Antipodes does not argue any special
ignorance in these learned Men: Or, that they had less skill in such humane
Arts than others; since Aristotle himself, and Pliny, did deny this as well as
they.

I answer:

1 If they did, yet this does make more to the present purpose: For if such
great Scholars, who were so eminent for their knowledge in natural things,
might yet notwithstanding be grossly mistaken in such matters as are now
evident and certain: Why then we have no reason to depend upon their
assertions or Authorities, as if they were infallible.

2 Though these great Naturalists, for want of some experience were mistaken in
that opinion, whilst they thought no place was habitable but the temperate
Zones; yet it cannot be from hence inferred, that they denied the possibility
of Antipodes: since these are such Inhabitants as live opposite unto us in the
other temperate Zone; and 'twere an absurd thing to imagine that those who
lived in different Zones, can be Antipodes to one another; and argues that a
man did not understand, or else had forgotten that common distinction in
Geography, wherein the relation of the Worlds Inhabitants unto one another, are
reckoned up under these three heads; Antaeci, Periaeci, and Antipodes. But to
let this pass: It Is certain, that some of the Fathers did deny the being of
any such, upon other more absurd grounds. Now if such as Chrysostom,
Lactantius, etc. who were noted for great Scholars, and such too as flourished
in these latter times, when all humane Learning was more generally professed,
should notwithstanding be so much mistaken in so obvious a matter: Why then may
we not think that those Primitive Saints, who were the penmen of Scripture,
and eminent above others in their time for holiness and knowledge, might yet
be utterly ignorant of many Philosophical Truths, which are commonly known in
these days? It Is probable, that the Holy Ghost did inform them only with the
knowledge of those things whereof they were to be the penmen, and that they
were not better skilled in points of Philosophy than others. There were indeed
some of them who were supernaturally endowed with humane Learning; yet this
was, because they might thereby be fitted for some particular ends, which all
the rest were not appointed unto: thus Solomon was strangely gifted with all
kind of knowledge, in a great measure, because he was to teach us by his own
experience the extreme vanity of it, Eccl. 1. 18.
that we might not so settle our desires upon it, as if it were able to yield
us contentment. So too the Apostles were extraordinarily inspired with the
knowledge of Languages, because they were to preach unto all Nations. But it
will not hence follow, that therefore the other holy penmen were greater
Scholars than others. It Is likely that Job had as much humane Learning as most
of them, because his Book is more especially remarkable for lofty expressions,
and discourses of Nature; and yet it is not likely that he was acquainted with
all those mysteries which later Ages have discovered; because when God would
convince him of his own folly and ignorance, he proposes to him such
questions, as being altogether unanswerable; which notwithstanding, any
ordinary Philosopher in these days might have resolved. As you may see at
large in the thirty eighth Chapter of that Book.

The occasion was this: Job having Cap. 13. 3.
before desired that he might dispute with the Almighty concerning the
uprightness of his own ways, and the unreasonablenesse of those afflictions
which he underwent, does at length obtain his desire in this kind; and God
vouchsafes in this thirty eighth chapter, to argue the case with him. Where he
does show Job how unfit he was to judge of the ways of Providence, in
disposing of Blessings and Afflictions, when as he was so ignorant in ordinary
matters, being not able to discern the reason of natural and common events.
As V. 8. 10, 11.
why the Sea should be so bounded from overflowing the land? What is the Ver.
18.
breadth of the Earth? what is the Ver. 22.
reason of the Snow or Hayle? what was the V. 28. 29.
cause of the Rain or Dew, of Ice and Frost, and the like. By which
questions, it seems Job was so utterly pusled, that he is feign afterward to
humble himself in this acknowledgement: Cap. 42. 3.
I have uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I
knew not: wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

So that it is likely these holy Men had not these humane Arts by any special
inspiration, but by instruction and study, and other ordinary means; and
therefore Moses his skill in this kind is called the Learning of the
Egyptians. Acts 7. 22.
Now because in those times all Sciences were taughr only in a rude and
imperfect manner; therefore it is likely that they also had but a dark and
confuse apprehension of things, and were liable to the common errors. And for
this reason is it, why Josh ca. 10. Quaest. 19.
Tostatus (speaking of Iosuahs bidding the Moon stand still as well as the
Sun) says, Quod forte er at imperitus circa Astrorum doctrinam, sentiens ut
vulgares sentiunt: That perhaps he was unskilful in Astronomy, having the
same gross conceit of the Heavens, as the vulgar had. From all which it may be
inferred, that the ignorance of such good Men and great Scholars concerning
these Philosophical points, can be no sufficient reason, why after examination
we should deny them, or doubt of their Truth.

It Is considerable, Consid. 3.
that in the rudiments and first beginnings of Astronomy, and so in several
Ages after, this opinion has sound many Patrons, and those too Men of eminent
note and learning. Such was more especially Pythagoras, who was generally and
highly esteemed for his divine wit, and rare inventions; under whose mysterious
sayings, there be many excellent Truths to be discovered.

But against his testimony, it is again Alex. Ross. l. 2. s^. 2. c. 10.
objected; If Pythagoras were of this opinion, yet his Authority should not be
of any credit, because he was the author of many other monstrous absurdities.

To this I answer: If a man's error in some particulars should take away his
credit for every thing else, this would abolish the force of all humane
Authority; for humanum est errane. Secondly, it is probable that many of
Pythagora's sayings which seem so absurd, are not to be understood according
to their letter, but in a mystical sense.

2 But he objects again, that Pythagoras was not of this opinion; and that for
two reasons: First, because no ancient author that he had read ascribes it unto
him. Secondly, it is contradictory to his other opinions, concerning the
Harmony that was made by the motion of the Heavens; which could not consist
with this other of the Earth's motion.

To the first I answer: The Objector could not choose but know that this
assertion is by many ancient authors ascribed to that sect, whereof Pythagoras
was the chief. He might have seen it expressly in De Coelo, lib. 2. ca. 13.
Aristotle himself: (...).

In which the Philosopher does compendiously reckon up the three chief
particulars employed in the opinion of the Pythagorians. First, the Suns being
in the center of the World. Secondly, the earth's annual motion about it, as
being one of the planets: thirdly, it is diurnal revolution, whereby it caused
day and night.

To his second reason I answer: First, that Pythagoras thought the Earth to be
one of the Planets (as appears by Aristotle's testimony concerning him) and to
move amongst them the rest. So that his opinion concerning the motion of the
heavens, is not inconsistent with that of the earth. Secondly, but as for the
celestial harmony, he might perhaps under this mystical expression,
according to his usual custom, shadow forth unto us that mutual proportion
and harmonical consent, which he did conceive in the several bigness, distance,
motions of the orbs. So that notwithstanding these objections, it is evident
that Pythagoras was of this opinion, and that his Authority may add somewhat
for the confirmation of it. Unto him assented Archime des de araenae numero.
Aristarchus Samius, who flourished about 280 years before the Birth of our
Savior, and was by reason of this opinion, arraigned for prophanes and
sacrilege by the Ariopagites, because he had blasphemed the deity of Vesta,
affirming the earth to move. To them agreed Philaus, Heraclides, Pontius,
Nicetas, Syracusanus, Ecphantus, Lucippus, and Plato himself, (as some think.)
So likewise Numa Pompilius, as Plutarch relates it in his life; who in
reference to this opinion, built the temple of Vesta round, like the universe:
in the middle of it was placed the perpetual vest all fire; by which he did
represent the Sun in the center of the world. All these men were in their
several times of special Note, as well for their extraordinary learning, as
for this opinion.

It Is considerable, 4. Consid.
that since this Science of Astronomy has bin raised to any perfection, there
have been many of the best skill in it, that have assented unto that assertion
which is here defended. Amongst whom was the Cardinal Cusanus, De docta ignor.
lib. 2. cap. 12.
but more especially Copernicus, who was a man very exact and diligent in these
studies for above 30 years together, from the year 1500 to 1530, and upwards:
and since him, most of the best Astronomers have been of this side. So that
now, there is scarce any of note and skill, who are not Copernicus his
followers, and if we should go to most voices, this opinion would carry it
from any other. It would be too tedious to reckon up the names of those that
may be cited for it; I will only mention some of the chief: Such were Ioachinus
Rheticus, an elegant writer, Christopherus Rothman, Mestilin, a man very
eminent for his singular skill in this Science; who though at the first he were
a follower of Ptolomy, yet upon his second and more exact thoughts, he
concluded Copernicus to be in the right, and that the usual Hypothesis, Praef.
ad Narrat. Rhetici.
praescriptione potius quam ratione valet, does prevail more by prescription
then reason. So likewise Erasmus Reinholdus, who was the man that calculated
the Pratenicall Tables from Copernicus his observations, and did intend to
write a Commentary upon his other Works, Ibid.
but that he was taken out of this life before he could finish those
resolutions. Unto these also I might add the Names of Gilbert, Keplar,
Gallilaeus, with sundry others, who have much beautified and confirmed this
Hypothesis, with their new inventions. Nay I may safely affirm, that amongst
the variety of those opinions that are in Astronomy, there are more (of those
which have skill in it) that are of this opinion, not only than any other side,
but than all the rest put together. So that now it is a greater Argument of
Singularity to oppose it.

It Is probable, 5 Consid.
that many other of the Ancients would have assented unto this opinion, if they
had been acquainted with those experiments which later times have found out for
the confirmation of it: And therefore in Narratione.
Rheticus and Mist. Cosmogr. cap. 1. Item praef. ad 4. l. Astr. Copern.
Keplar do so oten wish that Aristotle were now alive again. Questionless he
was so rational and ingenious a man (not half so obstinate as many of his
followers) that upon such probabilities as these, he would quickly have
renounced his own Principles, and have come over to this side: for in one
place, having proposed some questions about the heavens, de Coel. l. 2. c. 12.
which were not easy to be resolved: He sets down this rule, That in
difficulties, a man may take a liberty to speak that which seems most likely
to him: and in such cases, an aptness to guess at some resolution, for the
satisfying of our Philosophical thirst, does deserve rather to bestiled by the
name of Modesty, than Boldness. And in another place, Met. lib. 12. cap. 8.
he referres the Reader to the different opinions of Astronomers, advising him
to examine their several tenants, as well Eudoxus as Calippus; and to
entertain that (not which is most ancient, but) which is most exact and
agreeable to reason. Alm. lib. 13. cap. 2.
And as for Ptolomy, it is his counsel, that we should endeavor to frame such
suppositions of the Heavens, as might be more simple, being void of all
superfluities: and he confesses, that his Hypothesis had many implications in
it, together with sundry intricate and unlikely turnings; and therefore in the
same place, he seems to admonish us, that we should not be too confident the
Heavens were really in the same Form, wherein Astronomers did supposethem. So
that it is likely, 'twas his chief intent to propose unto us such a frame of the
celestial bodies, from which we might, in some measure, conceive of their
different appearances; and according to which, we might be able to calculate
their motions. But now, it is Copernicus his endeavor, to propound unto us, the
true natural Causes of these several Motions, and Appearances: It was the
intent of the one, to settle the Imagination; and of the other, to satisfy the
judgment. So, that we have no reason to doubt of his assent unto this
Opinion, if he had but clearly understood all the grounds of it.

It Is reported of Clavius, that when lying upon his Deathbed, he heard the
first News of those Discoveries which were made by Gallilaeus his Glass, he
brake forth into these words: Videre Astronomos, quo pacto constituendi sunt
orbs Coelestes, ut haec Phenomenon salvari possint: That it did behoove
Astronomers, to consider of some other Hypothesis, beside that of Ptolomy,
whereby they might salve all those new appearances. Intimating that this old
one, which formerly he had defended, would not now serve the turn: and
doubtless, if it had been informed how congruous all these might have been
unto the opinion of Copernicus, he would quickly have turned on that side.
It Is considerable, that amongst the followers of Copernicus, there are scarce
any, who were not formerly against him; and such, as at first, had been
thoroughly seasoned with the Principles of Aristotle; in which, for the most
part, they have no less skill, than those who are so violent in the defense of
them. Whereas on the contrary, there are very few to be found amongst the
followers of Aristotle and Ptolomy, that have read any thing in Copernicus, or
do fully understand the Grounds of his opinion; and I think, not any, who
having been once settled with any strong assent on this side, that have
afterward revolted from it. Now if we do but seriously weigh with our selves,
that so many ingenious, considering men, should reject that opinion which they
were nursed up in, and which is generally approved as the truth; and that, for
the embracing of such a Paradox as is condemned in Schools, and commonly cried
down, as being absurd and ridiculous; I say, if a man do but well consider
all this, he must needs conclude, that there is some strong evidence for it to
be found out by examination; and that in all probability, this is the righter
side.

It Is probable, 7 Consid.
that most of those Authors who have opposed this opinion, since it has bin
confirmed by new discoveries, were stirred up thereunto by some of these 3
insufficient grounds.

1 An over-fond and partial conceit of their proper inventions. Every man is
naturally more affected to his own brood, than to that of which another is the
Author; though perhaps, it may be more agreeable to reason. It Is very
difficult for any one, in the search of Truth, to find in himself such an
indifferency, as that his judgment is not at all swayd by an overweening
affection unto that which is proper unto himself. And this perhaps might be
the first reason that moved the noble Tycho with so much heat to oppose
Copernicus, that so he might the better make way for the spreding of that
Hypothesis, which was of his own invention. To this I might likewise refer
that opinion of Origanus and Mr. Carpenter, who attribute to the earth only a
diurnall revolution. It does more especially concern those men that are
Leaders of several sides, to beat down any that should oppose them.

2 A servile and superstitious fear of derogating from the authority of the
ancients, or opposing that meaning of Scripture phrases; wherein the supposed
infallible Church, has for a long time understood them. It Is made part of the
new Creed, set forth by Pius the fourth, 1564, That no man should assent unto
any interpretation of Scripture, which is not approved of by the authority of
the Fathers. And this is the reason why the Jesuits, who are otherwise the
greatest affectors of those opinions, which seem to be new and subtle, do
yet forbear to say any thing in defense of this; but rather take all occasions
to inveigh against it. Serrarius Commen. in Ios. cap. 10. Quaest. 14. So
Lipfius Phisiol. l. 2.
One of them does expressly condemn it for a heresy. And since him, it has
bin called in by Ann. Dom. 1616. item 1633.
two Sessions of the Cardinals, as being an opinion both absurd and dangerous.
And therefore likewise do they punish it, by casting the Defenders of it into
the Popes truest Purgatory, the Inquisition: but yet neither these Councels,
nor any (that I know of) since them, have proceeded to such a peremptory
censure of it, as to conclude it a heresy: fearing perhaps, lest a more exact
examinanation, and the discovery of future times, finding it to be an
undeniable Truth, it might redound to the prejudice of their Church, and it is
infallibility. And therefore he that is most bitter against it, in the heat
and violence of opposition, will not call it a heresy: the worst that he dares
say of it, is, That it is opinio temeraria quae altero saltem pede intravit
haeresios limen; Fromondus Antarist. cap. 6.
A rash opinion, and bordering upon heresy. Though unto this likewise he was
incited by the eagerness of disputation, and a desire of victory, for it
seems many eminent men of that Church before him, were a great deal more
mild and moderate in their censures of it.

Paul the third, was not so much offended at Copernicus, when he dedicated his
Work unto him.

The Cardinal of Cusa, does expressly maintain this opinion.

Scombergius, the Cardinal of Capua, did with much importunity and great
approbation, beg of Copernicus the commentaries that he writ in this kind. And
it seems the Fathers of the Council of Trent, were not such confident
defenders of Ptolomy's hypothesis against Copernicus, as many now are. For
speaking of those intricate subtilties, which the Fancies of men had framed, to
maintain the practice of the Church, they compared them to Astronomers, who
(say they) do feign Excentricks and Epicijcles, and such engines of Orbs, to
save the Phenomena; though they know there are no such things. But now, because
this opinion of Copernicus in later times has been so strictly forbidden, and
punished, it will concern those of that Religion, to take heed of meddling in
the defense of it, but rather to submit the liberty of their reason, unto the
command of their Superiors, and (which is very absurd) even in natural
Questions, not to assent unto any thing, but what authority shall allow of.

3. A judging of things by sense, rather than by discourse and reason: a tying
of the meaning of Scripture, to the letter of it; and from thence concluding
Philosophical points, together with an ignorance of all those grounds and
probabilities in Astronomy, upon which this opinion is bottomed. And this in
all likelihood, is the reason why some men, who in other things perhaps are
able Scholars, do write so vehemently against it: and why the common people
in general do cry it down, as being absurd and ridiculous. Under this head I
might refer the opposition of Mr. Fuller, Al. Ross. etc.

But now, no prejudice that may arise from the bare authority of such enemies
as these, will be liable to sway the judgment of an indifferent considering
man; and I doubt not but that he, who will thoroughly weigh with himself these
particulars that are here propounded, may find some satisfaction for these
Arguments, which are taken from the seeming Noveltie and Singularity of this
Opinion.

PROP. II.
That there is not any place in Scriptures, from which (being rightly
understood) we may infer the diurnall motion of the Sun or Heavens.

IT were happy for us, if we could exempt Scripture from Philosophical
controversies: if we could be content to let it be perfect for that end unto
which it was intended, for a rule of our Faith and Obedience; and not stretch
it also to be a Judge of such natural truths, as are to be found out by our
own industry and experience. Though the Holy Ghost could easily have given us
a full resolution of all such particulars; Eccles. 3. 10, 11.
yet he has left this travel to the sons of men to be exercised
therewith, Mundum reliquit disputationibus hominum: that being busied for the
most part in an inquisition after the creatures, we might find the less
leisure to wait upon our lusts, or serve our more sinful inclinations.

But however, because our Adversaries generally do so much insult in those
Arguments that may be drawn from hence; Comment. in Eccles. c. 1. v. 4.
and more especially, because Pineda does for this reason with so many bitter
and empty reproaches, revile our learned countryman Dr. Gilbert. In that
renewing of this opinion, he omitted an answer to the scripture expressions:
therefore it is requisite, That in the prosecuting of this discourse, we should
lay down such satisfaction as may clear all doubts that may be taken thence:
Especially since the prejudice that may arise from the misapprehension of those
Scripture phrases, may much disable the Reader from looking on any other
Argument, with an equal and indifferent mind.

The places that seem to oppose this, are of two kinds. First, such as imply a
motion in the Heavens: or secondly, such as seem to express a rest and
immobilitie in the Earth.

Those of the first kind seem to bear in them the cleerest evidence, and
therefore are more insisted on by our Adversaries. They may be referred unto
these three heads.

1 All those Scriptures where there is any mention made of the rising, or
setting of the Sun or Stars.

2 That story in Iosuah, where the Sun standing still, is reckoned for a
miracle.

3 That other wonder in the days of Hezekiah, when the Sun went back ten
degrees in the Dial of Ahaz. All which places do seem to conclude, That the
diurnall motion is caused by the Heavens.

To this I answer in general;

That the Holy Ghost in these Scripture expressions, is pleased to accommodate
himself unto the conceit of the vulgar, and the usual opinion: whereas, if in
the more proper phrase it had been said, That the Earth did rise and set; or,
that the earth stood still, etc. the people who had been unacquainted with that
secret in Philosophy, would not have understood the meaning of it, and therefore
it was convenient, that they should be spoken unto in their own Language.

I but you will reply, It should seem more likely, if there had been any such
thing, that the Holy Ghost should use the truest expressions: for then he would
at the same time have informed them of the thing, and reformed them in an
error: since his authority alone had been sufficient to have rectified the
mistake.

I answer:

1 Though it were, yet it is beside the chief scope of those places, to
instruct us in any Philosophical points, as has been proved in the former
book; especially when these things are neither necessary in themselves, nor do
necessarily induce to a more full understanding of that which is the maine
business of those Scriptures. But now the people might better conceive the
meaning of the Holy Ghost, when he does conform himself unto their capacities
and opinions, than when he talks exactly of things in such a proper phrase, as
is beyond their reach: And therefore it is said in Isaiah, I am the Lord which
teaches thee utilia, profitable things: where the gloss has it, non
subtilia, not such curiosities of Nature as are not easily apprehended.

2 It Is not only besides that which is the chief purpose of those places, but
it might happen also to be somewhat opposite unto it. For men being naturally
unapt to believe any thing that seems contrary to their senses, might upon
this begin to question the authority of that Book which affirmed it, or at
least to retch Scripture some wrong way, to force it to some other sense which
might be more agreeable to their own false imagination. Praescript. cap. 17.
Tertullian tells us of some Heretics, who when they were plainly confuted out
of any Scripture, would presently accuse those texts or Books to be fallible;
and of no authority; and rather yield Scripture to be erroneous, than forgo
those Tenants for which they thought there was so good reason. So likewise
might it have been in these points which seem to bear in them so much
contradiction to the senses and common opinion: and therefore it is excellent
advise set down by S. In Genes. ad lit. lib. 2. in fine.
Austin. Quod nihil credere de re obscur a temere debemus, neforte quod postea
veritas patefecerit, quamvis libris sanctis sive testamenti veteris, sive novi,
nullo modo esse possit adversum, tamen propter amorem nostri erroris oderimus:
That we should not hastily settle our opinions concerning any obscure matter,
lest afterward, the truth being discovered, (which however it may seem,
cannot be repugnant to any thing in Scripture) we should hate that, out of
love to the error that we have before entertained. A little reading may
inform us how these Texts have bin abused to strange and unmeant Allegories,
which have mentioned any natural truth in such a manner as was not agreeable
to men's conceits. And besides, if the Holy Ghost had propounded unto us any
secrets in Philosophy, we should have bin apt to be so busied about them, as
to neglect other matters of greater importance. And therefore Saint Austin
proposing the question, Ibid. cap. 9.
what should be the reason, Why the Scripture does not clearly set down any
thing concerning the Nature, Figure, Magnitude, and Motion of the Heavenly
Orbs; he answers it thus: The Holy Ghost being to deliver more necessary
Truths, would not insert these, lest men according to the variety of their
dispositions, should neglect the more weighty matters, and bestow their
thoughts about the speculative natural points, which were less needful. So
that it might seem more convenient, that the Scripture should not meddle with
the revealing of these unlikely Secrets, especially when it is to deliver unto
us many other mysteries of greater necessity, which seem to be directly
opposite to our sense and reason. And therefore, I say, the holy Ghost might
purposely omit the treating of these Philosophical Secrets, till time and
future discovery, might with leisure settle them in the opinion of others: As
he is pleased in other things of a higher kind, to apply himself unto the
infirmity of our apprehensions, by being represented, as if he were a humane
nature, with the parts and passions of a man. So in these things likewise, that
he might descend to our capacities, does he vouchsafe to conform his
expressions unto the error and mistake of our judgments.

But before we come to a further illustration, let us a little examine those
particular Scriptures, which are commonly urged to prove the motion of the Sun
or Heavens. These (as was said) might be distributed under these three heads.

1 Those places which mention the rising or setting of the Sun, as that in
the Ps. 19. 5. 6.
Psalm, The Sun like a Bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices
as agyant to run his race: His going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his
circuit unto the end of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
And that in Ecclesiastes, The Sun arises, and the Sun goes down, Eccles.
1. 5.
etc.

In which Scriptures, we may observe diverse phrases that are evidently spoken
in reference to the appearance of things, and the false opinion of the vulgar.
And therefore it is not altogether unlikely, That this, which they seem to
affirm concerning the motion of the Heavens, should also be understood in the
same sense.

The Sun like a Bridegroom comes out of his chamber; alluding perhaps unto
the conceit of ignorant people: as if it took rest all the while it was absent
from us, and came out of it is chamber, when it arose.

And rejoices as a Giant to run his race; because in the Morning it appears
bigger than at other times; and therefore in reference to this appearance, may
then be compared unto a Giant.

His going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of
it. Alluding again unto the opinion of the vulgar: who not apprehending the
roundnesse of the Heavens, do conceive it to have two ends: one where the Sun
rises, the other where it sets.

And there is nothing bid from the heat thereof, speaking still in reference
to the common mistake, as if the Sun were actually hot in it self; and as if
the heat of the weather were not generated by reflection, but did immediately
proceed from the body of the Sun.

So likewise, for that in Ecclesiastes, where it is said, the Sun rises, and
the Sun goes down, etc. which phrases being properly understood, do import
that he is sometimes in a higher place than at others: whereas, in a
circumference, there is no place higher or lower, each part being at the same
distance from the center, which is the bottom. But now understand the phrase
in reference to the Suns appearance, and then we grant that he does seem
sometimes to rise, and sometimes to go down, because in reference to the
Horizon, (which common people apprehend to be the bottom, and in the utmost
bounds of it to join with the heavens,) the Sun does appear in the Morning to
rise up from it, and in the Evening to go down unto it. Now I say, because the
Holy Ghost, in the manner of these expressions, does so plainly allude unto
vulgar errors, and the false appearance of things: therefore it is not without
probability, that he should be interpreted in the same sense, when he seems
to employ a motion in the Sun or Heavens.

2 The second place, was that relation in Iosuah: where it is mentioned as a
miracle. That the Sun did stand still. And Iosuah said, Ios. 10. 12, 14
Galilaeus maintains the literal sense of this place: toward the end of that
treatise, which he calls Nov-Antiqpat. doctrina.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. So
the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about a
whole day. And there was no day like that, before it or after it. In which
place likewise, there are diverse phrases wherein the Holy Ghost does not
express things according to their true nature, and as they are in themselves:
but according to their appearances, and as they are conceived in common
opinion. As,

1 When he says, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, or over Gibeon. Now the
whole Earth being so little in comparison to the body of the Sun, and but as a
point, in respect of that Orb wherein the Sun is supposed to move, and Gibeon
being, as it were, but a point of this Globe of Earth: therefore the words
cannot be understood properly, but according to appearance. Tostat. in locum,
Quaest. 16. 17.
It Is probable that Iosuah was then at Azecha, a little East from Gibeon, and
the Sun being somewhat beyond the Meridian, Arias Montanus in locum.
did seem unto him as he was in that place, to be over against Gibeon; and in
reference to this appearance, and vulgar conceit, does he command it to stand
still upon that place.

2 And so secondly for that other expression; And thou Moon in the valley of
Ajalon. This Planet was now a little East from the Sun, it being about three or
four days old (as Tostat. ib. Quaest. 18. Serrarius in Josh. 10. Quaes. 21.
22.
Commentators guess. Ajalon was three miles from Gibeon Eastward, and Iosuah
commanded the Moon to stand still there: because unto him it did then seem to
be over against that valley; whereas, it is certain, if he had been there
himself, it would still have seemed to be as much distant from him. Just as
men commonly speak in showing another the Stars: we point to a Star over such a
chimney, or such a tree, because to us it appears so; whereas the Star in it
self is not sensibly more over them, than it is over us. So that in in this
phrase likewise the Holy Ghost does conform himself unto the appearance of
things, and our grosser conceit.

3 And the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven. Now to speak properly, and
as the thing is in it self, Heaven has no midst but the center; and
therefore, this also must be interpreted in reference to the opinion of the
vulgar, and by the midst of Heaven, we are to understand such a place as was
not very near to either of the ends, the East or West.

4 And there was no day like that, before it or after it: which words are not
to be understood absolutely, for there are always longer days under the
Poles: but in respect to the opinion of the vulgar; that is, there was never
any day so long which these ignorant people knew of.

3 As for this last place concerning the Suns returning ten degrees in the
dial of Ahaz: 2. King. 20. 11.
I think it may probably be affirmed, That it is to be understood only
concerning the shadow: Isai. 38. 8.
which though it do necessarily happen in all horizontall dialls, for any
latitude betwixt the Tropickes: and so consequently in all declining dialls,
the elevation of whose Pole is less than the Suns greatest declination; as
Clavius de Horol. cap. 21. observes: yet the circumstances of this relation in
scripture, makes the event to differ from that other which is common and
natural: which against it is nature did seem to go backwards, when as the Sun
it self was not in the least manner altered from it is usual course. Of this
opinion were Abarbinell; Arius Montanus, Burgensis, Vatablas Sanctius, etc.

The reasons for it may be these;

1 The miracle is proposed only concerning the shadow; Will thou that the
shadow shall ascend or return by ten degrees: there being not in the offer of
this wonder, any the least mention made concerning the Suns going backwards.

2 It Is likely we should have had some intimation concerning the
extraordinary length of the day, as it is in that of Iosuah; but in this
relation, the chief matter that the story takes notice of, is the alteration
of the shadow.

3 Had it been by the supposed return of the Suns body, this had been a
greater miracle then those which were performed upon more solemn occasions; it
had been more wonderful then it is seeming rest in Iosuahs time; then the
supernatural Eclipse at our Saviors death, when the Moon was in the full.
And then it is not likely, that the Holy Ghost in relating of this miracle,
should chiefly insist in expressing how the shadow returned, and that only in
the dial of Ahaz.

4 This Figure did not appear in the Sun it self; because in the 2. Chron.
32. 31. It Is said, that the Ambassadors of the king of Babylon did come unto
Hezekiah, to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land; and therefore it
seems the miracle did not consist in any change of the Heavens.

5 If it had been in the Sun, it would have been as well discerned in other
parts of the world, as in the land of Iudaea. And then,

1 What need the King of Babylon send thither to enquire after it? If you
reply, because it was occasioned by Hezekiahs recoverie; I answer, it is not
likely that the heathens would ever believe so great a miracle should be
wrought merely for a sign of one man's recovery from a disease. But would
either be apt to think that it was done for some more remarkable purpose, and
that by some of their own gods, unto whom they attributed a far greater power,
than unto any other. It Is more probable, that they might hear some flying
rumor of a miracle that was seen in Iudaea: which because it happened only in
Hezekiahs house and dial; and that too upon his recoverie from a dangerous
sickness, they might be more apt to believe that it was a sign of it.

2 Why have we no mention made of it in the writings of the Ancients? It is no
way likely, that so great a miracle as this was (if it were in the Sun) should
have been passed over in silence; Especially, since it happened in those later
times, when there were many heathen writers that flourished in the world,
Hesiod, Archilochus, Symonides; and not long after, Homer, with diverse others;
and yet none of them have the least mention of any such prodigy. We have many
relations of matters that were less observable, which were done about that
time; the History of Numa Pompilius, Gyges; the fight betwixt the three
Brethren, with diverse such stories. And it is scarce credible, that this should
have been omitted amongst the rest.

Nay, we have (as many guess) some hints from profane antiquity, of the
miracle wrought by Iosuah. Unto which, it is thought the Ancients did allude in
the fable of Phaeton; when the Sun was so irregular in his course, that he
burnt some part of the world. And questionless then, this which happened in
later times, would not have been so wholly forgotten. It Is an Argument urged by
Tractat 35. in Mat.
Origin, That the Eclipse at our Saviors Passion was not universal, because
no profane author of those times mentions it. Which consequence is the very
same with that which is urged in this other case; but by the way, his
antecedent was false, since Apologet. cap. 21.
Tertullian affirms, That it was recorded amongst the Roman Annels.

Now as for that story in Herodotus, Lib. 2.
where after he had related the flight of Senacherib, he tells us, how the Sun
did four times in the space of 10340 years invert his course, and rise in the
West; which would seem so unto other nations, if he had only returned, as many
conclude, from this Scripture. As for this story, (I say) it cannot well be
urged as pertinent to the present business, because it seems to have reference
unto times that never were.

So that all these things being well considered, we shall find it more
probable, that this miracle does consist in the return of the shadow.

If you object, Isa. 38. 8. Jonah. 4. 8.
That the Scripture does expressly say, the Sun it self returned ten
degrees; I answer, it is a frequent manner of speech in Scripture, to put the
cause for the effect; as that in Jonas, Where it is said, Ion. 4. 8.
That the Sun did beat upon the head of Jonas; that is, the beams of the
Sun. Psalm. 121. 6.
So that of the Psalmist, The Sun shall not smite thee by day, that is, the
heat which proceeds from the Suns reflection. In the same sense may the
phrase be understood in this place; and the Sun may be said to return
back, because the light, which is the effect of it, did seem to do so; or
rather, because the shadow, which is the effect of that, did change it is course.

This later Scripture then, will not at all make to the present purpose: as for
those of the two former kinds, I have already answered, That they are spoken
in reference to the appearance of things, and vulgar opinion. For the further
illustration of which, I shall endeavor to confirm these two particulars.

1 That the Holy Ghost in many other places of Scripture, does accommodate his
expressions unto the error of our conceits: and does not speak of diverse
things as they are in themselves, but as they appear unto us. Therefore it is
not unlikely, that these phrases also may be liable unto the same
interpretation.

2 That diverse men have fallen into great absurdities, whilst they have looked
for the grounds of Philosophy, from the words of Scripture; and therefore it
may be dangerous in this point also, to adhere so closely unto the Letter of
the Text.

PROP. III.
That the Holy Ghost, in many places of Scripture, does plainly conform his
expressions unto the errors of our conceits; and does not speak of diverse
things as they are in themselves, but as they appear unto us.

THere is not any particular by which Philosophy has been more endamaged, than
the ignorant superstition of some men: who in stating the controversies of it,
do so closely adhere unto the mere words of Scripture. Quam plurima occurrunt
in libris sacris ad naturam pertinentia, etc. They are the words of Proaem. ad.
Phil. sa^cram
Vallesius. There are sundry things in holy Writ concerning natural points,
which most men think are not so to be understood, as if the Holy Ghost did
intend to unfold unto us any thing in that kind: but referring all to the
salvation of our souls, does speak of other matters according to common
opinion. And a little after, Ego, divina haec eloquia, etc. I for my part am
persuaded, that these divine Treatises were not written by the holy and
inspired penmen, for the interpretation of Philosophy, because God left such
things to be found out by men's labor and industry. But yet whatsoever is in
them concerning nature is most true: as proceeding from the God of nature, from
whom nothing could be hid. And questionless, all those things which the
Scripture does deliver concerning any natural point, cannot be but certain
and infallible, being understood in that sense, wherein they were first
intended; but now that it does speak sometimes according to common opinion,
rather than the true nature of the things themselves, was intimated before;
wherefore (by the way) Vest. Trac. 3. cap. 2.
Fromondus his triumph upon the later part of this quotation, is but vain, and
to no purpose. It Is a good rule set down by a learned Sanctius in Isa. 13. 5.
Item in Zachar. lib. 9. number. 45.
Commentator, to be observed in the interpretation of Scripture: Scriptura
sacra saepe non tam ad veritatem ipsam, quam ad hominum opinionem, sermonem
acommodat; that it does many times accommodate it is expressions, not so much to
the truth it self, as to men's opinions. And in this sense is that speech of
Gregory concerning Images and Pictures, attributed by Comment. in Genesis c. 1.
Calvin unto the History of the Creation; viz. Librum esse ideotarum, that it
is a Book for the simpler and ignorant people. For it being written to inform
them, as well as others, it is requisite that it should use the most plain and
easy expressions. To this purpose likewise is that of In Genesis c. 1, v. 10.
art. 6
Mersennus, Mill sunt Scripturae loca, etc. There are very many places of
Scripture, which are not to be interpreted according to the Letter; Vide
Hiero. in Ier. 28. Aquinas in Job. 26. 7.
and that for this reason, because God would apply himself unto our capacity
and sense: Presertim in ijs, quae adres naturales, oculisque subject as
pertinent; more especially in those things which concern nature, and are
subject to our eyes. And therefore in the very same place, though he be eager
enough against Copernicus, yet he concludes that opinion not to be a heresy;
because (says he) those Scriptures which seem to oppose it, are not so
evident, but that they may be capable of another interpretation: Intimating,
that it was not unlikely they should be understood in reference to outward
appearance and common opinion; And that this manner of speech is frequently
used in many other places of scripture, may be easily manifest from these
following examples. Thus though the Moon may be prooved by infallible
observation, to be less than any of the visible Stars, yet because of its
appearance, and vulgar opinion, therefore does the Scripture in comparison to
them, Genesis 1. 16.
call it one of the great Lights. Psalm. 136. 7.
Of which place, says Calvin, Moses populariter scripsit, nos potius respexit
quam sydera. Moses did not so much regard the nature of the thing, as our
capacity; and therefore uses a popular phrase: so as ordinary people without
the help of Arts and Learning, might easily understand him; And in another
place, Non fuit Spiritus Sancti concilium Astrologiam docere: It was not the
purpose of the Holy Ghost to teach us Astronomy: Comment. in Psa. 136.
but being to propound a Doctrine, that concerns the most rude and simple
people, he does (both by Moses, and the Prophets) conform himself unto their
phrases and conceits: lest any should think to excuse his own ignorance with
the pretense of difficulty: As men commonly do in those things which are
delivered after a learned and sublime manner. Thus Zanchi De operibus Dei, par.
2. li. 6. cap. 1.
likewise, Moses majorem rationem habuit nostri humanique judicij, etc. When
Moses calls the Moon a great light: he had a more especial reference to men's
opinions of it, than to the truth of the thing it self, because he was to deal
with such, who do usually judge rather by their sense, than by their reason.
Nor will that distinction of Fromondus and others avoid this interpretation,
when he tells us of magnum Materiale: which referres to the bulk and quantity
of the body; and magnum Formale, which imports the greatness of it is light.
For we grant, that it is really unto us a greater light then any of the Stars,
or than all of them together: yet there is not any one of them, but is in it is
self a bigger light than this; And therefore when we say this speech is to be
understood according to it is appearance, we do not oppose this to reality: But
it is implied, that this reality is not absolute, and in the nature of the thing
it self, but only relative, and in reference to us. I may say a candle is a
bigger light then a Star, or the Moon, because it is really so to me. How ever
any one will think this to be spoken, only in relation to it is appearance,
and not to be understood as if the thing were so in it self. But (by the way)
it does concern Fromondus to maintain the Scriptures authority, De Meteor.
lib. 4. cap. 2. art. 5.
in revealing of natural secrets; because, from thence it is that he fetches
the chief Argument for that strange Assertion of his, concerning the
heaviness of the wind; Job, 28. 25.
Where Job says, that God makes the weight for the wind. Thus likewise,
because the common people usually think the rain to proceed from some waters
in the expansum: therefore does Moses in reference to this erroneous conceit,
tell us of waters above the Firmament, and the Windows of Heaven: Comment. in
Psalm, 148. 4.
Of which says Calvin, Nimis serviliter literae se astringunt. etc. Such men
too servilely tie themselves unto the letter of the text, who hence conclude,
that there is a Sea in the Heavens: when as we know that Moses and the
Prophets, to accommodate themselv's unto the capacity of ruder people, do use
a vulgar expression; and therefore it would be a preposterous course, to reduce
their phrases unto the exact rules of Philososophy. Let me add, that from this
mistake, it is likely did arise that groundless observation of the ancient
Jews; who would not admit any to read the beginning of Genesis, till he was
arrived to thirty years of age. The true reason of which, was this: not because
that Book was harder than any other; but because Moses conforming his
expression to vulgar conceits, and they examining of them by more exact rules
of Philosophy, were feign to force upon them many strange Allegories, and
unnatural Mysteries.

Thus also, because for the most part we conceive the Stars to be
innumerable, therefore does the Holy Ghost often speak of them in reference to
this opinion. Ier. 35. 22.
So Jeremy, As the host of Heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the
Sea measured, so will I multiply the seed of David: So likewise when God would
comfort Abraham with the promise of a numberless posterite, he bids him look
up to Heaven, and tells him, that his Seed should be like those Stars for
number: Genesis 15. 5.
Which, says In 1. cap. Sphaerae.
Clavius, Intelligendum est secundum communem sententiam vulgi, existimantis
infinita^ esse multitudine^ stellarum, dum eas nocte serena confuse intuetur,
is to be understood according to the common opinion of the vulgar, who think
the Stars to be of an infinite multitude, whilst they behold them all (as they
seem confused) in a clear night. And though many of our Divines do commonly
interpret this speech to be a Hyperbole; yet being well considered, we shall
find that Abraham's posterity, in some few generations, were far more than
there are visible Stars in the Firmament; and of such only does God speak,
because he bids Abraham look up to the Heavens.

Now all these, even unto six differences of Magnitude, are reckoned to be but
1022. True indeed, at the first viewing of the Heavens, it may seem an
incredible thing, that they should be of no greater a number; but the reason of
this is, because they appear scattered and confused: so that the eye cannot
place them in any such order, as to reckon them up, or take any distinct
surveigh of of them. Sir. Fr. Bac. table of colors, number. 5.
Now it is a known truth, Quod fortius operatur pluralit as partium, ubi ordo
abest; nam inducit similitudinem infiniti, and impedit comprehensionem: That a
plurality of Parts without order, has a more strong operation, because it
has a kind of seeming infinity, and so hinders comprehension. And then
besides, there are more appearances of Stars many times, than there are
bodies of them; For the eye, by reason of it is weakness and disabilitie, to
discern any thing at so great a distance; as also, because of those beams
which proceed from such remote bodies in a twinkling and wavering manner, and
so mix and confound themselves at their entrance into that Organ: it must
needs receive more representations than there are true bodies. But now, if a
man do but leisurely and distinctly compare the Stars of the heaven with those
of this number, that are noted in a Celestial Globe, he shall scarce find
any in the Sky which are not marked with the Globe; nay, he may observe many
in the Globe, which he can scarce at all discern in the heavens.

Now this number of the Stars is commonly distributed into 48 Constellations;
in each of which, though we should suppose ten thousand Stars, (which can
scarce be conceived) yet would not all this number equal that of the children
of Israel. Nay, it is the assertion of Clavins, In prim. ca. Sphaerae.
that Abraham's posterity in some few generations, were far more then there
could be Stars in the Firmament, though they stuck so close that they touched
one another: And he proves it thus: A great circle in the Firmament, does
contain the diameter of a Star of the first Magnitude 14960 times. In the
diameter of the Firmament, there are contained 4760 diameters of such a Star:
now if we multiply this circumference by a diameter, the Quotient will be
71209600, which is the full number of Stars, that the eighth Sphaere
(according to Ptolomies grounds,) would contain, if they stood so close, that
they touched one another.

The children of Israel were reckoned at their going out of Egypt, Number. 1. 46.
603550, of such as were one and twenty years old, and upwards, and were able
to go to war; besides children, and women, and youths, and old men, and the
Levites; which in probability, did always treble the other number. Now if
they were so many at one time, we may well conceive, that in all those several
generations, both before and since, the number was much augmented; and long
before this time, did far exceed this supposed multitude of the Stars. From all
which, we may infer, that the Scripture expressions in this kind, are to be
understood acording to appearance and common opinion.

Another place usually cited for the same purpose, to show that the Holy Ghost
does not speak exactly concerning natural secrets; 1. Kin. 7. 23. 2. Chro. 4.
2.
as that in the Kings and Chronicles, which relates unto us the measure of
Solomon's brazen Sea, whose diameter was ten cubits, and it is circumference
thirty; whereas to speak Geometrically, the more exact proportion betwixt the
diameter and the circumference, is not as ten to thirty, but rather as seven to
twenty two.

But against this it is Ross. lib. 1. sect. 1. c. 8.
objected by our adversaries,

1 This Sea was not perfectly round, but rather inclining to a semicircular
Form, as Antiq. Iud. lib. 8. cap. 2.
Josephus affirms.

I reply: If it were so, yet this is so much from helping the matter, that it
makes it much worse; for then the disproportion will be far greater.

But secondly, Scripture, which is to be believed before Josephus, does tell us
in express terms, that it was round all about, 1. Kings, 7. 23.

2 The proportion of the diameter to the circumference, Ross. ibid.
is not exactly the same: as seven to two and twenty, but rather less. I
answer, though it be, yet it is nearer unto that, then any other number.

3 The scripture does but according to it is usual custom, Ibid.
suppress the less number, and mention only that which is bigger and more
full. So in some Genesis 15. 13 Acts, 7. 6.
places, Abraham's posterity is said to remain in the land of Egypt for four
hundred years; when as notwithstanding Exodus 12. 41.
other scriptures tell us, that they tarried there thirty years longer. Gal.
3. 17.
Thus likewise in one Gen 46. 27.
place, the number of Jacobs house, who came into Egypt, is reckoned to be
seventy; whereas, Acts, 7. 14.
elsewhere, they are said to be seventy five.

I answer: All this is so far from destroying the force of the present
Argument, that it does rather confirm it, and more clearly evidence unto us,
that the Scripture does not only, not speak exactly in these subtle and more
secret points of Philosophy, but also, in the ordinary obvious numbering of
things, does conform unto common custom, and often use the round number for
the whole.

4 It Is yet objected by Fromond. Vesta. 4. tract. 3. c. 2.
another adversary, That we have no reason to expect, the Holy Ghost should
reveal unto us this secret in Nature; because neither Archimedes, nor any
other, had then found it out. I reply, and why then should we think that the
Scripture must needs inform us of the Earths Motion; when as neither
Pithagoras, nor Copernicus, nor any else, had then discovered it?

5 In taking the compass of this vessel, Ibid.
they measured somewhat below the brim, where it was narrower than at the top,
and so the circumference there, might be exactly but thirty cubits; whereof
it is diameter was ten.

I answer: it is evident this is a mere shift, there being not the least ground
for it in the Text. And then besides, why might not we affirm, That the
diameter was measured from that place, as well as the circumference? since it is
very probable, that the Holy Ghost did speak ad idem; and not tell us the
breadth of one place, and the compass of another. So that all our adversaries
evasions cannot well avoid the force of the Argument that is taken from this
Scripture.

Again, common people usually conceive the Earth to be such a plain, as in
it is utmost parts is terminated by the Heavens, so that if a man were in the
farthermost coasts of it, he might touch the sky. And hence also, they think
that the reason why some countries are hotter than others, is, because they lie
nearer unto the Sun. Nay, Strabo tells us of some Philosophers too, who in this
point have grossly erred; affirming, that there was a place toward the utmost
coasts of Lusitania, where a man might hear the noise that the Sun made, as
he quenched his Beams in his descent to the Ocean; which, though it be an
absurd mistake, yet we may note, that the Holy Ghost in the expression of these
things, is pleased to conform himself unto such kind of vulgar and false
conceits; And therefore, often speaks of the Psa. 19. 6. Mat. 24. 31.
ends of Heaven, and the Ps. 22. 27, etc.
ends of the world. In this sense, they that come from any far country, are
said to come from the end of Heaven, Isaiah, 13. 5. And in another place, From
the side of the Heavens, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. All which phrases, do plainly allude
unto the error of vulgar capacities (says Sanctius) which hereby is better
instructed, Comment. in Isa. 13. 5.
then it would be by more proper expressions.

Thus likewise, because ignorant people cannot well apprehend how so great a
weight as the Sea and Land, should hang alone in the open air, without being
founded upon some Basis to uphold it: therefore in this respect also, does
Scripture apply it self unto their conceits, Job. 38. 4.
where it often mentions the foundations of the Earth. Psa. 102. 25.
Which phrase, in the letter of it, does manifestly allude unto men's
imaginations in this kind.

Thus also the common people usually conceive the Earth to be upon the Water;
because, when they have traveled any way as far as they can, they are at
length stopped by the sea. Therefore does Scripture in reference to this,
affirm, Psalm. 136. 6.
That God stretched the Earth upon the Waters, Psalm. 24. 2.
founded the Earth upon the Seas, and established it upon the Floods; Of which
places says Calvin, Non disputat Philosophice David, de terrae situ; sed
populariter loquens, ad rudium captum se accommodat: 'Twas not David's intent to
speak philosophically concerning the Earths situation; but rather, by using a
popular phrase, to accommodate his speech unto the capacities of the ruder
people.

In this sense likewise, are we to understand all those places of Scripture,
wherein the coasts of Heaven are denominated from the relations of Before,
Behind, the right hand, or the left. Which do not imply (says Subtle.
Exercit. 67.
Scaliger) any absolute difference in such places, but are spoken merely in
reference to men's estimations, and the common opinion of those people, for whom
the Scriptures were first penned. Thus because it was the opinion of the Jewish
Rabbis, that man was created with his face to the East; therefore the Hebrew
word (...), signifies Ante, or the East; (...)* Post, or the West; (...),
Dextra, or the South; (...), Sinistra, or the North. You may see all of them
put together in that place of Job, Behold I go forward, and he is not there,
Job. 23. 8. 9.
and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand, where he does work,
but I cannot behold him. He hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot
see him. Which expressions, are by some interpreters referred unto the four
coasts of Heaven, according to the common use of those original words. From
hence it is, that many of the Ancients have concluded hell to be in the North,
which is signified by the left hand: unto which side our Savior tells us, Mat.
25. 33.
that the Goats shall be divided. Which opinion, likewise seems to be favored
by that place in Job, Job, 26. 6, 7.
where it is said, Hell is naked before God, and destruction has no covering.
And presently it is added, He stretched out the North over the empty place.
Upon these grounds, S. Jerome interprets that speech of the Preacher, Eccles.
11. 3. If the tree falls toward the South, or toward the North, in the place
where the tree falls, there shall it be. Concerning those who shall go either
to heaven or hell. And in this sense also does some expound that of Zachary,
14. 4 Where it is said, that the mount of Olives shall clear in the midst;
half of it shall remove toward the North, and half of it toward the South.
By which is intimated, that amongst those Gentiles, who shall take upon them
the profession of Christ, there are two sorts; Some that go to the North, that
is to Hell; and others to the South, that is to Heaven. And therefore it is
(say they) that God so Ier. 1. 14. 15. item ca. 4. 6. 6. 1.
often threatens evil out of the North; and upon this ground it is (says Li.
de not. popul. ca. 4.
Besoldus) that there is no Religion that worships that way. We read of the
Mahumetans, that they adore toward the South; the Jews toward the West;
Christians toward the East, but none to the North.

But of this only by the way. However, certain it is that the Holy Ghost does
frequently in Scripture set forth the several coasts of Heaven by those
relative terms of right hand and left hand, etc. which expressions do not
denote any real intrinsicall difference betwixt those places, but are rather
fitted for the apprehension of those men, from whose fancy it is that they have
such denominations. De Coelo, lib. 2 cap. 2.
And though Aristotle concludes these several positions to be natural unto
the Heavens, yet his authority in this particular is not available, because he
delivers it upon a wrong ground, supposing the Orbs to be living creatures, and
assisted with intelligences. We may observe, that the meaning of these coasts
by the relations of right hand and left hand, etc. is so far from having any
ground in the nature of those several places, that these relations are not
only variously applied unto them by diverse religions (as was said before,) but
also by diverse Arts and Professions. Thus because Astronomers make their
observations toward the South parts of the Horizon, where there be most Stars
that rise and set: therefore do they account the West to be at their right
hand, and the East their left. The Cosmographers in taking the latitude of
places, and reckoning their several climates must look toward the North
Pole; and therefore, in their phrase, by the right hand is meant the East; and
by the left hand, the West: and thus (says Plutarch, De placit. Philos. li. 2.
cap. 10.
are we to understand these expressions in Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle. The
Poets count the South to be toward the left, and the North the right hand.
Thus Lib. 3.
Lucan speaking of the Arabians coming unto Thessalie, says: Ignotum vobis
Arabes venistis in orbem:
Vmbras mirati nemorum, nonire sinistras.


The Augures taking their observations at the East, count the South to be at
their right hand, and the North their left: So that these denominations have
not any real ground in the nature of the things, but are imposed upon them by
the Scripture phrase, in reference to the account and opinion of the Jews.

Thus also, D. Hakwel. Apol. lib. 1. c. 1. sect. 2.
because heretofore it was generally received, that the Heart was the
principal seat of the Faculties; therefore does the Spirit apply himself unto
this common Tenent; and in many places, Prove. 8, 5. 10, 8.
attributes Wisdom and Understanding to the Heart. Whereas, to speak
properly, Eccles. 1. 13, 16, 17. and 8. 5.
the reason and discurfive Faculties have their principal residence in the
Head (says Galen and Hypocrates, together with the generality of our later
Physicians,) because they are hindered in their operations by the distempers of
that part, and recovered by medicines applied unto it.

So likewise are we to understand those other places: Isaiah, 59. 5. where
some translations read it, Ova Aspidum ruperunt, they have broken the Vipers
eggs; alluding to that common but fabulous story of the Viper, who breaks his
passage through the bowels of the female. So Psalm. 58. 4, 5. where the Prophet
speaks of the deaf Adder, that stops her ears against the voice of the
charmer. Both which relations (if we may believe many naturalists) are as false
as they are common: and yet because they were entertained with the general
opinion of those days, therefore does the holy Ghost vouchsafe to allude unto
them in Holy Writ. Vesta Trac. 3. cap. 3.
It Is a plain mistake of Fromondus, when in answer to these places, he is
feign to say, that they are used proverbially only, and do not positively
conclude any thing. For when David writes these words, that they are like the
deaf Adder which stops her ears, etc. This affirmation is manifestly
employed, That the deaf Adder does stop her ears against the voice of the
charmer: which because it is not true in the letter of it, (as was said before)
therefore it is very probable, that it should be interpreted in the same sense
wherein here it is cited.

In reference to this also, we are to conceive of those other expressions;
Cold comes out of the North, Job, 37. 9. and again, fair weather comes out
of the North, ver. 22. So ver. 17. thy garments are quieted when he warmeth the
Earth by the South wind. And Prove. 25. 23. The North wind drives away rain.
Which phrases do not contain in them any absolute general truth, but can so
far only be verified, as they are referred to general climates: and though
unto us who live on this side of the Line, the North wind be coldest and
driest; and on the contrary, the South wind moist and warm, by reason that in
one of these places there is a stronger heat of the Sun to exhale moist
vapors, than in the other: yet it is clean otherwise with the inhabitants
beyond the other Tropicke; for there the North wind is the hotest, and moist,
and the South the coldest and dry: So that with them, these Scriptures cannot
properly be affirmed, that cold or that fair weather comes out of the
North; but rather on the contrary. All which notwithstanding, does not in the
least manner derogate from the truth of these speeches, or the omnisciencie of
the speaker: but do rather show the Wisdom and Goodness of the blessed
Spirit, in vouchsafing thus to conform his Language unto the capacity of
those people unto whom these speeches were first directed. In the same sense
are we to understand all those places where the Lights of Heaven are said to be
darkened, Joel, 2. 31. Item c. 3. 15.
and the Constellations not to give their light, Isai. 13. 10. Not as if they
were absolutely in themselves deprived of their light, and did not shine at
all; but because of their appearance to us; and therefore, in another place
answerable to these, God says, he will cover the Heavens, and so make the
Stars thereof dark, Ezech. 37. 2. Which argues, that they themselves were
not deprived of this light (as those other speeches seem to imply) but we.

In reference to this likewise are we to conceive of those other expressions,
that the Moon shall blush, and the Sun be ashamed, Isai. 24. 23. That they
shall be turned into blood, Math. 24. 29. Not that these things shall be so in
themselves (says S. Jerome,) Comment. in Joel. ca. 3.
but because they shall appear so unto us. Thus also Mark, 13. 25. The
Stars shall from Heaven; that is, they shall be so wholly covered from our
sight, as if they were quite fallen from their wonted places. Or if this be
understood of their real Fall, as it may seem probable by that place in the
Revelations, 6. 13. And the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, even as a
Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs, when she is shaken by a mighty Wind:
then is it to be interpreted not of them that are truly Stars, but them that
appear so: alluding unto the opinion of the unskilful vulgar (says Comment,
in Isai. cap. 13. 5.
Sanctius) that think the Meteors to be Stars. And Comment. in Genesis c. 3.
ve. 10. art. 6.
Mersennus speaking of the same Scripture, says: Hoc de veris Stell is minime
volunt Interpretes intelligi. sed de Cometis and alijs ignitis Meteoris:
Interpreters do by no means understand this of true Stars, but of the Comets
and other fiery Meteors. Though the falling of these be a natural event, yet
may it be accounted a strange prodigy, as well as an Earthquake, and the
darkening of the Sun and Moon, which are mentioned in the verse before.

In reference to this, does the Scripture speak of some common natural
effects, as if their true causes were altogether inscrutable, and not to be
found out, because they were generally so esteemed by the vulgar. Thus of the
wind it is John, 3. 8.
said, That none know whence it comes nor whither it goes. In another Ier
10. 13, Item ca. 51. 16.
place God is said to bring it out of his treasures; and Job. 37. 10.
elsewhere it is called the (...)
breath of God; And so likewise of the thunder: Concerning which, Io. 26. 14.
Job proposes this question, The thunder of his power who can understand? and
therefore too Psalm 2. 9. 3, 4. etc.
David does so often style it, the voice of God. All which places seem to
imply, that the cause of these things was not to be discovered, which yet later
Philosophers pretend to know: so that according to their construction, these
phrases are to be understood in relation unto their ignorance unto whom these
speeches were immediately directed.

For this reason is it: Why, though there be in nature many other causes of
Springs and Rivers than the Sea, Eccles. 1. 7.
yet Solomon (who was a great Philosopher, and perhaps not ignorant of them)
does mention only this, because most obvious, and easily apprehended by the
vulgar. Job 9. 9. Item 38. 31.
Unto all these Scriptures, I might add that in Amos, 5. 8. which speaks of
the Constellation commonly called the seven Stars; whereas, later discoveries
have found that there are but six of them discernable to the bare eye, as
appears by Gallilaeus his glass: Vide Fromond. Mete. l. 3. 6. 1. ar. 1.
the seventh of them being but a deceit of the eye arising from their too
great neernes; and if a man try in a clear night to number them distinctly, he
shall find that there will sometimes appear but six, and some times more.

True indeed, the original word of this Scripture (...), does not necessarily
imply any such number in it is signification, but yet our English translation
renders it the seven Stars; and if it had been expressly so in the Original
too, it might have spoken true enough, because they are usually esteemed of
that number. And when it had been said, He made the seven Stars and Orion, we
might have easily understood the words thus: He made those Constellations that
are commonly known unto us under such names.

From all these Scriptures it is clearly manifest, that it is a frequent custom
for the Holy Ghost to speak of natural things, rather according to their
appearance and common opinion, than the truth it self. Now it is very plain,
and our enemies themselves do grant it, that if the World had bin framed
according to the Systeme of Copernicus, Fromond. Antar. c. 6.
futurum esset ut vulgus, de Solis motu and Terrae statu proinde ut nunc
loqueretur. The vulgar phrase would have been the same as now it is, when it
speaks of the Suns motion, and the Earth's standing still.

Wherefore it is not improbable, that such kind of Scripture expressions are to
be understood only in relation to outward appearances, and vulgar opinion.

PROP. IIII.
That diverse learned men have fallen into great absurdities, whilst they have
looked for the grounds of Philosophy from the words of Scripture.

IT has bin an ancient and common opinion amongst the Jews, that the Law of
Moses did contain in it, not only those things which concern our Religion and
Obedience, but every secret also that may possibly be known in any Art or
Science; Schickard. Bechin. Haperu. Disp. 5. number. 8.
so that there is not a demonstration in Geometry, or rule in Arithmeticke;
not a mystery in any trade, but it may be found out in the Pentateuch. Hence
it was (say they) that Solomon had all his wisdom and policy: Hence it was
that he did fetch his knowledge concerning the nature of Vegetables, from the
Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hysop that grows upon the wall. Nay from hence, they
thought a man might learn the art of Miracles, to remoove a Mountain, or
recover the dead. So strangely have the learneder sort of that Nation been
befooled, since their own curse has lighted upon them.

Not much unlike this foolish superstition of theirs, is that custom of many
Artists amongst us; who upon the invention of any new secret, will presently
find out some obscure text or other to father it upon; as if the Holy Ghost
must needs take notice of every particular, which their partial fancies did
over-vallue.

Nor are they altogether guiltless of this fault, who look for any secrets of
nature from the words of Scripture; or will examine all it is expressions by the
exact rules of Philosophy.

Unto what strange absurdities this false imagination of the learneder Jews
has exposed them, may be manifest by a great multitude of Examples. I will
mention only some few of them. Hence it is, that they prove the shin-bone of
Og the Giant to be above three leagues long; Schickard. ib. Disp. 6. number. 2.
Or (which is a more modest relation) that Moses being fourteen cubits in
stature, having a Spear ten Else in length, and leaping up ten cubits, could
touch this Giant but on the Ancle. All which, they can confirm unto you by a
Cabalisticall interpretation of this story, as it is set down in Scripture.
Hence it is, that they tell us of all those strange Beasts which shall be seen
at the coming of the Messiah; as first, the Ox, which Job calls Behemoth,
Buxtor. Synag. Judah. cap. 36.
that every day devoures the grass on a thousand mountains, as you may see it
in the Psa. 50. 10.
Psalm, where David mentions the cattle, or (...) upon a thousand hills. If
you ask how this Beast does to find pasture enough, they answer, that he
remains constantly in one place, where there is as much grass grows up in the
night, as was eaten in the day.

They tell us also of a Bird, which was of that quantity, that having upon a
time cast an egg out of her neast, there were beaten down by the fall of it,
three hundred of the tallest Cedars, and no less than threescore villages
drowned. As also of a Frog, as big as a Town capable of sixty houses; which
Frog, notwithstanding his greatness, was devoured by a Serpent, and that
Serpent by a Crow; which Crow as she was flying up to a Tree eclipsed the Sun,
and darkened the World; by which you may guess what a pretty twig that Tree
was. If you would know the proper name of this Bird, you may find it in Psalm.
50. 11. where it is called (...), Vide Parap. Chald.
or in our Translation, the Foul of the mountains. It seems it was somewhat of
kin to that other Bird they tell us of, whose legs were so long, that they
reached unto the bottom of that Sea where there had bin an axe head falling
for 7 years together, before it could come to the bottom.

Many other relations there are, which contain such horrible absurdities, that
a man cannot well conceive how they should proceed from reasonable creatures.
And all this arising from that wrong Principle of theirs; That Scripture did
exactly contain in it all kind of Truths; and that every meaning was true,
which by the Letter of it, or by Cabalisticall interpretations might be found
out.

Now as it has been with them, so likewise has it happened in proportion unto
others: who by a superstitious adhering unto the bare words of scripture, have
exposed themselves unto many strange errors. Thus Enarrat. in Genesis
S. Basil holds, That next to the Sun, the Moon is bigger than any of the
Stars, because Moses does call them only two great Lights.

Thus others maintain, That there are waters properly so called above the
starry Firmament, because of those vulgar expressions in Scripture, which in
their literal sense do mention them. Of this opinion were many of the
Ancients, Philo, Josephus; and since them the Fathers, Respons. ad ques. 93.
Orthod.
Justin Martyr, Que. 11. sup. Genesis
Theodoret, De Civ. Dei, lib. 11. cap. ult.
Austin, Hexam. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Ambrose, Homil. 3. in Genesis
Basil, and almost all the rest. Since them, sundry other learned men, as Beda,
Strabus, Damascen, Tho. Aquinas, etc. If you ask for what purpose they were
placed here, Justin Martyr tells us, for these two ends: First, to cool the
heat that might otherwise arise from the motion of the solid Orbs; and hence
it is (say they) that Saturn is colder than any of the other Planets, because
though he moove faster, yet he is nearer to these waters: secondly, to press
and keep down the Heavens, lest the frequencie and violence of winds might
break and scatter them asunder; which opinion, together with both it is
reasons, are now accounted absurd and rediculous.

De civit. dei, l. 16. c. 23
S. Austin concludes the visible Stars to be innumerable, because Scripture
phrases seem to imply as much.

That the Heavens are not round, was the opinion of Respon. ad quest. 93.
Justin Martyr, Hexam. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Ambrose, Homil. 14. in epist. ad Hebr.
Chrysostom, In ca. 8. Hebr.
Theodoret, In idem c.
Theophilact, doubted of by In Genesis ad lit. li. 1. c. 9. Item l. 2. c. 6
S. Austin and diverse others. Nay, S. Chrysostom was so confident of it, that
he proposes the question in a triumphant manner: (...). Where are those men
that can prove the Heavens to have a sphaericall Form. The reason of which
was this, Because it is said in one Scripture, that God stretched forth the
Heavens as a curtain, Psalm. 104. 2. and spreads them as a tent to dwell in,
Isai. 40. 22. And so in that place of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 8. 2. they
are called a Tent or Tabernacle: which because it is not sphaericall, therefore
they conclude also, that the Heavens are not of that Form; whereas now, the
contrary is as evident as demonstration can make a thing. And therefore, Lib 3.
Comment. in Galat. ca. 5.
S. Jerome in his time, speaking of the same error, gives it this plain
censure: Est in Ecclesia stulti loquium, si quis Coelum putet fornicis modo
curvatum, Esaiae quem non intelligit sermon deceptus. It Is foolish speaking in
the Church, if any through misapprehension of those words in Isaiah, shall
affirm the Heavens not to be round.

That the Seas not overflowing the land is a miracle, was the opinion of Homil.
4. Hexam.
Basil, Commen. in Ioh.
Chrysostom, In Psalm. 103.
Theodoret, Hexam. lib. 3. c. 2, 3.
Ambrose, Orat. 34.
Nazianzen, and since them, Aquinas part. 1. quest. 69* art. 1.
Aquinas, Commen. in Psalm. 24. Item in Ps. 136. 6.
Luther, d Calvin, * Marlorate, with sundry others. Which they prooved from
these Scripture expressions, that in Job 38. 8. 11. Who has shut up the Sea
with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb; when I
did break up for it my decreed place; and set bars and doors, and said,
hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall the pride of thy waves
be staid. So likewise, Prove. 8. 29. God gave to the Sea his decree, that the
Waters should not pass his commandment. And Ierem. 5. 22. I have placed the
sand for a bound of the Sea by a perpetual decree that they cannot pass it:
and though the waves thereof cross themselves, yet can they not prevail;
though they roar, yet can they not pass over, that they turn not again to
cover the Earth. In all which places (say they) it is implied, that the water of
it self, were it not withheld from it is own natural inclination by a more
special power of God, would overflow the Land.

Others infer the same conclusion with that in Ecclesiastes, where the rivers
are said to come from the Sea; which they could not do, unless that were
higher. I answer: They should as well consider the later part of that
Scripture, which says, that the Rivers return to that place from whence they
came, and then the force of this consequence will vanish. To this purpose, some
urge that speech of our Savior, where he bids Simon to launch forth into the
deep; Luke 5. 4. (...).
the Latin word is, in altum; from whence, they gather that the Sea is higher
than the Land. But this savours so much of Monkish ignorance, that it deserves
rather to be laughed at, than to be answered.

But now if we consider the true properties of this Element, according to the
rules of Philosophy: we shall find, that it is not overflowing the Land is so
far from being a miracle, that it is a necessary consequence of it is nature;
and 'twould rather be a miracle, if it should be otherwise, as it was in the
general deluge. The reason is, because the water of it self must necessarily
descend to the lowest place; which it cannot do, unless it be collected in a
sphaericall Form, as you may plainly discern in this Figure.



Where the Sea at D. may seem to be higher than a mountain at B, or C.
because the rising of it in the midst does so intercept our sight from either
of those places, that we cannot look in a straight line, from the one to the
other. So that it may seem to be no less than a miracle, by which the sea
(being a heavy body) was withheld from flowing down to those lower places of B,
or C. But now, if you consider that the ascending of a body is it is motion from
the center, and descent is it is approaching unto it: you shall find* that for
the Sea to moove from D. to B* or C. is a motion of Ascent, which is contrary
to it is nature, because the mountain at B, or C. are farther off from the
center, than the Sea at D. the Lines A, B. and A, C. being longer than the
other A, D. So that for the Sun to keep always in it is channel, is but
agreeable to it is nature, as being a heavy body. But the meaning of those
Scriptures, is, to set forth the power and wisdom of God: who has appointed
these channels for it, and beset it with such strong banks to withstand the
fury of it is waves. Or if these men do so much rely on natural points, upon
the bare words of Scripture, they might easily be confuted from those other
places, where God is said to have founded the Earth upon the Seas, and
established it upon the Floods. From the literal interpretation of which, many
of the Ancients have fallen into another error: affirming the Water to be in
the lower place; and as a basis, whereon the weight of the Earth was borne up.
Of this opinion were Recog. 8.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Orat. con^. Idolos.
Athanasius, In Psalm. 136. 6.
Hillarie, Ia Ps. 24.
Eusebius, and others. So that it seems, if a man should resolutely adhere to
the bare words of the scripture, he might find contradiction in it: of which,
the natural meaning is altogether incapable. Comment. in Isai. l. 13.
S. Jerome tells us of some who would prove Stars to have understanding,
from that place in Isaiah, 45. 13. My hands have stretched out the Heavens, and
all their host have I commanded. Now (say they) none but intelligent creatures
are capable of Precepts; and therefore, the Stars must needs have rational
Souls. Of this opinion was De plant. Noe.
Philo the Jew: nay, many of the Rabbis conclude, that they do every hour
sing praises unto God with an audible real voice. Tostatus in Josh. cap. 10.
quest. 13, 14.
Because of that in Job 38. 7. which speaks of the Morning Stars singing
together. And Psalm. 19. 3, 4. where it is said of the Heavens, that there is no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard, and their words are gone to
the ends of the World. And whereas we translate that place in the tenth of
Iosuah, concerning the standing still of the Heavens: the original Word, (...)
does properly signify Silence, and according to their opinion, Iosuah did
only bid them hold their peace. From such grounds, it is likely did Tom. 1. in
Johan.
Origin fetch his opinion, that the Stars should be saved. I might set down
many other the like instances, were it not for being already weary of raking
into the errors of antiquity, or uncovering the nakedness of our
Forefathers. That excuse of De not. novi orbis, lib. 1. cap. 2.
Acosta may justly serve to mitigate the mistakes of these ancient Divines:
Facile condonandum est patribus, si cum cognoscendo colendoque Creatoritoti
vacarent, de creatura minus apt aliqua ex part opinati sunt. Those good men
were so wholly busied about the knowledge and worship of the Creator, that they
had not leisure enough for an exact search into the Essence of the Creatures.
However, these examples that have been already cited, may sufficiently
manifest, how frequently others have been deceived, in concluding the points of
Philosophy from the expressions of Scripture. And therefore, it is not certain,
but that in the present case also, it may be insufficient for such a manner of
arguing.

PROP. V.
That the Scripture in it is proper construction, does not any where affirm the
Immobilitie of the Earth.

THe same answer which was insisted on before, concerning the conformity of
Scripture expressions to men's capacity and common opinion, may well enough
satisfy all those other Arguments, which seem thence to affirm the Earth's
setlednesse and Immobilitie; since this is as well agreeable to outward
appearance and vulgar apprehension as the other. But now for more full
satisfaction, I shall set down the particular places that are urged for it;
which being thoroughly examined, we may plainly discern, that none of them in
their proper meaning, will serve to infer any such conclusion.

One of these sayings is that of the Preacher, Eccles. 1. 4. One generation
comes, and another passes, but the Earth endures for ever; where the
original word is, (...) and the vulgar, stat; from whence our Vallesius Sacra
Phil. cap. 62.
adversaries conclude that it is immooveable.

I answer: Fuller, Miscell. l. 1. c. 15. Pineda Comment. in locum.
the meaning of the word as it is here applied, is permanet; or as we translate
it, endures. For it is not the purpose of this place to deny all kind of
motion to the whole Earth: but that of generation and corruption, to which
other things in it are liable. And though Pineda, and others, keep a great
deal of impertinent stir about this Scripture, yet they grant this to be the
natural meaning of it: which you may more clearly discern, if you consider
the chief scope of this Book; wherein the Preachers intent is, to show the
extraordinary vanity of all earthly contentments, ver. 2. the utter
unprofitablenesse of all a man's labors, ver. 3. and this he illustrates by
the shortness and uncertaintie of his life; in which respect, he is below many
of his fellow creatures, as may be manifested from these four comparisons.

1 From the Earth, which though it seem to be but as the sediment of the World,
as the rubbish of the Creation; yet is this better than man in respect of his
lastingnesse, for one generation passes away, and another comes; but the
Earth, that abides for ever, ver. 4.

2 From the Sun; who, though he seem frequently to go down, yet he
constantly seems to rise again; and shines with the same glory, ver. 5. But
man dies and wastes away; Job, 14. 10. 12.
yea, man gives up the ghost, and where is he? he lies down, and rises not
till the Heavens be no more.

3 From the wind, the common emblem of uncertaintie; yet it is more constant
than man, for that knows it is circuits, and whirleth about continually, v. 6.
whereas our life passes away as does the wind, Psalm. 78. 39.
but returns not again.

4 From the Sea; though it be as uncertain as the Moon, by whom it is
governed, yet is it more durable than man and his happiness. For though the
Rivers run into it, and from it, yet is it still of the same quantity that
it was at the beginning, v. 7. But man grows worser as he grows older, and
still nearer to a decay. So that in this respect, he is much inferior to many
other of his fellow creatures.

From whence it is manifest; that this constancy or standing of the Earth, is
not opposed to it is local motion, but to the changing or passing away of
diverse men in their several generations. And therefore, thence to conclude the
earth's Immobilitie, were as weak and ridiculous, M. Carpenters Geog. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
as if one should argue thus: One Miller goes, and another comes, but the Mill
remains still; ergo, the Mill has no motion.

Or thus; one Pilate goes, and another comes, but the Ship remains still;
ergo, the Ship does not stir.

Perplex. li. 2. cap. 29.
R. Moses tells us, how that many of the Jews did from this place conclude,
that Solomon thought the Earth to be Eternal, because he says it abides
(...) forever; and questionles, if we examine it impartially, we shall find that
the phrase seems more to favor this absurdity, than that which our
adversaries would collect from hence; that it is without motion.

But M. Fuller urging this text against Copernicus; tells us, if any should
interpret these phrases, concerning the Earth's standing still, ve. 4. and the
Suns motion, ver. 5. in reference only to appearance and common opinion; he
must necessarily also understand those two other verses, which mention the
motion of the wind and rivers in the same sense. As if he should say; because
some things appear otherwise than they are, therefore every thing is otherwise
than it appears; or, because Scripture speaks of some natural things, as
they are esteemed according to man's false conceit; therefore it is necessary,
that every natural thing mentioned in Scripture, must be interpreted in the
like sense: or, because in one place, we read of the ends of a Staff, 1
Kings, 8. 8. and in many other places of the ends of the Earth, and the ends of
Heaven: Therefore the earth and heavens have as properly ends as a Staff. It Is
the very same consequence of that in the objection. Because in this place of
Ecclesiastes, we read of the rest of the Earth, and the motion of the Sun;
therefore, these phrases must needs be understood in the same proper
construction as those afterward, where motion was attributed to the Wind and
Rivers. Which inference you see is so weak, that the Objector need not triumph
so much in it is strength as he does.

Another proof like unto this, is taken from S. Peter, epist. 2. cap. 3. ver.
5. where he speaks of the Earth standing out of the water, and in the water,
(...); and therefore, the Earth is immooveable.

I answer: it is evident that the word here is equivolent with fuit: and the
scope of the Apostle is, to show that God made all the Earth: both that which
was above the water, and that which was under it. So that from this expression,
to collect the rest and immobilitie of the Earth, would be such an argument as
this other. Such a man made that part of a Mill-wheele, or a Ship, which stands
below the water, and that part which stands above the water: therefore those
things are immoovable.

To such vain and idle consequences does the heat of opposition drive our
adversaries.

A third Argument stronger than either of the former, they conceive may may be
collected from those 1. Chron. 16. 30.
scriptures: where it is said, Psalm. 93. 1. Item 96. 10.
The World is established, that it cannot be moved.

To which, I answer: These places speak of the World in general, and not
particularly of our Earth; and therefore may as well prove the immobility of
the Heavens, they being the greatest pert of the World; in comparison to which,
our Earth is but as an insensible point.

If you reply, that the word in these places is to be understood by a
Synechdoche, as being meant only of this habitable World, the Earth.

I answer: First, this is only said, not prooved: secondly, David but a little
before seems to make a difference between the World and the Earth, Psalm. 90. 2.
where he says, Before thou had formed the Earth and the World. But thir^^,
in another place, there is the same original word applied expressly to the
Heavens; and which is yet more, the same place does likewise mention this
supposed setlednesse of the Earth, Prove. 3. 19. The Lord by wisdom has
founded the Earth: and by understanding has he established the Heavens. So
that these places can no more prove an immobilitie in the Earth than in the
Heavens.

If you yet reply, That by the Heavens there is meant the seat of the Blessed,
which does not moove with the rest.

I answer: though by such an evasion a man might possibly avoid the force of
this place: yet, first, it is but a groundless shift, because then, that verse
will not contain a full enumeration of the parts in the World, as may seem
more agreeable to the intention of it: but only show, that God created this
Earth where we live, and the Heaven of Heavens. So that the Heaven of the
Stars and Planets, shall be shifted out from the number of the other
creature: secondly, there is another place which cannot be so avoided, LIB. 2.
Cap. 5.
Psalm. 89. 37. where the Psalmist uses this expression, (...) It shall be
established as the Moon. So Psalm. 8. 3. The Moon and the Stars, (...) which
thou have established. Thus likewise, Prove. 8. 27. when he established the
Heavens: and in the next verse, our English translation reads it, when he
established the clouds. And yet our adversaries will affirm the Moon, and
Stars, and Clouds, to be subject unto natural motions: why then should the
very same expressions be counted as sufficient Arguments to take it away from
the Earth.

If it be replied, That by establishing the Heavens, is meant only the holding
of them up, that they do not fall down to us (as Lorinus explaines that in
the eighth Psalm: Lorinus Comment. in Psalm. 8.
and quotes Euthymius for the same interpretation,) fundandi verbum significat
decidere non posse, aut dimoteri a loco vbi collecti sunt: I answer, why may
not we as well interpret the words thus of the Earth: so that by establishing
of it, is meant only the keeping of it up in the vast places of the open air,
without falling to any other place.

From hence it is plain, That these Scriptures are to be understood of such an
immobilitie in the Earth, as may likewise agree with the Heavens: the same
original word being so promiscuously applied to both.

I but (you will say) there are some other places which do more peculiarly apply
this setlednesse and establishment to the Earth. So Psalm. 119. 9. Thy
faithfulness is unto all generations: thou have established the Earth, and it
abides. Thus likewise, Psalm. 104. 5. Who laid the foundations of the Earth,
that it should not be removed for ever. The later of which, being well weighed
in it is original (says M. Fuller) does in three emphaticall words strongly
conclude the Earth's immobility. Miscel. lib. 1. cap. 15.


As first, when he says, (...) fundavit, he has founded it: wherein it is
employed, that it does not change his place. To which may be added all those
Texts, which so frequently speak of the foundations of the Earth; as also that
expression of the Psalmist, where he mentions the Pillars of the Earth, Psalm.
75. 3.

The second word is (...) translated Basis; and by the Septuagint, (...); that
is, he has founded it upon it is own firmness: and therefore it is
altogether without motion.

The third expression is (...) from the root, (...) which signifies, declinare;
implying, that it could not wagge with the least kind of declination.

To these I answer severally:

First, for the word, (...) fundavit, It cannot be understood properly, as if
the natural Frame of the Earth, like other artificial buildings, did need any
bottom to uphold it; for he hangs the Earth upon nothing, Job. 26. 7. But it
is a Metaphor, and signifies Gods placing or scituating this Globe of Land and
Water. As David tells us of the Pillars of the Earth: so Job mentions Pillars
of the Heavens, Job, 26. 11. And yet that will not prove them to be immovable.

True indeed, we read often concerning the foundations of the Earth: but so
we do likewise of the ends, sides, and corners of the Earth; and yet these
Scriptures will not prove it to be of a long or square form. Besides, we
read also of the Foundations of Heaven, (...) 2. Sam. 22. 8. And yet we must
not hence infer, that they are without all motion; As also of the planting of
the Heavens, Isai. 51. 6. which may as well prove them to be immoovable, as
that which follows in the same verse concerning the foundations of the Earth.

Which phrase (as I have observed right) in several places of Scripture, is to
be understood according to these three interpretations.

1 It is taken sometimes for the lower parts of the Earth, as appears by that
place, So Ps. 18. 15.
2. Sam. 22. 16. The channels of the Sea appeared, the foundations of the World
were discovered.

2 Sometimes for the beginning and first creation of it, Isa. 40. 2. Has it not
been told you from the beginning, have ye not understood from the foundations
of the Earth. And in many other places, John 17. 24. Ephesians. 1. 4.
Before the Foundations of the World was laid; that is, before the first
creation.

Sometimes it signifies the Magistrates and chief Governors of the Earth. So
many interpret that place in Micah, 6. 2. where it is said, Hear O ye
mountains the Lords controversy, and ye strong foundations of the Earth. So
Psalm. 82. 5. The foundations of the Earth are out of course; and in Sam. 2. 8.
they are called pillars. For the Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he
has set the World upon them. Hence it is, that the Hebrews derive their word
for Master, or Lord: from a root which signifies a Basis or bottom, (...).
Etimol. mag
And the Greek word for King, does in it is Primitives import as much as the
Foundation of the people, (...). But now, none of all the several
interpretation of this phrase, will in the least manner conduce to the
confirmation of the present Argument.

As for the second word, (...) Basis ejus: I answer, the proper signification
of it, is locus dispositus, seeds, or statio, an appointed seat or station; and
according to this sense, is it most frequently used in Scripture. And
therefore, the Heavens are sometimes called, (...) the seat of Gods habitation.
And for this reason likewise, do Aquila and Symmachus translate it by the word
(...), a seat or appointed situation, which may as well be attributed to the
Heavens.

The third expression is (...) that it should not be moved from the Primitive
(...) which does not signify barely to move; but declinare, or vacillare, to
decline or slip aside from it is usual course. Thus is it used by David, Ps. 17.
5. where he prays, Hold up my goings in thy paths, (...) That my footsteps
slide not* He does not mean that his feet should not move. So Psalm. 121. 3. He
will not suffer thy foot to be moved. Thus likewise, Psalm. 16. 8. Because the
Lord is at my right hand, I shall not be moved: which last place is translated
in the new Testament by the Greek word (...), Acts 2. 25.
which signifies fluctuare, or vacillare, to be shaken by such an uncertain
motion as the waves of the Sea. Now as David's feet may have their usual
motion, and yet in this sense be said not to move, that is, not to decline or
slip aside: so neither can the same phrase applied to the Earth, prove it to be
immovable.

Nor do I see any reason, why that of Didacus Astunica may not be truly
affirmed, Comment. in Job.
That we may prove the natural motion of the Earth, from that place in Job,
9. 6. Qui commovet terram e loco suo, as well as it is rest and immobilitie from
these.

From all which, it is very evident, that each of these expressions, concerning
the founding or establishing both of Heaven or Earth, were not intended to show
the unmovablenesse of either, but rather, to manifest the power and wisdom of
Providence, who had so settled these parts of the World in their proper
scituations, that no natural cause could displace them, or make them decline
from their appointed course. As for such who do utterly dislike all new
interpretation of Scripture, even in such matters as do merely concern
opinion, and are not fundamental: I would only propose unto them a speech of
S. Hierome, concerning some that were of the same mind in his time. Cur novas
semper expetant voluptates, and vulgae eorum vicina Maria non sufficiant, cur
in solo studio Scripturarum, veteri sapore contenti sunt.

Thus have I in some measure cleared the chief Arguments from Scripture,
against this opinion. For which notwithstanding, I have not thence cited any:
because I conceive the Holy Writ, being chiefly intended to inform us of such
things as concern our faith and obedience: we cannot thence take any proper
proof for the confirmation of Natural Secrets.

PROP. VI.
That there is not any Argument from the words of Scripture, principles of
Nature, or observations in Astronomy, which can sufficiently evidence the Earth
to be in the center of the Universe.

Our adversaries do much insult in the strength of those Arguments which they
conceive; do unanswerably conclude, the Earth to be in the center of the
World. Whereas, if they were but impartially considered, they would be found
altogether insufficient for any such conclusion, as shall be clearly manifested
in this following Chapter.

The Arguments which they urge in the proof of this, are of three sorts;
Either such as are taken,

1 From expressions of Scripture.

2 From principles of natural Philosophy. LIB. 2. Cap. 6.


3 From common appearances in Astronomy.

Those of the first kind are chiefly two: The first is grounded on that common
Scripture phrase, which speaks of the Sun, as being above us. So Solomon
often mentioning humane affairs, calls them, Eccles. 1. 14, etc.
the works which are done under the Sun. From whence it appears that the
Earth is below it; and therefore, nearer to the center of the Universe, than
the Sun.

I answer: Though the Sun in comparison to the absolute frame of the World, be
in the midst; yet this does not hinder, but that in respect to our Earth, he
may be truly said to be above it, because we usually measure the height or
lowness of every thing, by it is being further off, or nearer unto this center
of our Earth. From which, since the Sun is so remote, it may properly be
affirmed, that we are under it; though notwithstanding that be in the center
of the World.

A second Argument of the same kind, is urged by Fromundus.

It Is requisite, Antar. c. 12. item Vesta. tract 5. c. 2.
that Hell (which is in the center of the Earth) should be most remotely
situated from the seat of the Blessed. But now this Heaven, which is the seat
of the Blessed, is concentricall to the starry Sphaere. And therefore it will
follow, that our Earth must be in the midst of this Sphaere; and so
consequently, in the center of the World.

I answer: This Argument is grounded upon these uncertainties;

1 That Hell must needs be situated in the center of our Earth.

2 That the heaven of the Blessed, must needs be concentricall to that of the
Stars.

3 That places must be as far distant in situation as in use:

Which because they are taken for granted, without any proof, and are in
themselves but weak and doubtful: therefore the conclusion (which always
follows the worser part) cannot be strong, and so will not need any other
answer.

The second sort of Arguments taken from natural Philosophy, are principally
these three:

1 First, Arg. 1.
from the vileness of our Earth, because it consists of a more for did and
base matter than any other part of the World; and therefore, must be situated
in the center, which is the worst place, and at the greatest distance from
those purer incortuptible bodies, the Heavens.

I answer: This Argument does suppose such propositions for grounds, which are
not yet prooved; and therefore not to be granted. As,

1 That bodies must be as far distant in place, as in Nobility.

2 That the Earth is a more ignoble substance than any of the other Planets,
consisting of a more base and vile matter.

3 That the center is the worst place.

All which, are (if not evidently false) yet very uncettaine.

2 From the nature of the center; Arg. 2.
which is the place of rest, and such as in all circular motions, is it is self
immooveable. And theresore will be the fittest situation for the Earth; which
by reason of it is heaviness, is naturally unfit for motion.

I answer: This Argument likewise is grounded upon these two foolish
foundations; As,

1 That the whole Frame of Nature does moove round, excepting only the Earth.

2 That the whole Earth, considered in it is whole, and in it is proper place, is
heavy; or more unfit for a natural motion, than any of the other Planets.

Which are so far from being such general grounds, from which contro.
versies should be discussed, That they are the very thing in question betwixt
us and our adversaries.

3 From the nature of all heavy bodies, Arg. 3.
which is to fall toward the lowest place. From whence they conclude, that our
Earth must be in the center.

I answer: This may prove it to be a center of gravitie, but not of distance;
or that it is in the midst of the World. Yea (but say our adversaries)
Aristotle for this urges a demonstration, which must needs be infallible. Thus,
the motion of light bodies, does apparently tend upward toward the
circumference of the World: but now the motion of heavy bodies, is directly
contrary to the ascent of the other; wherefore it will necessarily follow, that
these do all of them tend unto the center of the World.

I answer: Though Aristotle were a Master in the art of Syllogismes, and he
from whom we received the rules of disputation; yet in this particular, it is
very plain that he was deceived with a fallacy, whilst his Argument does
suppose that which it does pretend to prove.

That light bodies do ascend unto some circumference which is higher and above
the Earth, is plain and undeniable. But that this circumference is the same
with that of the World, or concentricall unto it, cannot be reasonably
affirmed, unless he suppose the earth to be in the center of the Universe,
which is the thing to be prooved.

I would fain know from what grounds our adversaries can prove, that the
descent of heavy bodies is to the center; or the ascent of light bodies, to the
circumference of the World. The utmost experience we can have in this kind,
does but extend to those things that are upon our Earth, or in the air above
it. And alas, what is this unto the vaste frame of the whole Universe? but
punctulum, such an insensible point, which does not bear so great a proportion
to the whole, as a small sand does unto the Earth. Wherefore it were a
senseless thing, from our experience of so little a part, to pronounce any
thing infallibly concerning the situation of the whole. The Arguments from
Astronomy, are chiefly these four; each of which, are boasted of to be
unanswerable.

1 The Horizon does every where divide all the great circles of a Sphaere into
two equal parts: Arg. 1.
So there is always half the Equinoctial above it, and half below. Thus
likewise, there will constantly be six signs of the Zodiac above the Horizon,
and other six below it. And besides, the circles of the Heaven and Earth, are
each way proportionable to one another: as fifteen Germane miles on the Earth,
are every where agreeable to one degree in the Heavens; and one hour in the
Earth, is correspondent to fifteen degrees in the Equator. From whence it may
be inferred, that the Earth must necessarily be situated in the midst of
these circles; and so consequently, in the center of the World.

I answer: This Argument does rightly prove the Earth to be in the midst of
these circles: but we cannot hence conclude, that it is in the center of the
World: from which, though it were never so much distant, yet would it still
remain in the midst of those circles, because it is the eye that imagines them
to be described about it. Wherefore it were a weak and preposterous
collection, to argue thus, That the Earth is in the center of the World;
because in the midst of those circles; or because the parts and degrees of the
Earth, are answerable in proportion, to the parts and degrees in Heaven.
Whereas, it follows rather on the contrary, That these circles are equally
distant and proportional in their parts; in respect of the Earth, because it
is our eye that describes them about the center of it.

So that though a far greater part of the world did appear at one time than
at another; yet in respect of those circles which our eye describes about the
Earth, all that we could see at once, would seem to be but a perfect
Haemisphere: As may be manifested by this following Figure.



Where if we suppose A. to be our Earth, B. C. D. E. one of the great circles
which we fancy about it, F. G. H. I. the orb of fixed Stars, R. the center
of them. Now though the Arc, G. F. I. be bigger than the other, G. H. I. yet
yet notwithstanding, to the eye on the Earth, A. one will appear a semicircle,
as well as the other; because the imagination does transfer all those Stars
into the lesser circle, B. C. D. E. which it does fancy to be described above
that center. Nay, though there were a habitable Earth, at a far greater
distance from the center of the world, even in the place of Jupiter, as suppose
at Q. yet then also would there be the same appearance. For though the Arc,
K. F. L. in the starry heaven, were twice as big as the other, K. H. L. yet
notwithstanding at the Earth, Q. they would both appear but as equal
Hemispheres, being transferred into that other circle, M. N. O. P. which is
part of the Sphaere that the eye describes to it self above the Earth.

From whence we may plainly discern, That though the Earth be never so far
distant from the center of the World; yet the parts and degrees of that
imaginary Sphaere about it, will always be proportional to the parts and
degrees of the Earth.

2 Another demonstration like unto this former, Arg. 2.
frequently urged to the same purpose, is this: If the Earth be out of the
center of the World, then must it be situated in these three positions: either
in the Equator, Vid. Carp. Geog. l. 1. c. 5.
but out of the Axis; or secondly, in the Axis, but out of the Equator; or
thirdly, besides both of them. But it is not placed according to any of these
scituations; therefore must it needs be in the center.

1 It Is not in the Equator, and beside the Axis. For then, first, there will
be no Equinox at all in some places, when the days and nights shall be of an
equal length: secondly, the afternoones and forenoones will not be of the
same length; because, then our Meridian Line must divide the Hemisphaere into
unequal parts.

2 It Is not in the Axis, but out of the Equator; for then, first, the Equinox
would not happen when the Sun was in the middle line betwixt the two
Solstices, but in some other parallel, which might be nearer to one of them,
according as the earth did approach to one Tropicke more than another.
Secondly, there would not be such a proportion between the increase and
decrease of days and nights, as now there is.

3 It Is not besides both of them: For then, all these inconveniences, and
sundry others must with the same necessity of consequence be inferred. From
whence it will follow, That the Earth must be situated there, where the Axis
and Equator meet, which is in the center of the World.

To this we grant, that the Earth must needs be placed both in the Axis and
Equator; and so consequently, in the center of that sphaere which we imagine
about it: But yet this will not prove, that it is in the midst of the Universe.
For let our adversaries suppose it to be as far distant from that, as they
conceive the Sun to be; yet may it still be situated in the very concourse of
these two Lines: because the Axis of the World is nothing else but that
imaginary Line which passes through the Poles of our Earth, to the Poles of the
World. And so likewise the Equator, is nothing else but a great circle in the
midst of the Earth, betwixt both the Poles, which by imagination is continued
even to the fixed Stars. Thus also, we may affirm the Earth to be in the
plane of the Zodiac, if by it is annual motion it did describe that
imaginary circle: and in the plane of the Equator, if by it is diurnall motion
about it is own Axis, it did make several paralels, the midst of which should
be the Equator. From whence it appears, that these two former Arguments
proceed from one and the same mistake, whilst our adversaries suppose the
circumference and center of the Sphaere, to be the same with that of the World.

Another demonstration of the same kind, Arg. 3.
is taken from the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon; which would not always
happen when these two Luminaries are diametrically opposed, but sometimes times
when they are less distant than a semicircle, if it were so, that the Earth
were not in the center.

I answer: This Argument, if well considered, will be found most directly to
infer this conclusion, That in all Eclipses, the Earth is in such a strait
Line (betwixt the two Luminaries,) whose extremities do point unto opposite
parts of the Zodiac. Now though our adversaries should suppose (as Copernicus
does) the Earth to be situated in that which they would have to be the Suns
Orb; yet would there not be any Eclipse, but when the Sun and Moon were
diametrically opposite, and our Earth betwixt them: As may clearly be
manifested by this Figure, where you see the two Luminaries in opposite Signs:
and according as any part of our Earth is situated by it is diurnall
revolution, so will every Eclipse be either visible, or not visible unto it.



The last and chief Argument, is taken from the appearance af the Stars;
which in every Horizon, Arg. 4.
at each hour of the night, Arist. de coe. lo. li. 2. c. 14.
and at all times of the year, seem of an equal bigness. Now this could not
be, if our Earth were sometimes nearer unto them by 2000000 Germane miles,
which is granted to be the diameter of that Orb, wherein the Earth is
supposed to move.

I answer: this consequence will not hold, if we affirm the Earth's Orb not
to be big enough for the making of any sensible difference in the appearance of
the fixed Stars. Copern. li. 1. cap. 5, 6.


Yea, but (you will say) it is beyond conceit, and without all reason, to think
the fixed Stars of so vast a distance from us, that our approaching nearer
unto them by 2000000 Germane miles, cannot make any difference in the seeming
quantity of their bodies.

I reply: There is no certain way to find out the exact distance of the starry
Firmament: but we are fain to conclude of it by conjectures, according as
several reasons and observations seem most likely unto the fancies of diverse
men. Now that this opinion of Copernicus does not make it too big, may be
discerned from these following considerations.

The Worlds great and little, are relative terms, and do import a comparison
to something else: So that where the Firmament (as it is according to
Copernicus) is said to be too big; it is likely, that this word is to be
understood in reference to some other thing of the same kind, the least of
which, is the Moons Orb: but now if it is being so much bigger than this may
be a sufficient reason, why it should be thought too great, then it seems
that every thing which exceeds another of the same kind, in such a proportion,
may be concluded to be of too big a quantity: and so consequently, we may
affirm, that there is no such thing in the World. And hence it will follow,
that Whales and Elephants are mere Chimaera's, and poetical fictions, because
they do so much exceed many other living creatures. If all this eighth sphaere
(says Gallilaeus) as great as it is, were a light body, and placed so far
from us that it appeared but as one of the lesser Stars, we should then
esteem it but little; and therefore, we have no reason now to thrust it out
from being amongst the works of nature, by reason of it is too great immensitie.
It Is a frequent speech of our adversaries, Tycho, Fromundus, and others, in
excuse of that incredible swiftness which they imagine in their primum mobile,
That 'twas requisite the motion of the Heavens should have a kind of infinity
in it, the better to manifest the infiniteness of the Creator. And why may not
we as well affirm this concerning the bigness of the Heavens? Difficilius est
accidens praeter modulum subjecti intendere, quam subjectum sine accidente
augere (says Keplar.) His meaning is, that it is less absurd to imagine the
eighth Sphaere of so vast a bigness, as long as it is without motion, or at
least, has but a very slow one: than to attribute unto it such an incredible
celeritie, as is altogether disproportionable to it is bigness.

2 It Is the acknowledgement of Clavius, Comment. in Sphaer. cap. 1.
and might easily be demonstrated, That if the center were fastened upon the
Pole of the World, the Orb wherein he supposes the Sun to move, would not be
able to reach so far in the eighth Sphaere (being considered according to
Ptolomies Hypothesis) as to touch the Pole-starre: which notwithstanding (says
he) is so near the Pole it self, that we can scarce discern it to move:
Nay, that circle which the Polestarre makes about the Pole, is above four
times bigger than the Orb of the Sun. So that according to the opinion of
our adversaries, though our Earth were at that distance from the center, as
they suppose the Sun to be, yet would not this eccentricitie make it nearer
to any one part of the Firmament, than the Pole-starre is to the Pole, which
according to his confession, is scarce sensible. And therefore according to
their opinion, it would cause very little difference in the appearance of those
Stars, the biggest of which does not seem to be of above five cubits in it is
diameter.

3 It Is considerable, That the sphaeres of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, are
according to the general opinion, of very great extension; and yet each of
them is appointed only to carry about it is particular Planet, which are but
very little in comparison of the fixed Stars. Now if for the situation of
these fixed Stars, there should be allotted a proportionable part of the
World, it is certain, that their Orb must be far bigger than it is commonly
supposed, and very near to this opinion of Copernicus.

4 We usually judge the bigness of the higher Orbs, by their different
motions. As because Saturn finishes his course in thirty years, and Jupiter
in twelve, therefore we attribute unto those Orbs such a different proportion
in their bigness. Now if by this rule we would find out the quantity of the
eighth Sphaere, we shall discern it to be far nearer unto that bigness,
which Copernicus supposes it to have, than that which Ptolomy, Tycho, and
others, ordinarily ascribe unto it. For the starry Heaven (say they) does not
finish his course under 26000 years; whereas Saturn, which is next unto it,
does compass his Orb in thirty years. From whence it will probably follow,
that there is a very great distance betwixt these in place, because they have
such different terms of their revolutions.

But against this answer: unto the last Argument, our adversaries thus reply:

1 If the fixed Stars be so far distant from us, Fromond. Vesta. tract. 5.
cap. 1.
that our approaching nearer unto them by 2000000 Germane miles, do not make
any sensible difference in their appearance, then Gallilaeus his perspective
could not make them seem of a bigger Form, than they do to the bare eye,
which yet is contrary to common experience.

2 From hence it may be inferred, Ibid.
That the least fixed Star is bigger than all this Orb wherein we suppose the
Earth to move; because there is none of them but are of a sensible bigness in
respect of the Firmament, whereas, this it seems is not.

3 Since God did at first create the Stars for the use of all nations that
are under the wholeheavens, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Ibid.
it might have argued some improvidence in him, if he had made them of such
vast magnitudes: whereas they might as well bestow their light and influences,
and so consequently be as serviceable to that end for which they were
appointed, if they had been made with less bodies, and placed nearer unto us.
And it is a common maxim, that nature in all her operations, does avoid
superfluities, and use the most compendious way.

I answer:

1 To the first, whether the perspective do make the fixed Stars appear
bigger than they do to the bare eye, cannot certainly be concluded, unless we
had such an exact glass, by which we might try the experiment. But if in
this kind we will trust the authority of others, Astron. Copern. lib. 4. par.
1.
Keplar tells us from the experience of skillful men, that the better the
perspective is, by so much the less will the fixed Stars appear through it,
being but as mere points from which the beams of light do disperse themselves
like hairs. And it is commonly affirmed by others, that the Dog-starre; which
seems to be the biggest Star amongst those of the first magnitude, does yet
appear through this glass but as a little point no bigger than the fiftieth
part of Jupiter. Hence it is, that though the common opinion hold the Stars
of the first magnitude to be two minutes in their diameter, and Tycho three,
yet System. mundi, C^ll. 3.
Gallilaeus, who has bin most versed in the experiments of his own
perspective, concludes them to be but five seconds.

2 To the second: First we affirm, the fixed Stars to be of a vaste
magnitude. But however, this Argument does not induce any necessity that we
should conceive them so big as the earth's Orb. For it might easily be
prooved, that though a Star of the sixth magnitude were but equal in
diameter unto the Sun (which is far enough from the greatness of the
Earth's Orb) yet the starry heaven would be at such a distance from us, that
the Earth's annual motion could not cause any difference in it is appearance.

Suppose the diameter of the Sun to be about half a degree, Vide Galil. ibid.
as our adversaries grant; whereas a Star of the sixth magnitude is fifty
thirds, which is comprehended in that of the Sun 2160 times. Now if the Sun
were removed so far from us, that it is diameter would seem but as one of that
number whereof it now contains 2160, then must his distance from us, be 2160
times greater than now it is: which is all one, as if we should say, that a
Star of the sixth magnitude is severed from us by so many semidiameters of
the Earth's Orb. But now according to common consent, the distance of the Earth
from the Sun, does contain 128 semidiameters of the Earth, and (as was said
before) this supposed distance of the fixed Stars, does comprehend 2160
semidiameters of the Earth's Orb. From whence it is manifest, that the
semidiameter of the Earth, in comparison to it is distance from the Sun, will
be almost doubly bigger than the semidiameter of the Earth's Orb, in
comparison to this distance of the Stars. But now the semidiameter of the
Earth, does make very little difference in the appearance of the Sun, because
we see common observations upon the surface of it, are as exactly true to the
sense, as if they were made from the center of it. Wherefore, that difference
which would be made in these fixed Stars, by the annual course of the earth,
must needs be much more unobservable, or rather altogether insensible.

2 The consequence of this Argument is grounded upon this false supposition,
That every body must necessarily be of an equal extension, to that distance
from whence there does not appear any sensible difference in it is quantity.
So that when I see a Bird flying such a height in the air, that my being
nearer unto it, or farther from it, by ten or twenty foot, does not make it
seem unto my eyes either bigger or less; then I may conclude that the bird
must needs be either ten or twenty foot thick: or when I see the body of a
Tree that may be half a mile from me, and perceive that my approaching nearer
to it by thirty or forty paces, does not sensibly make any different
appearance, I may then infer, that the Tree is forty paces thick; with many
the like absurd consequences, that would follow from that foundation upon which
this Argument is bottomed.

To the third I answer: It Is too much presumption, to conclude that to be
superfluous, the usefulness of which we do not understand. There be many
secret ends in these great works of Providence, which humane wisdom cannot
reach unto, and as Solomon speaks of those things that are under the Sun, so
may we also of those things that are above it, That no man can find out the
works of God, Eccles. 8. 17.
for though a man labor to seek it out. Yea further: Though a wise man think
to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it. He that has most insight
into the works of nature, is not able to give a satisfying reason, why the
Planets or Stars should be placed just at this particular distance from the
Earth, and no nearer or farther. And besides, this Argument might as well be
urged against the Hypothesis of Ptolomy or Tycho, since the Stars, for ought
we know, might have been as serviceable to us, if they had been placed far
nearer, than either of those Authors suppose them. Again, were there any force
in such a consequence, it would as well conclude a great improvidence of
nature, in making such a multitude of those lesser Stars, which have lately
discovered by the perspective. For to what purpose should so many Lights be
created for the use of man, since his eyes were not able to discern them? So
that our disabilitie to comprehend all those ends which might be aimed at in
the works of nature, can be no sufficient Argument to prove their
superfluity. Though Scripture do tell us that these things were made for our
use, yet it does not tell us, that this is their only end. It Is not impossible,
but that there may be elsewhere some other inhabitants, by whom these lesser
Stars may be more plainly discerned. And (as was said before) why may not we
affirm that of the bigness, which our adversaries do concerning the motion of
the Heavens? That God, to show his own immensitie, did put a kind of
infinity in the creature.

There is yet another Argument to this purpose, urged by Lib. 1. sect. 2. cap.
1.
Al. Ross. which was not referred to any of the former kind, because I could
scarsely believe I did rightly understand it: since he puts it in the front of
his other Arguments, as being of strength and subtilty enough to be a leader
unto all the rest; and yet in the most likely sense of it, it is so extremely
simple to be pressed in a controversy that every fresh man would laugh at it.
The words of it are these: Quod minimum est in circulo debet esse centrum
illius, at terra long minor est Sole, and Aequinoctialis terrestris est omnium
in Coelo circulus minimus, ergo, etc.

By the same reason, it would rather follow, that the Moon or Mercury were in
the center, since both these are less than the Earth. And then, whereas he
says that the Aequinoctiall of the Earth is the least circle in the Heavens,
it is neither true nor pertinent, and would make one suspect, that he who
should urge such an Argument, did searse understand any thing in Astronomy.

There are many other objections like unto this, not worth the citing: The
chief of all have bin already answered; by which you may discern, that there
is not any such great necessity, as our adversaries pretend, why the Earth
should be situated in the midst of the Universe.

PROP. VII.
It Is probable that the Sun is in the center of the World.

THe chief reasons for the confirmation of this truth, are employed in the
inconveniences of this Hypothesis above any other; whereby we may resolve the
motions and appearances of the Heavens into more easy and natural causes.

Hence will the frame of nature be freed from that deformity, which it has
according to the Systeme of Tycho: who though he make the Sun to be in the
midst of the Planets, yet without any good reason, denies it to be in the midst
of the fixed Stars; as if the Planets, which are such eminent parts of the
World, should be appointed to move about a distinct center of their own,
which was beside that of the Universe.

Hence likewise are we freed from many of those inconveniences in the
Hypothesis of Ptolomy, who supposed in the Heavens, Eppicides and Eccentrickes,
and other Orbs, which he calls the differents of the Apoge and the Perige. As
if nature in framing this great engine of the World, had been put unto such
hard shifts, that she was feign to make use of wheels and screwes, and other
the like artificial instruments of motion.

There be sundry other particulars, whereby this opinion concerning the Suns
being in the center, may be strongly evidenced: which because they relate unto
several motions also, cannot therefore properly be insisted on in this place.
You may easily enough discern them, by considering the whole frame of the
Heavens, as they are according to the Systeme of Copernicus; wherein, all those
probable resolutions that are given for diverse appearances amongst the Planets,
do mainly depend upon this supposition, that the Sun is in the center. Which
Arguments (were there no other) might be abundantly enough for the confirmation
of it. But for the greater plenty, there are likewise these probabilities
considerable.

1 It may seem agreeable to reason, that the light which is diffused in
several Stars through the circumference of the World, should be more
eminently contained, and (as it were) contracted in the center of it, which can
only be by placing the Sun there.

2 It Is an Argument of In prim. cap. Sphaer.
Clavius, and frequently urged by our adversaries, That the most natural
situation of the Suns body was in the midst, betwixt the other Planets; and
that for this reason, because from thence he might more conveniently distribute
amongst them both his light and heat. The force of which, may more properly
be applied to prove him in the center.

3 It Is probable that the planetarie Orbs (which are special parts of the
Universe) do moove about the center of the World, rather than about any other
center which is remote from it. But now it is evident, that the Planet Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, do by their motion encompasse the body of the
Sun. It Is likely therefore, that th^s is situated in the midst of the World.

As for the three upper Planet, it is found by observation, that they are
always nearest to the Earth, when in opposition to the Sun, and farthest
from us, when in conjunction with it: which difference is so eminent, that Mars
in his Perige does appear sixty times bigger than when he is in the Apoge,
and at the greatest distance.

Now, that the revolution of Venus and Mercury also is about the Sun, may from
hence be evidenced: first, because they are never at any great distance from
him: secondly, because they are seen sometimes above, and sometimes below him:
thirdly, because Venus, according to her different scituations, does change her
appearance, as the Moon.

4 There is yet another Argument, which De Coelo. lib. 2. 6^. 13.
Aristotle himself does repeat from Pythagoras. The most excellent body should
have the best place; but the Sun is the most excellent body, and the center
is the best place; therefore it is likely the Sun is in the center. In the
frame of nature (which is supposed to be of an orbicular form) there are but
two places of any eminency, the circumference and the center. The circumference
being of so wide a capacity, cannot so fitly be the peculiar seat of a body,
that is so little in respect of it: and besides, that which is the most
excellent part of the World, should be equally preserved in it self, and
shared in it is virtues by all the other parts, which can only be done by it is
being placed in the midst of them. This is intimated unto us in that frequent
speech of Plato, that the Soul of the World does reside in the innermost place
of it: and that in Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 17, etc.
Macrobius, who often compares the sun in the World, to the Heart in a living
creature.

Unto this Aristotle answers by a distinction: There is medium magnitudinis, so
the center is the middle of a Sphaere: and there is medium naturae, or
informationis, which is not always the same with the other; for in this sense
the Heart is the middle of a man; because from thence (says he) as from the
center, the vital spirits are conveied to all the members: and yet we know
that it is not the center of Magnitude, or at an equal distance from all the
other parts.

And besides, the middle is the worst place, because most circumscribed, since
that is more excellent which does limit any thing, than that which is bounded
by it. For this reason is it, that Matter is amongst those things which are
terminated, and Form, that which does circumscribe.

But against this answer of Aristotle, it is again replied:

1 Though it be true, Keplar. Astr. Copern. lib. 4. par. 2.
that in living creatures the best and chiefest part is not placed always just
in the midst, yet this may be, because they are not of an orbicular form, as
the World is.

2 Though that which bounds another thing be more excellent than that which is
terminated by it, yet this does not prove the center to be the worst place,
because that is one of the terms or limits of a round body, as well as the
circumference.

There are likewise other Arguments to this purpose, much insisted on by
eminent Astronomers, Maestin. prae. ad Nar^at. Rhetici. Keplar. mysterium
Cosmographicum.
taken from that harmonicall proportion which there may be betwixt the several
distance and bigness of the Orbs, if we suppose the Sun to be in the center.

For according to this (say they) we may conceive an excellent Harmony both
in the number and the distance of the Planets: (and if God made all other
things numero and mensura, much more then those greater Works, the Heavens) for
then the five Mathematical bodies, so much spoken of by Lib. 13. prop. 14, 15,
etc.
Euclid, will bear in them a proportion answerable to the several distances of
the Planets from one another.

Thus a Cube will measure the distance betwixt Saturn and Jupiter; a Pyramid
or Tetraedron, the distance betwixt Jupiter and Mars; a Dodecaedron, the
distance betwixt Mars and the Earth; an Icosaedron, the distance betwixt the
Earth and Venus; and an Octoedron, the distance betwixt Venus and Mercury; that
is, if we conceive a circumference described immediately without the Cube, and
another within it, the distance between these two will show what proportional
distance there is betwixt the Orb of Saturn, and that of Jupiter. Thus also,
if you conceive a circumference described on the outside of a Pyramid or
Tetraedron, and another within it, this will show such a proportional
distance, as there is betwixt the Orb of Mars, from that of Jupiter. And so of
the rest.

Now if any ask why there are but six Planetary Orbs? Keplar answers: Quia non
oportet plures quam quinque proportiones esse, totidem nempe quot regularia
sunt in Mathesi corpora. Sex autem termini consummant hunc proportionum
numerum: Because there are but five proportions, so many as there are regular
bodies in Mathematickes, each of whose sides and angles are equal to one
another. But now there are six terms required to consummate this number of
proportions; and so consequently, there can be but six primary Planets.

Thus likewise by placing the Sun in the center, LIB. 2. Cap. 6.
we may conceive such a proportion betwixt the Bodies of the Planets, as will
be answerable unto their several Sphaeres: Then Mercury, which has the least
Orb, will have the least Body; Venus bigger than that, but less than any of
the other; our Earth bigger than Venus, but less than the rest; Mars bigger
than the Earth, but less than Jupiter; Jupiter bigger than Mars, and less
than Saturn; Saturn being the highest, should also be the biggest. All which
Harmony would be disturbed by putting in the Sun amongst them; and therefore,
it may be more convenient for him to sit still in the center.

There are sundry other Arguments in this kind to be found out, by a
consideration of this whole Hypothesis: He that does rightly understand it,
may therein easily discern many strong probabilities, why the Sun should be in
the midst of the World, rather than in any other position.

PROP. VIII.
That there is not any sufficient reason to prove the Earth incapable of those
motions which Copernicus ascribes unto it.

THe two chief motions in the World, which are more especially remarkable
above the rest, are the Diurnall, and Annual.

The Diurnall, which makes the difference betwixt night and day, is caused by
the revolution of our Earth upon it is own Axis, in the space of four and
twenty hours.

The Annual, which makes the difference betwixt Winter and Summer, is likewise
caused by the Earth, when being carried through the Eclipticke in it is own
Orb, it finishes it is course in a year.

The first is usually styled, Motus revolutionis: The second Motus
circumlationis: There is likewise a third, which Copernicus calls Motus
inclinationis: but this being thoroughly considered, cannot properly be styled a
motion, but rather an immutabilitie, it being that whereby the Axis of the
Earth does always keep parallel to it self, from which situation, it is not
his annual course that does make it in the least manner to decline.

As for the difficulties which concern the second of these, they have been
already handled in the sixth Proposition, where the Earth's eccentricitie was
maintained.

So that the chief business of this Chapter, is to defend the Earth's
diurnall motion, against the objections of our adversaries. Sundry of which
objections, to speak (as the truth is) do bear in them a great show of
probability, and such too (as it seems) was very efficacious, since Aristotle
and Ptolomy, etc. men of excellent parts and deep judgments, did ground upon
them, as being of infallible and necessary consequence.

I shall reckon them up severally, and set down such answers unto each, as may
yield some satisfaction to every indifferent seeker of truth.

1 First then, it is objected from our senses; If the Earth did move, we should
perceive it. The Western mountains would then appear to ascend toward the
Stars, rather than the Stars to descend below them.

I answer: The sight judges of motion according as any thing does desert the
plane whereon it self is seated: which plane every where keeping the same
situation and distance, in respect of the eye, does therefore seem immovable
unto it, and the motion will appear in those Stars and parts of the Heaven;
through which the vertical Line does pass.

The reason of such deceit may be this: Motion being not a proper object of the
sight, nor belonging to any other peculiar sense, must therefore be judged of
by the sensus communis, which is liable to mistake in this respect; because it
apprehends the eye it self to rest immovable, whilst it does not feel any
effects of this motion in the body: As it is when a man is carried in a Ship;
so that sense it but an ill judge of natural secrets. It Is a good rule of
Plato, (...): A Philosopher must not be carried away by the bare appearance of
things to sight, but must examine them by reason. If this were a good
consequence, The Earth does not move, because it does not appear so to us, we
might then as well argue, that it does move when we go upon the water,
according to the verse: Provehimur portu, terraeque, verbesque recedunt.

Or if such Arguments would hold, it were an easy matter to prove the Sun
and Moon not so big as a Hat, or the fixed stars as a Candle.

Yea, Al. ^oss. l. 1. sect. 1 cap. 1.
but if the motions of the Heavens be only apparent, and not real, then the
motion of the clouds will be so too, since the eye may be as well deceived in
the one as the other.

I answer: It Is all one, as if he should infer, that the sense was mistaken
in every thing, because it was so in one thing: and this would be an excellent
Argument to prove that opinion of Anaxagoras, that the Snow was black.

The reason why that motion which is caused by the Earth, does appear as if it
were in the Heavens, is, because the sensus communis in judging of it, does
conceive the eye to be it self immovable (as was said before) there being no
sense that does discern the effects of any motion in the body; and therefore,
it does conclude every thing to move, which it does perceive to change it is
distance from it: So that the clouds do not seem to move sometimes, when as
notwithstanding they are every where carried about with our Earth, by such a
swift revolution; yet this can be no hinderance at all, why we may not judge
aright of their other particular motions, for which there is not the same
reason. Though to a man in a Ship, the Trees and Banks may seem to move; yet
it would be but a weak Argument, to conclude from hence, that therefore such a
one could not tell whether his friend does really stir, whom he sees to walk
up and down in the Ship: or that he might as well be deceived in judging the
Oars to move, when they do not.

It Is again replied by the same Objector, Ibid.
That it is not credible, the eve should be mistaken in judging of the Stars
and Heavens; because those being light bodies, are the primarie and proper
Objects of that sense.

I answer: The deceit here is not concerning the light or color of those
bodies, but concerning their motion; which is neither the primarie nor proper
Object of the Eye, but reckoned amongst the Objecta Communia.

2 Another common Argument against this motion, is taken from the danger that
would thence arise, unto all high buildings, which by this would quickly be
ruinated, and scattered abroad.

I answer: Coper. l. 1. ^8
This motion is supposed to be natural: and those things which are according
to nature, have contrary effects to other matters, which are by force and
violence. Now it belongs unto things of this later kind, to be inconstant and
hurtful; whereas those of the first kind must be regular, and tending to
conservation. The motion of the Earth is always equal and like it self: not
by starts and fits. If a glass of Beer may stand firmly enough in a Ship,
when it moves swiftly upon a smooth stream, much less then will the motion of
the Earth, which is more natural; and so consequently more equal, cause any
danger unto those buildings that are erected upon it. And therefore to suspect
any such event, would be like the fear of Lactantius, who would not
acknowledge the being of any Antipodes, Gibert de Magn. lib. 6. cap. 5.
lest then he might be forced to grant that they should fall down unto the
Heavens. We have equal reason to be afraid of high buildings, if the whole
World above us were whirled about with such a mad celeritie as our adversaries
suppose; for then there would be but small hopes, that this little point of
Earth should escape from the rest.

But supposing (says Lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 3.
Rosse) that this motion were natural to the Earth, yet it is not natural to
Towns and Buildings, for these are artificial.

To which I answer: Ha, ha, he.

3 Another Argument to this purpose is taken from the rest and quietness of the
air about us; which could not be, if there were any such swift motion of the
Earth. If a man riding upon a fleet horse, do perceive the air to beat
against his face, as if there were a wind, what a vehement tempest should we
continually feel from the East, if the Earth were turned about with such a
swift revolution as is supposed.

Unto this it is usually answered, That the air also is carried along with the
same motion of the Earth: For if the concavitie of the Moons Orb, which is of
so smooth and glabrous a superficies, may (according to our adversaries) drive
along with it the greatest part of this Elementarie World, all the regions of
Fire, and all the vast upper regions of Air, and (as some will have it) the
two lower Regions, together with the Sea likewise; for from hence (says Alex.
Rosse, lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 3.) is it, that betwixt the Tropicks there is a
constant Eastern wind, and a continual flowing of the Sea Westward; I say, if
the motion of the Heavens which are smooth bodies, may be able to carry with
it so great a part of the elementarie World: or if the rugged parts of the
Moons Body be able to carry with it so great a part of the air, as Fromondus
(Ant. c. 16.) affirms: much more then may our earth, which is a rugged
mountainous Body, be able to turn about so little a part of the world, as that
vaporous air next unto it.



Suppose the inward circle to represent the Earth; and the outward, the thicker
air which encompasses it. Now it is easily conceivable, that the revolution of
so great a Body as this Globe of Earth, may turn about by it is mere motion
(if there were nothing else) so little a part of the adjoining air, as is here
represented: And yet,

1 The disproportion betwixt the thickness of the Earth, and this Orb of Air,
is far greater than could be expressed in the Figure, being but as twenty
miles; which is at most the thickness of this Air, unto 3456 miles, which is
the semidiameter of our Earth, and so is but as an insensible number in respect
of this other.

2 Besides the mere motion of the Earth, which in probabilities (being such a
rugged body) might be enough to carry so little a part of the air along with
it; there is also (as we suppose) a magneticall vigor which proceeds from it,
whereby it is more able to make all things that are near unto it, to observe
the same revolution.

But if it be so (says Li. 1. sect. 1. cap. 5.
Alex. Ross.) that not only the man, but the medium also, and the Object be
moved: this must needs be such a great hinderance to the sight, that the eye
cannot judge exactly of any thing. For suppose the man alone to be in a motion,
he could not see so well as when he is still; but now if not only he, but his
spectacles, and book were all moved, he would not be able to discern any
thing distinctly.

I answer: the consequence were pertinent, if all these were several motions:
but if the Subject, and Medium, and Object were all carried with one and the
same equal motion (as it is here supposed) this could be no impediment to the
act of seeing, but it would be all one with the rest; because by this means,
they are not severed from one another; and therefore the species are not
disturbed. It Is an excellent saying of Syst. mundi, Collop. 2.
Gallilaeus, and may serve for the resolution of many such doubts as these:
Motus eatenus tanquam motus operatur, quatenus relationem habet ad eas res quae
ipso distituuntur, in ijs vero-rebus, quae totae aequaliter de eo participant,
nihil operatur, and ita se habet ac si nullus esset. If a man be within some
room of a Ship, he may read altogether as easily when the Ship moves, as when
it stands still.

4 Another Argument against this circular motion of the earth* is grounded upon
that common Principle amongst the Aristotelians: Vnius corporis simplicis unum
tantum est motus: One kind of body has but one kind of motion. But now the
Earth and Water has a motion of descent: the Air, a motion of ascent; and
therefore none of them can have any circular motion natural unto them.

I answer: First, these right motions of elementarie bodies belong only to the
parts of them, and that too when they are out of their proper places; so that
the whole to which they belong, may notwithstanding this, have another motion
of it is own. But secondly, this saying which Aristotle calls a Principle, will
not consist with other evident experiments of nature. Thus, though a Loadstone
in respect of it is matter and condensitie, naturally tends downward; yet this
does not hinder, but that in respect of some other qualities, as it is desire of
union and coition to another loadstone, it may also naturally move upwards.
From whence it will follow, that the same elementarie body may have diverse
natural motions.

5 The gravitie and magnitude of this Earthy Globe, do make it altogether unfit
for so swift a motion.

I answer: First, Heaviness can only be applied unto those bodies which are
out of their proper places, or unto such parts as are severed from the whole to
which they belong. And therefore the Globe of Earth, considered as whole, and
in it is right place, cannot truly be called heavy. I deny not, but that there
is in it, and so likewise in the other Planets, an ineptitude to motion, by
reason of the matter and condensitie of their bodies: And so likewise there is,
as truly (though not according to the same degrees) in the least particle of a
material condensed substance: so that this cannot reasonably be pretended as a
just impediment, why the earth should be incapable of such a motion. Secondly,
and though this Globe be of so vast a magnitude, yet as nature bestows upon
other creatures (for instance an Eagle and a Fly) spirits, and motive powers,
proportionable to their several bodies: so likewise may she indowe the Earth
with a motive faculty answerable to it is greatness. Or if this may make the
Earth incapable of so swift a motion, as is supposed, much more then will the
Heavens be disabled for that greater swiftness which is imagined in them. I
might add, the Globe of the Sun and Jupiter are observed to move about their
own centres; and therefore the Earth, which is far less than either of
them, is not by reason of it is too great magnitude made unfit for such a
revolution. Thirdly, as for the swiftness of the Earth's course, it does not
exceed (all circumstances well considered) the celeritie of some other motions,
with which we are acquainted; as that of the clouds, when driven by a
tempestuous wind; Mae^lin praefat. ad Narrat. Rhet. Fromond. Vesta. tract. 1.
cap. 3.
that of a Bullet shot from a Cannon, which in the space, a minute does fly 4
miles. Or as another has observed in the second scruple of an hour it may
pass the fifteenth part of a Germane mile: Than which, there is not any point
in the Earth's Equinoctial that moves faster; and though a Bullet be much
slower in moving a greater distance, yet for so little a space, while the force
of the powder is most fresh and powerful, it does equal the swiftness of the
Earth. And yet,

1 A bullet or cloud is carried in it is whole body, being fain to break it is
way through the air round about it: but now the earth (in respect of this
first motion) does remain still in the same situation, and move only about
it is own center.

2 The motion of a Bullet is violent, and against it is nature, which does
strongly incline it to move downwards. Whereas the Earth being considered as
whole, and in it is proper place, is not heavy, nor does it contain any
repugnancie to a circular motion.

6 The chief Argument, on which our adversaries do most insist, is this: If
there were such a motion of the Earth as is supposed, Aristot. de Coelo, lib.
2. cap. 13.
then those bodies which are severed from it in the Air, would be forsaken by
it. The clouds would seem to rise and set as the Stars. The Birds would be
carried away from their nests. No heavy body could fall perpendicular. An Arrow
or Bullet being shot from East to West by the same violence, will not be
carried an equal distance from us, but we should by the revolution of our
Earth, overtake that which was shot to the East, before it could fall. If a man
leaping up should abide in the Air but one second scruple of an hour, or the
sixtieth part of a minute, the Earth in that space, would withdraw it self
from him almost a quarter of a mile. All these and many other such strange
inferences, which are directly contrary to sense and experience, would follow
from this motion of the Earth.

There are three several ways most frequently used for the resolving of these
kind of doubts.

1 From those magneticall qualities, which all elementarie bodies do partake of.

2 From the like motions of other things within the room of a sailing Ship.

3 From the like participation of motion in the open parts of a Ship.

1 For those magneticall properties, with which all these bodies are endowed.
For the better understanding of this, you must know, That besides those common
elementarie qualities of heat, coldness, dryness, moisture, etc. which arise
from the predominancie of several Elements; there are likewise other qualities
(not so well known to the Ancients) which we call magneticall, of which every
Particle in the Terrestrial Globe does necessarily participate: and whether it
be joined to this Globe by continuitie or contiguitie; or whether it be severed
from it, as the Clouds in the second Region, a Bird, or Bullet in the Air; yet
does it still retain it is magneticall qualities, together with all those
operations that proceed from them.

Now from these properties do we suppose the circular motion of the Earth to
arise.

If you ask, what probabilities there are, to prove that the Earth is endowed
with any such affections. I answer: It Is likely, that the lower parts of this
Globe do not consist of such a soft fructifying Earth, as there is in the
surface (because there can be no such use for it, as here, and nature does
nothing in vain;) but rather, of some hard rocky substance, since we may well
conceive, that these lower parts are pressed close together by the weight of
all those heavy bodies above them. Now it is probable, that this rocky substance
is a Lodestone, rather than a Iaspis, Adamant, Marble, or any other; because
experience teaches us, that the Earth and Loadstone do agree together in so
many properties. Suppose a man were to judge the matter of diverse bodies; each
of which should be wrapped up in some covering from his eye, so that he might
not only examine them by some other outward signs: If in this examination he
should find any particular body which had all the properties that are peculiar
to a Lodestone, he would in reason conclude it to be of that nature, rather
than any other. Now there is altogether as much reason why we should infer,
that the inward parts of the Earth do consist of a magneticall substance. The
agreement of these two you may see largely set forth in the treatise of D.
Gilbert. I will instance only in one Example; which of it self may sufficiently
evidence, that the Globe of Earth does partake of the like affections with the
lodestone. In the mariners needle you may observe the magneticall notions of
direction, variation, declination; the two last of which are found to be
different, according to the variety of places. Now this difference cannot
proceed from the needle it self, because that is the same every where. Nor can
we well conceive how it should be caused by the Heavens; for then the
variation would not be always alike in the same place, but diverse, according
to those several parts of the heaven, which at several times should happen to
be over it: And therefore, it must necessarily proceed from the Earth, which
being it self endowed with magneticall affections, does diversely dispose the
motions of the needle, according to the difference of that disponent virtue
which is in it is several Ports.

Now to apply this unto the particular instances of the Objection: We say,
though some parts of this great Magnet the Earth, may according to their matter
be severed from the whole; yet are they always joined to it by a communion of
the same magneticall qualities; and do no less observe these kind of
motions, when they are separated from the whole, than if they were united to
it. Nor need this seem incredible, that a heavy Bullet, in such a swift
violent course, should be able to observe this magneticall revolution of the
whole Earth; when as we see that those great bodies of Saturn, Jupiter, etc.
hanging in the vaste spaces of the aetheriall Air, do so constantly and
regularly move on, in their appointed courses: Though we could not show any
similitude of this motion in these inferior bodies, with which we are
acquainted; yet we must know, there may be many things which agree to the
whole frame, that are not discernable in the diverse parts of it. It Is natural
unto the Sea to ebb and flow, but yet there is not this motion in every drop
or bucket of Water. So if we consider every part of our bodies severally, the
humors, bones, flesh, etc. they are all of them apt to tend downwards, as
being of a condensed matter; but yet consider them according to the whole
Frame, and then the blood or humors may naturally ascend upwards to the Head,
as well as descend to any of the lower parts. Thus the whole Earth may move
round, though the several parts of it have not any such particular revolution
of their own. Thus likewise, though each condensed body being considered by it
self, may seem to have only a motion of descent; yet in reference to that
whole Frame of which it is a part, it may also partake of another motion that
may be natural unto it.

But some may here object: Though the Earth were endowed with such magneticall
affections, yet what probability is there that it should have such a
revolution? I answer: It Is observed of those other magneticall bodies of
Saturn, Jupiter, and the Sun, that they are carried about their own centers;
and therefore it is not improbable, but that it may be so with the Earth also;
which if any deny, he must show a reason why in this respect they should be
unlike.

Yea, but though the Earth did move round, what ground is there to affirm that
those bodies which are severed from it, as a Bullet, or the clouds, should
follow it in the same course?

I answer: Those spots which are discovered about the Sun, and are thought to
be clouds or evaporations from his body, are observed to be carried about
according to his revolution. Thus the Moon is turned round by our Earth: the
four lesser Planets by the body of Jupiter. Nay, thus all the Planets in their
several Orbs, are moved about by the revolution of the Sun, upon it is own
Axis (says Keplar) and therefore much more may an Arrow or Bullet be carried
round by the magneticall motion of our Earth.

The second way, whereby some answer unto the instances of this Argument, is,
by showing the like motions of other things within some room of a sailing
Ship. Thus experience teaches (say they) that a candle, as also the fumes that
come from it, will always keep the same situation in the swiftest motion of a
Ship, as if it did rest immovably, and the flame will not more especially bend
one way, or have any troubled fluctuation, but burn as strait and quietly, as
if it did stand still. Again, it has been found (say those that have been
versed in these kind of experiments) that the same force will cast a body but
at an equal distance, whether or no the body do move with, or against the
motion of the Ship. As also that any weight being let fall, will descend in as
true a perpendicular, as if the Ship did stand still. If a man leaping up, do
tarry in the Air one second minute of an hour, yet the Ship will not in it is
greatest swiftness (as it should according to the calculation of our
adversaries) be carried from him at least fifteen foot. If we suppose a man to
jumpe in such a Ship, he will not be able to pass farther, when he jumps
against the motion of it, than when he jumps with it. All which particulars
may argue, that these things are carried along together, by the common motion
of the Ship. Now if bodies may be thus jointly moved by such a praeternaturall
motion, much more then will they accompany the Earth in it is diurnall
revolution, which we suppose to be natural unto them, and as a Law imposed by
God in their first Creation.

If the flame of a candle, or the smoke that comes from it (things that are so
easily movable) are notwithstanding carried so equally, and without any
disturbance, by the motion of a Ship: then also the Clouds in the Air, and
all other light Bodies, may well enough be turned about by the revolution of
our Earth.

If an equal force will cast an heavy body but at an equal distance, whether
or no it move with, or against the motion of the Ship; then may we easily
conceive, that an Arrow or Bullet being shot with the same violence, will pass
but the same space on the Earth, whether or no it be shot toward the East or
West.

If a heavy Body, while the Ship does move, will fall down in a strait Line,
then it is not the revolution of our Earth that can hinder a perpendicular
descent.

If a man leaping up in a Ship, may abide in the Air on the second scruple of
an hour, and yet this Ship in it is greatest swiftness not withdraw it self
fifteen foot; then will not the Earth in that space go from him almost a
quarter of a mile.

But against this it is objected, Fromondus Vesta. tract. 2. cap. 2.
That the Earth has the similitude of an open Ship, and not of any room that
is close. And though it be true, that when the Roof and the Walls do all
move together, the Air which is included betwixt them, must be carried along
by the same motion; yet it is not so with the Earth, because that has not any
such Walls or Roof, wherein it may contain and carry along with it the
medium. And therefore experience will rather argue against this supposed
revolution. Thus it is observed, that a stone being let fall from the Mast of a
Ship that moves swiftly, will not descend to the same point, as if the Ship did
stand still. From whence it will follow, that if our Earth had such a circular
motion, then any heavy body being let fall from some high Tower, or other steep
place, would not descend unto that point of Earth which was directly under it
at the beginning.

To this we answer; That the Air which moves along with our Earth, is as well
limited in certain bounds, as that which is included in a room. If you ask
where these bounds are terminated: I answer neither by the utmost parts of the
World, nor yet by the concavitie of the Moons Orb (as Fromondus would have us
affirm) but by the Sphaere of vaparous Air that encompasses our Earth; or
which is all one, by the Orb of magneticall vigor, which proceeds from it. And
besides, it is considerable that all Earthly Bodies are not only contained
within these limits, as things are in a close room, but also as parts in that
whole to which they belong.

2 Though the carrying along of the medium may solve the motion of light Bodies
in a Ship, as the flame of a candle, smoke, or the like; yet this cannot
concur to that which has bin said of heavy Bodies, as a man leaping up, a
Bullet descending, etc. since it is not the motion of the mere Air that is
able to make these partake of the same motion with the Ship. Unto that Argument
which he urges from the experiment of a Stone falling in an open Ship, We
answer:

1 Though the instance of a Ship, may serve as a proof for this opinion, it
being an Argument a minori ad majus, from an accidental motion to a natural;
yet it will not serve against it. For though it were not thus in accidental
motions; yet this would not hinder but that it might be so in those that are
supposed to be proper and natural.

2 As for that experiment it self, it is but a groundless imagination, and was
never yet confirmed by any particular experience, because it is certain the
event would be clean otherwise, as shall be prooved in the third way of
answering.

3 The third and last way of clearing the doubts in the sixth Argument, is by
showing the like participation of motion, in those things that are in the open
parts of a Ship. To which purpose Gallilaeus urges this experiment: Syste.
Mundi. Colloq. 2.
If any one should let fall a Stone from an high Mast, he would find lapidem in
eundem semper Navis locum decidere, seu consistat illa, seu quantacunque
velocitate moveatur: that the Stone would always descend unto the very same
place, whether or no the Ship did move or stand still. The reason of which is,
because the motion of the Ship is likewise impressed in the Stone: which
impression is not equally prevalent in a light body, as a Feather, or Wool,
because the Air which has power over them, is not carried along by the same
motion of the Ship. Thus likewise will it be in this other experiment: If a man
upon a running Horse should in his swiftest course let fall a Bullet or Stone,
these heavy Bodies, besides their own descent, would also participate that
transverse motion of the Horse. For as those things that are thrown from us,
do continue the it motion when they are out of the hand in the open Air: so
likewise must it be when the force is conferred by that motion which the arm
has from the Horse. While a man is riding, his arm is also carried by the
same swiftnes of the Horse; therefore, if he should only open his hand and
let fall any thing, it would not descend in a strait Line, but must necessarily
be driven forward, by reason of that force impressed in it by the swiftness of
the Horse, which is also communicated to the arm: it being all one in effect,
whether or no the arm be moved by a particular motion of it is own, as it is
in casting of things from us; or by the common motion of the Body, as it is in
dropping of any thing from us, either when we are on the top of some sailing
Ship, as in the Former; or on some running Horse, as in this Later instance.

What has been said concerning the motion of descent, is likewise applyable,
both to that which is upward, and that which is transversall. So that when it is
objected, if the Earth did move, then a Bullet that were shot up
perpendicularly would be forsaken by it, and not descend to the place from
whence it arose: We answer, that the Cannon which is upon the Earth, together
with the Bullet in it, do partake of the same circular motion, with the Earth,
and this perhaps our adversaries will grant, whilst we suppose the Bullet to
remain still in the Cannon, all the difficulty will be to show how it must
necessarily observe the same motion, when it is shot out into the open Air.
For the better explication of this, you may note this following Figure. Gallil.
Syst. Colleq. 2.




Where we suppose A. C. to be a Cannon perpendicularly, erected with a Bullet
in it at B. which if it were immovable, we grant that the Bullet being
discharged, must ascend in a just perpendicular. But now conceive this Cannon
to move along with the Earth, then in that space of time while the Bullet by
the force of the powder is ascending to the top of the Bore, the Cannon will be
transferred to the situation D. E. so that the Bullet must be moved according
to the Line F. G. which is not directly upright, but somewhat declining. Now
the motion of the Bullet in the Air, must necessarily be conformed unto that
direction that is impressed in it by the Cannon from whence it is shot, and so
consequently it must be continued according to the Line F. G. and therefore
will always keep perpendicularly over the point from which it did ascend.

If you reply, that the motion of the Bullet in the Cannon must needs be so so
swift, that the Earth cannot carry the Cannon from C. to E. in the same space
of time, wherein the Bullet does move from B. to A. I answer: it is not
material whether the Earth be of a greater or lesser swiftness than the
Bullet, because the declination must always be proportionable to the motion
of the Earth, and if we suppose this to be slower than the Bullet, then the
declination of the Line F. G. will be so much the less.

This truth may yet farther be illustrated by the practice of those Fowlers,
who use to kill Birds as they are flying: Concerning which Art, it is commonly
thought that these men direct their aims to some certain space in the Air,
just before the Birds, where they conceive the Bullet will meet with them in
their flight; whereas the truth is, they proceed in this case, the very same
way, as if the Birds did stand still, by a direct aiming at their bodies, and
following of their flight by the motion of the piece, till at length, having
got a perfect aim, they discharge, and do hit altogether as surely, as if the
Birds were sitting upon a Tree. From whence we may observe, that the motion of
the piece, as in our aiming, it is made to follow the Birds in their flight
(though it be but slow,) yet is communicated to the Bullet in the Air.

But here it may seem very difficult to give any reason according to those
grounds concerning the flight of birds; which being animated, have a liberty to
fly here or there, to tarry for a good space of time in the open Air, and so
it is not easy to conceive what means there is, by which they should
participate of the Earth's diurnall revolution.

To this Gallilaeus answers, that the motion of the Air, as it does turn
about the Clouds, so does it also carry with it the Birds, together with such
other like things that are in it. For if some violent wind be able to drive
with such swiftness a full laden Ship, to throw down Towers, to turn up
Trees, and the like; much more then may the diurnall motion of the Air, (which
does so far exceed in swiftness the most tempestuous wind) be able to carry
with it the bodies of Birds.

But if all things be turned about by this revolution, Ob.
then it should seem there is no such thing as a right motion, whether of
ascent, or descent in a strait Line.

I answer: Sol.
The moving of heavy or light bodies, may be considered in a double relation.

1 According to the space wherein they move, and then we grant their motions
not to be simple, but mixed of a direct and circular.

2 According to the body or medium wherein they move, and then they may
properly be said to have right motions, because they pass through the medium
in a strait Line; and therefore it is, that unto us they seem directly to
ascend or descend. Aristotle himself would not deny, but that Fire may ascend
in a strait Line unto it is Sphaere, and yet participate also of that circular
motion which he supposes to be communicated from the Heavens, unto the upper
part of the Air, and it is own Region. So likewise must it be for the descent
of any thing. Suppose a Ship in it is swiftest motion, and a man in it, having
some vessel filled with water, should let fall into it a little Ball of Wax,
or some other matter which may be slow in it is sinking, so that in one minute
it should scarce descend the space of a cubit, though the Ship (it may be) in
the same time may pass at least a hundred cubits; yet would this still seem
unto the eye to descend in a strait Line; and the other motion which is
communicated unto it by the Ship, would not at all be discernable in it. And
though in this case, the motion were in it self composed of a circular and
direct; yet in respect of us it would appear, and so might be styled exactly
strait.

Now if it be thus in those which are generally granted to be praeternaturall
motions; we need not doubt then the possibility of the like effect in that
motion which we conceive to be proper and natural, both to the Earth, and the
things that belong unto it.

There is yet another Objection to this purpose urged by Austriaca Syder. par.
2. prop. 25.
Malapertius, a late Jesuit, who though he do with much eagerness press
this Argument concerning a Bullet or Stone, against the opinion of Copernicus;
yet he grants that it might easily be resolved, if the defenders of it would
affirm that the Air did move round with the earth. But this (says he) they
dare not avouch; for then the Comets would always seem to stand still, being
carried about with the revolution of this air, and then they could not rise or
set, as experience shows they do.

To this it may be answered, that most Comets are above that Sphaere of Air
which is turned round with our Earth, as is manifest by their height. The
motion that appears in them, is caused by the revolution of our Earth, whereby
we are turned from them.

As for those which are within the Orb of our Air, these do seem to stand
still. Such a one was that mentioned by De bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 12.
Dion. lib. 54.
Josephus, which did constantly hang over Jerusalem; and that likewise which
appeared about the time of Agrippa's death, and for many days together did
hang over the City of Rome. Wherefore Not. Qu. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Seneca does well distinguish out of Epigenes, betwixt two sorts of Comets, the
one being low, and such as seem immovable, the other higher, and such as did
constantly observe their risings and settings, as the Stars.

I have done with all the Arguments of any note or difficulty, that are urged
against this diurnall motion of the Earth. Many other cavils there are not
worth the naming, which discover themselves to be rather the Objections of a
captious, than a doubtful mind. Amongst which, I might justly pass over
those that are set down by Lib. 1. sect. 2, cap. 6.
Alex. Rosse. But because this Author does proceed in his whole discourse with
so much scorn and triumph, it will not be amiss therefore to examine what
infallible evidence there is in those Arguments upon which he grounds his
boastings.

We have in one chapter no less than these nine.

1 If the Earth did move, Arg. 1.
then would it be hotter than the Water, because motion does produce heat;
and for this reason likewise, the Water would be so hot and rarefied, that it
could not be congealed; since that also does partake of the same motion with
the Earth.

2 The Air which is next the Earth, Arg. 2.
would be purer, as being rarefied with motion.

3 If the Earth did move the Air, Arg. 3.
it would cause some sound, but this is no more audible than Pythagoras his
Harmony of the Heavens.

4 'Twould have been in vain for Nature to have endowed the Heavens with all
conditions requisite for motion, Arg. 4.
if they had been to stand still: As first, they have a round Figure. Secondly,
they have neither gravitie nor levity. Thirdly, they are incorruptible.
Fourthly, they have no contrary.

5 All similarie parts are of the same nature with the whole: Arg. 5.
But each part of the Earth does rest in it is place; therefore also does the
whole.

6 The Sun in the World is as the Heart in a man's Body: Arg. 6.
But the motion of the Heart ceasing, none of the members do stir; therefore
also if the Sun should stand still, the other parts of the World would be
without motion.

7 The Sun and Heavens do work upon these inferior Bodies by their light and
motion. Arg. 7.
So the Moon does operate upon the Sea.

8 The Earth is the Foundation of Buildings; Arg. 8.
and therefore must be firm and stable.

9 It Is the constant opinion of Divines, Arg. 9.
that the Heavens shall rest after the day of Judgment; which they prove from
Isa. 60. 20. They Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw
it self. So likewise Rev. 10. 6. The Angel swears that there shall be time
no longer; and therefore the Heavens must rest, since by their motion it is
that time is measured. And S. Paul says, Romans 8. 20. That all the Creatures
are made subject to vanity. Now this can be no other in the Heavens, than the
Vanity of Motion, which the Wise man speaks of, Eccles. 1. 4. The Sun
rises, and the Sun goes down, etc.

To these it may be answered:

In the first you may note a manifest contradiction, Ad. 1. and 2.
when he will have the Earth to be hotter than the Water, by reason of this
motion; when as notwithstanding he acknowledges the Water to move along with
it; and therefore too in the next Line he infers that the Water, because of
that heat and rare faction which it receives from this motion with the earth,
must be incapable of so much cold as to be congealed into Ice.

But unto that which may be conceived to be his meaning in this and the next
Argument: I answer, if he had fully understood this opinion which he opposes,
he would easily have apprehended that it could not be prejudiced by either of
these consequences. For we suppose that not only this Globe of Earth and Water,
but also all the vaporous Air which invirons it, are carried along by the same
motion. And therefore, though what he says concerning the heat, which would
be produced by such a motion, were true; yet it would not be pertinent, since
our Earth and Water, and the Air next unto them, are not by this means
severed from one another, and so do not come within the compass of this
Argument.

If any reply, That this will notwithstanding hold true concerning the upper
part of the Air, where there is such a separation of one body from another;
and so consequently, an answerable heat: I answer,

1 It Is not generally granted, That motion in all kind of bodies does produce
heat; some restrain it only to follid bodies: affirming, That in those which
are fluid, it is rather the cause of coldness. This is the reason (say they)
why running Waters are ever to our sense the coolest: and why amongst those
Winds which proceed from the same coasts of Heaven, about the same time of the
year, the strongest always is the coldest? If you object, that running Waters
are not so soon frozen as others: They answer, this is not because they are
thereby heated; but because unto congellation, it is requisite that a Body
should settle and rest, as well as be cold.

2 If we should grant a moderate heat in those parts of the Air, we have not
any experiment to the contrary, nor would it prejudice the present opinion, or
common Principles.

As the sound of this motion is not more heard than the Harmony of the Heavens:
Ad. 3.
so neither is there any reason why this motion should cause a sound, more than
the supposed motion of the Heavens, which is likewise thought to be continued
unto the Air hard by us.

This will prove the Earth to move as well as the Heavens; Ad. 4.
For that has, first, a round Figure, as is generally granted. Secondly, being
considered as whole, and in it is ptoper place, it is not heavy, as was proved
before: and as for the two other conditions, neither are they true of the
Heavens; nor if they were, would they at all conduce to their motion.

1 This Argument would prove that the Sea did not ebb and flow, Ad. 5.
because there is not the same kind of motion in every drop of Water: or that
the whole Earth is not sphaericall, because every little piece of it is not of
the same Form.

This is rather an illustration than a proof; Ad. 6.
of if it do prove any thing, it may serve as well for that purpose unto which
it is afterward applied, where the motion of every Planet is supposed to depend
upon the revolution of the Sun.

That the Sun and Planets do work upon the Earth by their own real daily
motion, Ad. 7.
is the thing in question; and therefore must not be taken for a common ground.

We grant that the Earth is firm and stable from all such motions whereby it
is jogged or uncertainly shaken. Ad. 8.


1 For the authority of those Divines, which he urges for the interpretation
of these Scriptures; this will be but a weak Argument against that opinion
which is already granted to be a Paradox.

2 The Scriptures themselves, in their right meaning, will not at all conduce
to the present purpose.

As for that in Isaiah, if we consult the cohaerence, we shall find that the
scope of the Prophet is to set forth the Glory of the Church triumphant.
Wherein (he says) there shall not be any need of the Sun or Moon, but
Gods presence shall supply them both: For the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting Light, and thy God thy glory, ver. the nineteenth, and as for this
Sun and Moon, it shall not go down, or withdraw it self: but he shall
be an everlasting Light without intermission. Vid. Revel. 21. 23. item c. 22.
ver. 5.
So that it is evident he speaks of that Light which shall hereafter be, in
stead of the Sun and Moon.

As for that in the Revelations, we yield, that time shall cease; but to say
that this depends upon the cessation of the Heavens, is to beg the question,
and to suppose that which is to be proved, viz. that time is measured by the
motion of the Heavens, and not of the Earth. Genesis c. 1. l. 2. quaest. 6.
Perrerius (from whom this last argument was borrowed without acknowledgement)
might have told him in the very same place, that time does not absolutely, and
universally depend upon the motion of the Heavens, sed in motu and successione,
cujuslibet durationis, but in any such succession, by which duration may be
measured.

As for that in the Romans, we say, that there are other vanities to which the
Heavenly Bodies are subject: As first, unto many changes and alterations,
witness those Comets, which at several times have been discerned amongst
them; and then likewise to that general corruption, in which all the creatures
shall be involved at the last day. 2. Pet. 3. 10, 12.
When they shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat.

Thus you see, there is not any such invincible strength in these arguments, as
might cause the Author of them to triumph before hand with any great noise of
victory.

Another Objection like unto these is taken from the Etymology of several
words. Thus the Heavens are called Aethera, ab (...) because they are always
in motion, and the Earth Vesta, quia vi stat, because of it is immobilitie.

To which I answer: 'Twere no difficult matter to find such proofs for this
opinion, as well as against it.

Thus we may see that the Hebrew word (...) is derived from (...) quia currit;
and Terra, non quod terratur, sed quod perenni cursu omnia terat, says
Calcagnius. However, though we suppose the Etymology to be never so true and
genuine; yet it can at the best but show what the more common opinion was of
those times when such names were first imposed.

But suppose all this were so, Ob.
That the Earth had such a diurnall revolution; yet how is it conceivable that
it should at the same time have two distinct motions.

I answer: Sol.
This may easily be apprehended, if you consider how both these motions do
tend the same way from West to East. Thus a Bowl being turned out of the hand,
has two motions in the Air; one, whereby it is carried round; the other,
whereby it is cast forward.

From what has been delivered in this Chapter, the indifferent Reader may
gather some satisfaction for those Arguments which are usually urged against
this diurnall motion of the Earth.

PROP. IX.
That it is more probable the Earth does move, than the Sun or Heavens.

AMongst those many Arguments that may be urged for the confirmation of this
truth, I shall set down only these five.

1 If we suppose the Earth to be the cause of this motion, then will those vast
and glorious Bodies of the Heavens be freed from that inconceivable, unnatural
swiftnes, which must otherwise be attributed unto them.

For if the diurnall revolution be in the Heavens, Vid. Maest. Epit. Astr. lib.
1. in fine.
then it will follow according to the common Hypothesis, that each Star in
the Equator must in every hour move at the least 4529538 Germane miles. So
that according to the observation of De Prop. l. 5. prop. 58.
Cardan, who tells us, that the pulse of a well tempered man does beat 4000
times in an hour; one of these Stars in that space, whilst the pulse beats
once, must pass 1132 Germane miles (says Alphraganus:) Or according to Tycho
732 Germane miles. But these numbers seem to be somewhat of the least; and
therefore many others do much enlarge them, affirming that every Star in the
Equator, in one beating of the pulse, most move 2528 of these miles.

It Is the assertion of Comment. in prim cap. Sphaerae.
Calvius, that though the distance of the Orbs, and so consequently their
swiftness, seem to be altogether incredible; yet it is rather far greater
in it self, than Astronomers usually suppose it; and yet (says he) according
to the common grounds, every star in the Equator, must move 42398437 miles in
an hour. And though a man should constantly travel 40 miles a day; yet he
would not be able to go so far as a Star does in one hour, under 3904 years:
Or if we will suppose an Arrow to be of the same swiftness, then must it
compass this great Globe of Earth and Water 1884 times in an hour. And a Bird
that could but fly as fast, might go round the World seven times in that space,
whilst one could say, Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum.

Which though it be a pretty round pace; yet you must conceive that all this is
spoken only of the eighth Sphaere, and so being compared to the swiftness of
the primum mobile, is but a slow and heavy motion.

For (says the same author) the thickness of each Orb is equal to the
distance of it is concave superficies from the center of the Earth. Thus the
Orb of the Moon does contain as much space in it is thickness, as there is
betwixt the nearest parts of that and the center. Thus also the eighth Sphaere
is as thick as that whole space betwixt the center of the Earth, and it is own
concave superficies. So likewise must it be in those three other Orbs, which
he supposes to be above the Starry Heaven. Now if we proportion their
swiftness according to this difference in their bigness, you may then
conceive (if you can) what a kind of celeritie that must be, by which the
primum mobile will be whirled about.

Tycho makes the distance of the Stars to be much less, and their motion
flower; and yet he is feign to confess, that it is omni cogitatione celerior.

Clavius likewise speaking concerning the swiftness of the Starry Orb, does
acknowledge, Quod velocitas ejus captum humani ingenij excedit. What then could
he think of the primum mobile?

Dr Gilbert being (it seems) astonished at the consideration of this strange
swiftness, De magnete, lib. 6. cap. 3.
says of it, that it is motus supra omnes cogitationes, somnia, fabulas and
licentias poeticas insuperabilis, ineffabilis, incomprehensibilis. A man may
more easily conceive the possibility of any Fable or Fiction how Beasts and
Trees might talk together, than how any material Body should be moved with
such a swiftness.

Not but that it is possible for God to turn them about with a far greater
velocitie. Nay it is possible for Art to contrive a motion, which shall be
equally slow in that proportion as this is swift. But however, the question
here, is not what can be done, but what is most likely to be don according to
the usual course of Nature. It Is the part of a Philosopher, in the resolution
of natural events, not to fly unto the absolute Power of God, and tell us what
he can do, but what according to the usual way of Providence, is most likely
to be done, to find out such causes of things, as may seem most easy and
probable to our reason.

If you ask what repugnancy there is in the Heavens, unto so great a swiftnes:
we answer, Their being such vast, material condensed substances, with which
this inconceivable motion cannot agree.

Since Motion and Magnitude are two such Geometrical things, as bear a
mutual proportion to one another; therefore it may seem convenient, that
slownesse should be more agreeable to a great Body, and swiftnes to a lesser:
and so it would be more consonant to the Principles of Nature, that the Earth,
which is of a lesser quantity, should be appointed to such a motion as is
somewhat proportionable to it is bigness, than that the Heavens that are of such
a vast magnitude, should be whirled about with such an incredible swiftnes,
which does as far exceed the proportion of their bigness, as their bigness
does exceed this Earth, that is but as a point or center to them. It Is not
likely that nature in these constant and great works, should so much deviate
from that usual harmony and proportion which she observes in lesser matters. If
this Globe of Earth only were appointed to move every day round the Orb of
the fixed Stars, though it be but a little Body, and so more capable of a
swift motion; yet that swiftness would be so extremely disproportionable unto
it, that we could not with reason conceive it possible, according to the
usual course of nature. But now that the Heavens themselves, of such strange
bigness, with so many Stars, which do so far exceed the magnitude of our
Earth, should be able to turn about with the same celeritie: Oh it is
altogether beyond the fancy of a Poet or a mad man.

For answer unto this Argument, our adversaries tell us, that there is not in
the Heavens any repugnancie to so swift a motion; and that whether we consider
the nature of those Bodies, or secondly, the swiftness of this motion.

1 For the nature of those Bodies, either their Qualities. Quantity.


1 There is not in them the Qualities of lightness or heaviness, or any the
least contrariety that may make them reluctant to one another.

2 Their magnitude will help them in their swiftness: Ross. lib. 1. sect. 1.
ca. 1.
For the greater any body is, the quicker will it be in it is motion, and that
not only when it is moved by an inward Principle, as a millstone will descend
faster than a little pibble; but also when it is motion does proceed from some
external Agent, as the Wind will drive a great Cloud, or a heavy Ship, when
it is not able to stir a little Stone.

2 As for the swiftness of this motion, the possibility of it may be
illustrated by other particulars in Nature: As,

1 The sound of a Cannon, Idem lib. 2. sect. 1. ca. 5.
in a little time is carried for twenty miles distance.

2 Though a Star be situated so remotely from us; yet the Eye discerns it
in a moment, which is not without some motion, either of the Species of the
Star, or the Rays of the Eye. Thus also the Light does in an instant pass
from one side of the Heaven to another. Idem lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 2.


3 If the force of Powder be able to carry a Bullet with so great a swiftness,
we need not doubt then, but that the Heavens are capable of such a celeritie,
as is usually attributed unto them.

Unto these it may be answered:

1 Where they say that the heavenly Bodies are without all gravitie, we grant
it, in the same sense as our Earth also, being considered as whole, and in it is
proper place, may be denied to be heavy: since this quality in the exactest
sense; can only be ascribed unto such parts as are severed from the whole to
which they belong. But however, since the Heavens or Stars are of a material
substance, it is impossible but there should be in them some ineptitude to
motion; because matter is of it self a dull and sluggish thing; and by so much
the more, as it is kept close and condensed together. And though the followers
of Ptolomey do with much confidence deny the Heavens to be capable of any
reluctancie to motion; yet it were easy to prove the contrary out of their
own Principles. It Is not conceivable, how the upper Sphaere should move the
nether, unless their Superficies were full of rugged parts (which they deny:)
or else one of the Orbs must lean upon the other with it is weight, and so
make it partake of it is own motion. And besides, they tell us, that the
farther any Sphaere is distant from the primum mobile, the less is it hindered
by that in it is proper course, and the sooner does it finish it is own
revolution. From whence it will easily follow, that these Bodies have
resistency from one another.

I have often wondered, why amongst the enchanted Buildings of the Poets, they
have not fained any Castle to be made of the same materials with the sollid
Orbs, since in such a fabric there would have been these eminent conveniences.

1 It must needs be very pleasant, by reason of it is perspicuitie, because it
is more diaphanous than the Air it self, and so the Walls of it could not
hinder the prospect any way.

2 Being so solid and impenitrable, it must needs be excellent against al
violence of weathers, as also against the assaults of the enemy, who should not
be able to break it with the most furious batteries of the Ram, or pierce it
with any Cannon shot.

3 Being void of all heaviness, a man may carry it up and down with him, as a
Snaile does his House: and so whether he follow the enemy, or fly from him,
he has still this advantage, that he may take his castle and defense along
with him.

But then again, there are on the other side as many inconveniences. For,

1 It Is perspicuitie would make it so open, that a man should not be able to
retire himself into any private part of it. And then,

2 Being so extremely sollid, as well as invisible, a man should be still in
danger of knocking his head against every Wall and Pillar; unless it were also
intangible, as some of the Peripatetickes affirm.

3 It Is being without all gravitie, would bring this inconvenience, that every
little puff of wind would blow it up and down; since some of the same sect
are not ashamed to say, that the Heavens are so utterly devoid of heaviness,
that if but a little Fly should justle against the vast frame of the
Celestial Sphaeres, he would move them out of their places.

A strong fancy, that could be at leisure, might might make excellent sport
with this Astronomicall fiction.

So that this first evasion of our Adversaries, will not shelter them from the
force of that Argument, which is taken from the incredible swiftnes of the
Heavens.

2 Whereas they tell us in the second place, that a bigger Body, as a Millstone,
will naturally descend swifter than a less, as a Pibble. I answer: This is not
because such a great Body is in it self more easily movable; but because the
bigger any thing is which is out of it is own place, the stronger will be it is
natural desire of returning thither, and so consequently, the quicker it is
motion. But now those Bodies that move circularly, are always in their proper
scituations, and so the same reason is not applyable unto them. And then,
whereas it is said that Magnitude does always add to the swiftness of a
violent motion (as Wind will move a great Ship sooner than a little Stone:)
We answer, This is not because a Ship is more easily movable in it self
than a little Stone: For I suppose the Objector will not think he can throw
the one as far as the other; but because these little Bodies are not so
liable to that kind of violence from whence their motion does proceed.

As for those instances which are cited to illustrate the possibility of this
swiftness in the Heavens, we answer: The passage of a sound is but very slow
in comparison to the motion of the Heavens. And then besides, the swiftness of
the Species of sound or sight, which are accidents, are not fit to infer the
like celeritie in a material substance: and so likewise for the Light which De
Anima^. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Aristotle himself, and with him the generality of Philosophers, do for this
very reason prove not to be a Body, because it moves with such swiftness, of
which (it seems) they thought a Body to be incapable. Nay, the Ross. lib. 2.
sect. 1. ca. 4.
Objector himself in another place, speaking of Light in reference to a
substance, does say: Lumen est accidens, sic species rei visae, and alia est
ratio substantiarum, alia accidentium.

To that of a Bullet, we answer: He might as well have illustrated the
swiftnes of a bullet, which will pass 4 or 5 miles in 2 minutes, by the motion
of a hand in a Watch, which passes 2 or 3 inches in 12 hours; there being a
greater disproportion betwixt the motion of the heavens, and the swiftnes of a
Bullet, than there is 'twixt the swiftnes of a bullet, and the motion of a hand
in a watch.

Another Argument to this purpose may be taken from the chief end of the
Diurnall and Annual motions, Arg. 2.
which is to distinguish betwixt Night and Day, Winter and Summer; and so
consequently, to serve for the commodities and seasons of the habitable World.
Wherefore it may seem more agreeable to the Wisdom of Providence, for to make
the Earth as well the efficient, as the final cause of this motion: Especially
since nature in her other operations does never use any tedious difficult means
to perform that which may as well be accomplished by shorter and easier
ways. But now, the appearances would be the same, in respect of us, if only
this little point of Earth were made the subject of these motions, as if the
vast Frame of the World, with all those Stars of such number and bigness were
moved about it. Galen.
It Is a common Maxim, (...). Nature does nothing in vain, but in all her
courses does take the most compendious way. It Is not therefore (I say) likely,
that the whole Fabric of the Heavens, which do so much exceed our Earth in
magnitude and perfection, should be put to undergo so great and constant a
Work in the service of our Earth, which might more easily save all that labor
by the circumvolution of it is own Body; especially, since the Heavens do not
by this motion attain any farther perfection for themselves, but are made thus
serviceable to this little Ball of Earth. So that in this case it may seem to
argue as much improvidence in nature to employ them in this motion, as it would
in a Lansberg.
Mother, who in warming her Child, would rather turn the fire about that,
than that about the sire: Or in a Keplar.
Cook, who would not roast his Meat by turning it about to the fire; but rather,
by turning the fire about it: Galilaeus.
Or in a man, who ascending some high Tower, to save the labor of stirring his
head, should rather desire that all the Regions might successively be turned
before his eye, that so he might easily take a view of them.

We allow every Watch-maker so much wisdom as not to put any motion in his
Instrument, which is superfluous, or may be supplied an easier way: and shall
we not think that Nature has as much providence as every ordinary
Mechanicke? Or can we imagine that She should appoint those numerous and vast
Bodies, the Stars, to compass us with such a swift and restless motion, so
full of confusion and uncertainties, when as all this might as well be done by
the revolution of this little Ball of Earth?

Amongst the several parts of the World, Arg. 3.
there are six Planets which are generally granted to move. As for the Sun and
the Earth, and the fixed Stars, it is yet in question, which of them are
naturally endowed with the same condition. Now common reason will dictate unto
us, that motion which is most agreeable to that which in kind and properties is
most near to those Bodies that undoubtedly are moved. But now there is one
eminent qualification, wherein the Earth does agree with the Planets; whereas the
Sun, together with the fixed stars, do in the same respect differ from them:
and that is Light, which all the Planets and so too the Earth, are fain to
borrow elsewhere, whilst the Sun and the Stars have it of their own. From
whence it may be probably concluded, that the Earth is rather the subject of
this motion than the other. To this it may be added, that the Sun and Stars
seem to be of a more excellent Nature than the other parts of the World; and
therefore should in reason be endowed with the best qualifications. But now
motion is not so noble a condition as rest. That is but a kind of wearisome and
servile thing; whereas, this is usually ascribed to God himself: Of whom it is
said:

Boet. de Consol. Phil. lib. 3.
Immotus stabilisque manens dans cuncta moveri. Arg. 4.
De Coelo, li. 2. cap. 10.
Aristotle tells us, it is very agreeable to reason that the time appointed for
the revolution of each Orb, should be proportionable to it is bigness. But now
this can only be by making the Earth a Planet, and the subject of the annual
and diurnall motions. Wherefore it is probable, that this does rather move than
the Heavens.

According to the common Hypothesis, the primum mobile will move round in a
day. Saturn in thirty years. Jupiter in twelve. Mars in two. The Sun,
Venus, and Mercury, which have several Orbs, yet will agree in their
revolutions, being each of them about a year in finishing their courses:
Whereas by making the Earth a Planet, there will be a just proportion betwixt
the bigness of the Orbs, and the time of their motions: For then, next to the
Sun or Center, there will be the Sphaere of Mercury; which as it is but
narrow in it is diameter, so likewise is it quick in it is motion, running it is
course in eighty eight days. Venus, that is next unto it, in 224 days. The
Earth in 365 days, or a year. Mars, in 687 days. Jupiter in 4332 days.
Saturn, in 10759 days. Thus likewise is it with those Medicean Stars that
encompasse Jupiter. That which is lowest amongst them, finishes his course in
two and twenty hours; the next in three days and a half; the third, in seven
days; and the farthest in seventeen days. Now as it is (according to
Aristotle's confession) more likely that Nature should observe such a due
proportion betwixt the Heavenly Orbs: so is it more probable, that the Earth
should move, rather than the Heavens.

This may likewise be confirmed from the appearance of Comets: Arg. 5.
Concerning which, there are three things commonly granted, or if they were
not, might be easily proved: namely,

1 That there are diverse Comets in the Air, betwixt the Moon and our Earth.

2 That many of these Comets do seem to rise and set as the Stars.

3 That this appearing motion is not properly their own, but communicated unto
them from somewhat else.

But now, this motion of theirs cannot be caused by the Heavens; and therefore
it must necessarily proceed from the revolution of our Earth.

That the Moons Orb cannot carry along with it the greater part of the air
wherein these Comets are placed, might easily be proved from the common
grounds. For the concave Superficies of that Sphaere is usually supposed to be
exactly terse and smooth; so that the mere touch of it cannot turn about the
whole Element of Fire, with a motion that is not natural unto it. Nor could
this Elementarie Fire which they imagine to be of a more rarefied and subtle
Nature, communicate the same motion to the thicker Air, and that to the waters
(as some affirm:) For by what means could that smooth Orb take hold of the
adjoining Air. To this Sarsius answers, that there are great gibbosities, and
mountainous inequalities, in the concavitie of the lowest Sphaere, and by these
is it enabled to carry along with it the Fire and Air. But Antarist. cap. 16.
Fromondus tells him, Fictitiaista and ad fugam reperta sunt. And yet his own
Conjecture is scarce so good, when he affirms, that this motion of the
aetheriall Air, as also of that elementary Air hard by us, is caused by that
ruggedness which there is in the Bodies of the Planets; of which opinion we
may with as good reason say as he says to Sarsius: Fictitia ista, and ad
fugam reperta; These things are mere fictions invented for shifts, and without
any probable ground.

But now this appearance of the Comets may easily be resolved, if we suppose
the earth to move. For then, though they did still remain in their wonted
places; yet this, by it is diurnall revolution successively with drawing it self
from them, they will appear to rise and set. And therefore, according to this
common natural experiment, it is more probable that the Earth should move,
than the Heavens.

Another Argument urged by some, to prove that this Globe of Earth is easily
movable, is taken from the opinion of those who affirm that the access of any
weight unto a new place: Vid. Vasq. lib. 1. disp. 2. cap. 816.
as suppose an army does make the Earth poise it self afresh, and change the
center of gravitie that it had before: but this is not generally granted; and
therefore not to be insisted on as a common ground.

To this purpose likewise is that inference of Lansbergius, who from Archimedes
his saying, that he could move the Earth, if he knew where to stand and fasten
his instrument; concludes, that the Earth is easily movable; whereas 'twas the
intent of Archimedes in that speech, to show the infinite power of Engines:
there being no weight so great, but that an instrument might be invented to
move it.

Before we finish this Chapter, it is requisite that we enquire what kind of
faculty that is from which those motions that Copernicus ascribes unto the
Earth, does proceed. Whether or no it be some Animal Power, that does assist
(as Aristotle) or inform (as Keplar thinks) or else some other natural motive
quality which is intrinsicall unto it.

We may observe, That when the proper genuine cause of any motion is not
obvious, men are very prone to attribute unto that which they discern to be
the most frequent Original of it in other things, Life. Thus the Stoics
affirm, the Soul of the Water to be the cause of the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea. Senec. Not. Qu. lib. 5. cap. 5, 6.
Thus others think the Wind to proceed from the Life of the Air, whereby it
is able to move it self several ways, as other living creatures. And upon
the same grounds do the Platonicks, Stoics, and some of the Peripateticks,
affirm the Heavens to be animated. From hence likewise it is, that so many do
maintain Aristotle his opinion concerning Intelligences: which some of his
followers, the Schoolmen, do confirm out of Scripture. From that place in
Mat. 24. 29. where it is said, The Powers of the Heaven shall be shaken. In
which words, by Powers (say they) are meant the Angels, by whose power it is,
that the Heavens are moved. And so likewise in that, Job, 9. 13. Where the
vulgar has it, Sub quo curvantur, qui portant orbem; that is, the
Intelligences. Which Text, might serve altogether as well to prove the Fable of
Atlas and Hercules. Thus Cajetan concludes from that place in the Psalm, 136.
5. Where it is said, God by wisdom made the heavens: or according to the
vulgar, Qui fecit Coelos intellectu, That the Heavens are moved by an
intelligent Soul.

If we consider the original of this opinion, we shall find it to proceed
from that mistake of Aristotle, who thought the Heavens to be Eternal; and
therefore to require such a moving cause, as being of an immateriall Substance,
might be exempted from all that weariness and inconstancy, which other things
are liable unto.

But now this ground of his is evidently false, since it is certain, That the
Heavens had a beginning, and shall have an end. However, the employing of
Angels in these motions of the World, is both superfluous, and very improbable.

1 Because a natural Power, intrinsicall to those Bodies, will serve the turn
as well. And as for other operations, which are to be constant and regular,
Nature does commonly make use of some inward Principle.

2 The Intelligences being immateriall, cannot immediately work upon a Body.
Nor does any one tell us what Instruments they should make use of in this
business. They have not any hands to take hold of the Heavens, or turn them
about. And that opinion of Aquinas, Dur and, Soncinas, with other Schoolmen,
seems to be without all reason; who make the faculty, whereby the Angels move
the Orbs, to be the very same with their Understandings and Will: So that if an
Angel do but merely suspend the Act of willing their Motion, they must
necessarily stand still; and on the contrary, his only willing them to move,
shall be enough to carry them about in their several courses. Since it were
then a needless thing for Providence to have appointed Angels unto this
business, which might have been done as well by the only Will of God. And
besides, how are the Orbs capable of perceiving this Will in the
Intelligences? Or if they were, yet what motive Faculty have they of
themselves, which can enable them to obey it?

Now as it would be with the Heavens: so likewise is it with the Earth, which
may be turned about in it is diurnall revolution, without the help of
Intelligences, by some motive Power of it is own, that may be intrinsicall unto
it.

If it be yet enquired, what cause there is of it is annual motion: I answer,
It Is easily conceivable, how the same Principle may serve for both these, since
they tend the same way from West to East.

However, that opinion of Keplar is not very improbable, That all the Primary
Planets are moved round by the Sun, which once in twenty five, or twenty six
days, does observe a revolution about it is own Axis, and so carry along the
Planets that encompasse it; which Planets are therefore slower or swifter,
according to their distances from him. If you ask by what means the Sun can
produce such a motion?

He answers: By sending forth a kind of Magneticke Virtue in strait Lines, from
each part of it is Body; of which there is always a constant succession: so
that as soon as one beam of this vigor has passed a Planet, there is another
presently takes hold of it, like the teeth of a Wheel.

But how can any virtue hold out to such a distance?

He answers: First, as light and heat, together with those other secret
influences, which work upon Minerals in the Bowels of the Earth: so likewise
may the Sun send forth a magneticke, motive virtue, whose power may be
continued to the farthest Planets. Secondly, if the Moon, according to common
Philosophy may move the Sea, why then may not the Sun move this Globe of Earth?

In such Quaere's as these, we can conclude only from conjectures that speech
of the wise man, Eccl. 3. 11. being more especially verified of Astronomicall
questions, concerning the Frame of the whole Universe, That no man can find
out the Works of God, from the beginning to the end. Though we may discern
diverse things in the World, which may argue the infinite Wisdom and Power of
the Author; yet there will be always some particulars left for our dispute
and enquiry, and we shall never be able with all our industry, to attain a
perfect comprehension of the creatures, or to find them wholly out, from the
beginning to the end.

The Providence of God having thus contrived it, Valles Sacr. Philos. c. ^4.
that so man might look for another Life after this, when all his longing and
thirst shall be fully satisfied. For since no natural appetite is in vain, it
must necessarily follow, that there is a possibility of attaining so much
knowledge as shall be commensurate unto these desires, which because it is not
to be had in this World, it will behove us then to expect and provide for
another.

PROP. X.
That this Hypothesis is exactly agreeable to common appearances.

IT has been already proved, that the Earth is capable of such a situation
and motion, as this opinion supposes it to have. It remains, that in the last
place we show how agreeable this would be unto those ordinary seasons of
Days, Months, Years, and all other appearances in the Heavens.

1 As for the difference betwixt days and nights: it is evident, That this may
be caused as well by the revolution of the Earth, as the motion of the Sun;
since the Heavenly Bodies must needs seem after the same manner to rise and
set, whether or no they themselves by their own motion do pass by our Horizon
and Vertical point; or whether our Horizon and Vertical point, by the
revolution of our Earth, do pass by them. According to that of De Coelo, lib.
2. cap. 8.
Aristotle, (...). There will not appear any difference, whether or no the Eye
be moved from the Object, or the Object from the Eye. And therefore I cannot
choose but wonder that a man of any reason or sense should make choice of no
better an Argument to conclude his book withal, than that which were read at
the later end of Al. Ross. where he infers, that the Earth does not move,
because then the shadow in a Sunnediall would not be altered.

2 As for the difference of Months, we say, That the diverse illumination of
the Moon, the different bigness of her Body, her remaining for a longer or
shorter time in the earth's shadow, when she is eclipsed, etc. may well enough
be solved by supposing her to move above our Earth, in an Eccentricall
Epicycle. Thus,



In which kind of Hypothesis there will be a double difference of motion. The
one caused by the different situation of the Moons Body in it is own
Eccentricke. The other by the different situation of the Moons Orb in the
Earth's Eccentricke: which is so exactly answerable to the motions and
appearances of this Planet, that from hence Lansbergius draws an Argument for
this Systeme of the heavens, which in the strength of his confidence he calls,
Demonstrationem (...), cui nulla ratione potest contradici.

4 As for the difference betwixt winter and summer; betwixt the number and
length of days, which appertain to each of those seasons: the seeming motion of
the sun from one sign to another in the Zodiac: All this may easily be
solved, by supposing the Earth to move in an Eccentricall Orb about the Sun.
Thus,



Suppose the Earth to be at C. then the Sun at A. will seem to be in the
sign and at the greatest distance from us, because the Earth is then in the
farthest parts of its Eccentricke. When after by it is Annual Motion it has
passed successively by the Signs at length it comes to the other Solstice at
B. where the Sun will appear in and seem biggest, as being in it is Perigie,
because our Earth is then in the nearest part of it is Eccentricke.

As for all other Appearances of the Sun which concern the Annual Motion,
you may see by the following Figure, that they are exactly agreeable to this
Hypothesis.

Where you have the Earth described about the Sun at A. in the four chief
points of the Zodiac; namely, the two Equinoctials at and and the Solstices
and and. Through all which points, the Earth does pass in his annual motion
from West to East.

The Axis upon which our Earth does move, is represented by the Line B. C.
which Axis does always decline from that of the Eclipticke, about 23 degrees,
thirty minutes. The Points B. C. are imagined to be the Poles, B. the North
Pole, and C. the South.

Now if we suppose this Earth to turn about its own Axis, by a diurnall
motion, then every Point of it will describe a parallel Circle, which will be
either bigger or lesser, according to it is distance from the Poles. The chief
of them are the Equinoctial D. E. The two Tropicks, F. G. and H. I. The two
Polar Circles M. N. the Arcticke, and K. L. the Antarcticke: of which, the
Equinoctial only is a great Circle, and therefore will always be equally
divided by the Line of Illumination M. L. whereas the other paralels are thereby
distributed into unequal parts. Amongst which parts, the diurnall Arches of
those that are toward B. the North Pole, are bigger than the Nocturnall, when
our Earth is in and the Sun appears in Insomuch, that the whole Arcticke
Circle is enlightened, and there is day for half a year together under that
Pole.

Now when the Earth proceeds to the other Solstice at and the Sun appears in
then that Hemisphere must be involved in darkness, which did before partake of
Light. And those paralels toward the North and South Poles will still be
divided by the same inequality. But those bigger parts which were before
enlightened, will now be darkened, and vice versa. As when the Earth was in N.
the Arcticke Circle M. N. was wholly enlightened, and the Antarcticke, K. L.
altogether in the dark. So now, when it is in A. the Antarcticke, K. L. will be
wholly in the Light, and the other M. N. altogether obscured. Whereas the Sun
before was vertical to the inhabitants at the Tropic F. G. So now is he in
the same situation to those that live under the other Tropicke, H. I. And
whereas before the Pole did incline twenty three degrees thirty minutes toward
the Sun, so now does it recline as much from him. The whole difference will
amount to 47 degrees, which is the distance of one Tropicke from the other.

But now in the two other Figures, when the Earth is in either of the
Equinoctialls the Circle of Illumination will pass through both the Poles; and
therefore must divide all the paralels into equal parts. From whence it will
follow, that the Day and Night must then be equal in all places of the World.

As the Earth is here represented in it turns only the enlightened part
toward us: as it is in we see it is nocturnall Hemisphere.

So that according to this Hypothesis, we may easily and exactly reconcile
every appearance concerning the difference betwixt Days, and Nights, Winter
and Summer, together with all those other varieties which depend upon them.

If you would know how the Planets (according to the Systeme of the Heavens)
will appear Direct, Stationarie, Retrograde; and yet still move regularly
about their own Centers, you may plainly discern it by this following
Diagram.



Where suppose the Sun to be at A. the Circle (B. G. M.) to be the Orb of the
Earth's motion, and that above it noted with the same Letters, to be the
Sphaere of Jupiter; and the uppermost of all, to be a part of the Zodiac in
the Starry Heaven.

Now if you conceive the Letters, BCDEF GHIKLM, and bcdef ghiklm, to divide the
Earth's Orb, and that of Jupiter, into several parts, proportionable to the
slownesse or swiftnes of their different motions (Jupiter finishing his course
in twelve years, and the Earth in one) then supposing the Earth to be at the
point (B.) and Jupiter likewise in his Orb to be situated at (b) he will
appear unto us to be in the Zodiac at the point (r.) But afterward, both of
them moving forward to the Letter (Cc.) Jupiter will seem to be in the
Zodiac at (v) as having passed directly forward according to the order of the
Signs. And so likewise each of them being transferred to the places (Dd.)
(Ee.) Jupiter will still appear Direct, and to have moved in the Zodiac unto
the Points (yz.) But now when the Earth comes to be more immediately interposed
betwixt this Planet and the Sun; as when both of them are at the Letter (Ff.)
then will Jupiter be discerned in the Zodiac at (x.) So that all the while
the Earth was passing the Arch (E F) Jupiter did still remain betwixt the
Points (z) and (x) and therefore must seem unto us as if he were Stationary;
but afterward, both of them being carried to (Gg.) then Jupiter will appear
at (s) as if by a hasty motion he had returned from his former course the space
(x s.) Both of them passing to (H h) this Planet will still seem to be
swiftly Retrograde, and appear in the Point at (p) but when they come to the
Points (I i.) Jupiter will then seem to be slower in this motion, and to have
only passed the space (P n.) Both of them being transferred to (K k.) Jupiter
will then appear in the Zodiac at (o) as being again Direct, going forward
according to the order of the Signs, and while the Earth did pass the Arch
(IK) Jupiter then remained between the points (n o.) and so consequently, did
again seem to be Stationary. Both of them coming to (L l.) and thence to
(M. N.) Jupiter will still appear Direct, and to have gone forward in the
Zodiac from (q) to (t.) So that all the space wherein Jupiter is retrograde,
is represented by the Arch (n z.) In which space, he himself moves in his own
Orb, the Arch (e i) and so the Earth in it is Orb, a proportional space (EI.)

As it has been said of this Planet, so likewise is it applyable to the other.
Saturn, Mars, Venus, Mercury; all which are thus made to appear direct,
Stationarie, and retrograde, by the motion of our Earth, without the help of
those Epicycles and Eccentricks, and such unnecessary wheel work, wherewith
Ptolomey has filled the Heavens. Insomuch that here Antarist. cap. 18.
Fromondus is feign to confess, Nullo Argumento in speciem probabiliori, Vest.
tract. 4. cap. 3.
motum terrae annuum a Copernicanis astrui, quam illo stationis, directionis,
regressionis Planetarum. There is not any more probable Argument to prove the
annual motion of the Earth, than it is agreeableness to the station,
direction, and regression of the Planets.

Lastly, that Copernicus his Systeme of the Heavens, is very answerable to the
exactest observations, may be manifest from this following description of it.



Suppose the Sun to be situated at A. Now because Mercury is found by
experience to be always very near the Sun, so that he does for the most
part lie hid under his Rays. As also because this Planet has a more lively
vigorous Light than any of the other; therefore we may infer, that his Orb
is placed next unto the Sun, as that at B.

As for Venus, it is observed, That She does always keep at a set distance from
the Sun, never going from him above forty degrees or thereabouts; that her
Body appears through the perspective to be forty times bigger at one time than
at another; that when She seems biggest and nearest unto us, we then discern
her as being perfectly round. Therefore does this Planet also move in a Circle
that incompasses the Sun. Which Circle does not contain the Earth within it;
because then, Venus would sometimes be in opposition to the Sun; whereas,
it is generally granted, that She never yet came so far as to be in a Sextile.

Nor is this Circle below the Sun (as Ptolomey supposes) because then this
Planet, in Matutina Vespertin^.
both it is Conjunctions, would appear horned, which She does not.

Nor is it above the Sun, because then She would always appear in the Full,
and never Horned.

From whence it will follow, that this Orb must necessarily be betwixt the
Earth and the Sun; as that at C.

As for Mars: it is observed, That he does appear sixty times bigger when he
is near us, than at his greatest distance; that he is sometimes in opposition
to the Sun. From whence we may conclude, that his Orb does contain our
Earth within it. It Is observed also, that he does constantly appear in the
Full, and never Horned; from whence likewise it is manifest, that the Sun is
comprehended within it is Orb, as it is in that which is represented by the
Circle, E.

And because the like appearances are observed in Jupiter and Saturn (though
in less degrees) therefore we may with good reason conceive them to be in the
Heavens, after some such manner as they are here set down in the Figure, by the
Circles, F. G.

As for the Moon: because She is sometimes in opposition to the Sun;
therefore must her Orb comprehend in it the Earth: because She appears dark
in her Conjunction, and sometimes eclipses the Sun; therefore that must
necessarily be without her Orb, as it is in that Epicycle at H. In the Center
of which, the Earth must necessarily be situated according to all those
appearances mentioned before. So that the Orb of it is annual motion, will be
represented by the Circle D.

All which appearances, cannot so well be reconciled by Ptolomey, Tycho,
Origanus, or by any other Hypothesis, as by this of Copernicus. But the
application of these to the several Planets, together with sundry other
particulars, concerning the Theoricall part of Astronomy, you may see more
fully set down by those who have purposely handled this subject, Copernicus,
Rheticus, Galilaeus; but more especially Keplar: nnto whom I do acknowledge my
self indebted for sundry particulars in this discourse.

I have done with that which was the chief purpose of the present Treatise;
namely, the removal of those common prejudices that men usually entertain
against this opinion. It remains, that by way of conclusion, I endeavor to
stir up others unto these kind of Studies, which by most men are so much
neglected.

It Is the most rational way, in the prosecution of several Objects, to
proportion our love and endeavor after every thing, according to the
excellency and desireablenesse of it. But now, amongst all Earthly
Contentments, there is nothing either better in it self, or more convenient
for us, than this kind of Learning; and that, whether you consider it according
to it is general Nature, as a Science; or according to it is more special
Nature, as such a Science.

1 Consider it as a Science. Certain it is, that amongst the variety of
Objects, those are more eligible which conduce unto the welfare of that which
is our best part, our Souls. It Is not so much the pleasing of our senses, or
the increasing of our Fortunes, that does deserve our industry, as the
information of our Judgments, the improvement of our Knowledge. Whatever the
World may think; yet it is not a vast Estate, a Noble Birth, an eminent place,
that can add any thing to our true real Worth; but it must be the degrees of
that which makes us Men, that must make us better Men, the endowments of our
Soul, the enlargement of our Reason. Were it not for the contemplation of
Philosophy, the heathen Praef. ad lib. 1. Not. Quaest.
Seneca would not so much as thank the gods for his Being. Nisi ad haec
admitterer non fuit opere pretium nasci. Detrahe hoc inestimabile bonum, non
est vita tanti, ut sudem, ut aestuem. Take but away this benefit, and he would
not think Life worth the sweating for. So much happiness could he discern
in the Studies of Nature. And therefore as a Science in general, it may very
well deserve our Love and Industry.

2 Consider it as such a particular Science, Astronomy: the Word signifies the
Law of the Stars; and the Hebrews (who do not ordinarily admit of
composition) call it in two words, Job 38. 33. Ier. 33. 25.
(...) Coelorum statuta, or the Ordinances of Heaven; because they are governed
in their courses by a certain rule, as the Psalmist speaks in the hundred forty
eighth Psa. ve. 6. God has given them a Law which shall not be broken.

Now this of all natural Sciences may best of all challenge our Industry; and
that, whither you consider it, 1 Absolutely, as it is in it self: or, 2 As it
stands in reference to us.


1 As it is in it self. The excellency of any Science may be judged of (says
the Philosopher) first, by the excellency of the Object. Secondly, by the
certainty of it is demonstrations.

1. For the Object. It is no less than the whole World (since our Earth also
is one of the Planets) more especially those vast and glorious Bodies of the
Heavens. So that in this respect, it far exceeds all those barren, empty
speculations, about Materia prima, and Universal, and such like cob webs of
learning; in the study of which, so many do misplace their younger years. And
for the same reason likewise is it to be preferred before all those other
Sciences, whose subjects are not either of so wide an extent, or so excellent a
Nature.

2 For the demonstrations of Astronomy, they are as infallible as truth it
self; and for this reason also does it excel all other knowledge, which does
more depend upon conjectures and uncertaintie. They are only those who want
skill in the Principles of this Science, that mistrust the conclusions of it.
Since therefore in these respects, it is one of the most excellent Sciences in
Nature, it may best deserve the industry of Man, who is one of the best Works
of Nature. Other creatures were made with their Heads and Eyes turned
downwards: would you know why man was not created so too? why it was, that he
might be an Astronomer? Os hominum sublime dedit, Celumque tueri
Iussit, and erectos ad Syder a tollere vultus.


God gave to man an upright face, that he Might view the stars, and learn
astronomy.

2 Consider it in reference to us, and so it is, 1 Most Useful. 2 Most
Pleasant.


1 Most useful, and that in sundry respects. It proves a God and a Providence,
and incites our hearts to a greater admiration and fear of his omnipotency.
We may understand by the Heavens, how much mightier he is that made them; for
by the greatness and beauty of the creatures, proportionably the Maker of them
is seen, says the book of Wisdom, 13. 4. 5. Itwas hence that Aristotle did
fetch his chief Argument to prove a primus motor. 'T was the consideration of
these things that first led Men to the knowledge and worship of God (says
Tuscul. 1. Item Plut. de placit. Phil. l. 1. c. 6.
Tully.) Haec nos primum ad Deorum cultum, tum ad modestiam, magnitudinemque
animi erudivit. And therefore when God by the Prophet would convince the people
of his Deity, he bids them lift up their eyes on high; and behold who has
created those things that brings out their Host by number, that calls them
all by their Names, etc. Isa. 40. 26. which occasioned that saying of
Lactantius: Instit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Tanta rerum magnitudo, tanta dispositio tanta in servandis ordinibus,
temporibusque constantia; non potuit aut olim sine provido artifice oriri, aut
constare tot saeculis sine incolapotente, aut perpetuum gubernari sine perit^
and sciente rectore, quod ratio ipsa declarat. Such a great order and constancy
amongst those vast Bodies, could not at first be made but by a wise Providence,
nor since preserved without a powerful Inhabitant, nor so perpetually governed
without a skillful guide.

True indeed, an ordinary view and common apprehension of these Celestial
Bodies, must needs manifest the Excellency and Omnipotency of their Maker;
but yet a more accurate and diligent enquiry into their Natures, will raise our
Understandings unto a nearer Knowledge, and greater Admiration of the Deity.
As it is in those inferior things, where the mere outside of a Man, the
comeliness and majesty of his countenance, may be some Argument from whence
to infer the excellency of his Creator. But yet the subtle Anatomist, who
searches more deeply into this wonderful structure, may see a cleerer evidence
for this in the consideration of the inward Fabric, the muscles, nerves,
membranes, together with all those secret contrivances in the Frame of this
little World. Thus also is it in the great Universe, where the common
apprehension of things is not at all considerable, in comparison to those other
discoveries, which may be found out by a more exact enquiry.

As this Knowledge may conduce to the proving of a God, and making Men
religious; so likewise may it serve to confirm unto us the Truth of the Holy
Scriptures: since the sacred Story, in the order of it is narrations, does so
exactly agree with the conversions of Heaven, and Logisticall Astronomy.

It may also stir us up to behave our selves answerably unto the noble and
divine nature of our Souls. Psalm. 8. 3, 6.
When I consider the Heaven, the Works of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained, what is Man, that that thou art so mindful
of him? as to create such vast glorious Bodies for his service.

Again, when I consider with my self the strange immensitie and bigness of
this great Universe, in comparison to which, this Earth of ours is but as an
undiscernable point: When I consider that I carry a Soul about me, of far
greater worth than all this, and desires that are of a wider extent and more
unbounded capacity than this whole Frame of Nature; Then me thinks it must
needs argue a degeneratenesse and poverty of Spirit, to busy my Faculties
about so ignoble, narrow a subject as any of these earthly things. What a folly
is it in Men to have such high conceits of themselves, for some small
possessions which they have in the World above others, to keep so great a
bussle about so poor a matter. Sen. Not. Quaest. l. 1. Nonne o terrena
animalia consideratis, quibus praesidere videamini? Nam si inter mures videres
unum aliquem, jus sibi ac potestatem prae caeteris vindicantem, quanto
movereris chachinno, etc. Boetim de Consol. l. 2.
Hoc est punctum quod inter tot gentes ferro and igni dividitur. It Is but a
little point which with so much ado is distributed unto so many nations by
fire and sword. What great matter is it to be Monarch of a small part of a
point? Might not the Ants as well divide a little Molehill into diverse
Provinces, and keep as great a stir in disposing of their government? Punctum
est illud in quo navigat is, in quo bellatis, in quo regna disponitis. All this
place wherein we war; and travel, and dispose of Kingdoms, is but a point
far less than any of those small stars, that at this distance are scarce
discernable. Which when the Soul does seriously meditate upon, it will begin
to despise the narrowness of it is present habitation, and think of providing
for it self a mansion in those wider spaces above, such as may be more
agreeable to the nobleness and divinity of it is Nature.

Why should any one dream of propagating his name, or spreading his report
through the World? when as though he had more glory than ambition can hope for;
yet as long as all this habitable earth is but an inconsiderable point, what
great matter can there be in that fame which is included within such strait
contracted limits? Quicunque Boetis Ibid.
solam mente praecipiti petit
Summumque credit gloriam,
Late patentes aetheris cernat plagas,
Arctumque terrarum situm.
Brevem replere non valentis ambitum,
Pudebit aucti nominis.
He that to honor only seeks to mount,
And that his chiefest end does count;
Let him behold the largenes of the skies,
And on the strait Earth cast his eyes;
He will despise the glory of his Name,
Which cannot fill so small a Frame.


Why should any one be taken up in the admiration of these lower outsides,
these earthly glories? Respicite Coeli spatium, firmitudinem, celeritatem, and
aliquando desinite vilia mirari. Idem lib. 3.
He that rightly understands the nature of the Heavens, will scarce esteem any
other thing worth his notice, much less his wonder.

Now when we lay all this together, that he who has most in the World, has
almost nothing of it; That the Earth it self, in comparison to the Universe,
is but an inconsiderable point; and yet that this whole Universe does not bear
so great a proportion to the Soul of man, as the earth does unto that: I say,
when a man in some retired thoughts shall lay all this together, it must needs
stir up his spirits to a contempt of these earthly things, and make him place
his love and endeavor upon those comforts that may be more answerable to the
excellency of his nature.

Without this Science, what traffic could we have with foreign Nations? What
would become of that mutual Commerce, whereby the World is now made but as one
Commonwealth? Vosque medijs in aquis Stellae, pelagoque timendo,
Decretum monstrastis iter, totique dedistis,
Legibus inventis hominum, commercia mundo.
It Is you bright Stars, that in the fearful Sea
Do guide the Pilot through his purposed way.
It Is your direction that does commerce give,
With all those men that through the World do Live.


2 As this Science is thus profitable in these and many other respects: so
likewise is it equally pleasant. The eye (says the Philosopher) is the sense
of pleasure, and there are no delights so pure and immateriall as those which
enter through that Organ. Now to the understanding which is the eye of the
soul, there cannot be any fairer prospect, than to view the whole Frame of
Nature, the fabric of this great Universe, to discern that order and
comeliness which there is in the magnitude, Wis. 7. 18, 19.
situation, motion of the several parts that belong unto it; to see the true
cause of that constant variety and alteration which there is in the different
seasons of the year. All which must needs enter into a man's thoughts, with a
great deal of sweetness and complacency. And therefore it was that Julius Caesar
in the broiles and tumult of the camp, made choice of this delight: -- Media
interpraelia semper, Lucan. l. 10.

Stellarum, Coelique plagis, superisque vacavit.
He always leisure found amidst his Wars,
To mark the coasts of heaven, and learn the stars.


And for this reason likewise did Seneca amidst the continual noise and bussle
of the Court, betake himself to this recreation: O quam iuvabat, quo nihil
maius, parens
Natura gennit, operis immensi artifex,
Coelum intueri Solis, and currus sacros
Mundique motus, Solis alternas vices,
Orbemque Pheobes, astra quem cingunt vaga
Lateque fulgens aetheris magni decus.
O what a pleasure was it to survay
Natures chief work, the heavens; where we may
View the alternate courses of the Sun,
The sacred Chariots, how the World does run:
The Moons bright Orb, when she is attended by
Those scattered stars, whose light adorns the sky.


And certainly those eminent men who have this way bestowed a great part of
their employment, such as were Ptolomey, Julius Caesar, Alphonsus King of
Spain, the noble Tycho, etc. have not only by this means pitched upon that
which for the present was a more solid kind of pleasure and contentment; but
also a surer way to propagate their memories unto future ages. Those great
costly Pyramides which were built to perpetuate the memory of their founders,
shall sooner perish and moulder away into their primitive dust, than the names
of such Worthies shall be forgotten. The monuments of learning are more
durable than the Monuments of Wealth or Power.

All which encouragements may be abundantly enough to stir up any considering
man, to bestow some part of his time in the study and inquisition of these
Truths.

Foelices animae, quibus haec cognoscere primum, Inque domos superas scandere
cura fuit. FINIS.
Faults escaped at the Press in the second Book.
IN the Epistle line 11. read prae monish. Prop. 4. read words for grounds.
page 3. line 18. r. probable for possible. p. 4. l. 15. r. obsolete for
absolute. l. 20. r. as to take up every thing for Canonical p. 8. l. 7. r.
things for times. p. 16. l. 10. r. move amongst the rest. p. 17. l. 4.
Philolaus. p. 18. l. 20. Prutenicall. p. 22. l. 7. marg. 6. Consid. p. 26. l.
8. Scho^bergius. p. 34. l. 14. pravity for variety. p. 38. l. 8. imply for
employ. p. 42. l. 22. sign for figure. p. 43. l. 14. rather for either. p. 58.
l. 7. this for a. l. 8. product for quotient. p 59. l. 6. is for as. p. 70. l.
20. several for general. p. 72. l. 13. Shall fall from. p. 83. l. 18. toss
for cross. l. 27. from for with. p. 86. l. 8. Sea for Sun. l. 16. in for on.
p. 90. l. 7. (...). p. 94. l. 3. with for of. p. 97. l. 4. (...) l. 24.
dimoveria loco, ubi collocata sunt. p. 100. l. 5. (...) l. 13. if for as p.
101. l. 16. (...) ab (...) p. 104. 3. cum for cur. l. 4. gulae for vulgae. p.
109. l. 6. false for foolish. l. 12. as for in it is. p. 114. l. 25. about that
for above the. p. 115. l. 10. in one of these three. p. 120. l. 22. words for
Worlds. p. 123. l. 15. seconds for cubits. p. 130. l. 26. lately bin. p. 133.
l. 8. conveniences. p. 134. l. 4. Epicycles. l. 6. Deferents. p 153. l. 10.
unus. p. 159. l. 21. might only. p. 160. l. 12. motions for notions. p. 166. l.
11. one second. p. 187. l. 16. say for see. p. 190. l. 12. must for most. p.
205. l. 1. motion is. p. 228. l. 23. r. (M m) for (M N) p. 237. l. 17. r. O^
homini. p. 236. l. 3. r. of all other natural.

Place this against the first Page.


