THE Vnfouldyng of sundry untruths and absurd propositions, latelye propounded
by one I.B. a great favorer of the horrible Heresy of the Libertines.

1. John. 4.1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God, for,

Jude verse 4. There are certain men crept in, which were before of old,
ordained to this condemnation: Ungodly men they are, which turn the grace of
our God into wantonness, and deny the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Man. 1581.

To the Christian Reader Grace and peace from God. etc.
THe days are dangerous wherein we live, and the time of the dissolution of
all things draws nigh, which makes Satan by himself and his instruments,
daily more and more to oppose him self against the truth, which if it were
not plainly and plentifully proved by the wonderful swarms of Atheistes,
Epicures, Anabaptists, Pelagians, and the Family of love, which this our
corrupt age does unhappily hatch and overmuch cherish, yet, by the blasphemous
and wicked assertio^s of this man, in some measure confuted in this book, we
have an evident demonstration and to plain a proof. But as this may in some
measure make many slide, to see sundry, fostered in the bosom of the church,
who both closely and openly go about to take her by the throat so on the other
side, this may somewhat comfort us, that we may yet behold some passage
granted to the defense of Gods religion, whilst that under our godly
magistrates, the confutations of such assertious, may be suffered freely to
pass, and be published. Wherein it is thy duty (good reader) not only to
show thy self thankful to the Lord for this his mercy, but also to use this
and all other holy means, to preserve thy self safe and sound from this and
such like dangerous and deadly infections of thy soul, which that thou may
the better perform, I beseech thee labor diligently in the word, be fervent
in prayer use continual meditation, and frequent daily conference, with them,
that be sound and sincere hearted to god and his truth, and then no doubt but
using that means that God has ordained, thou shall find his plentiful
blessing upon thee and thine, not in know ledge only but in practice and
obedience also, which God grant for his Christ's sake. At London the xxvii.
day of this May 1581.

Thine ever in Christ Jesus T. W. the Lords most unworthy

Certain absurd and Erroneous speeches, uttered the xxvi. day of February,
Anno 1580. by I.B. the Libertine.
1 THat the first Table of the Law, taught us our duty toward Christ's
godhead: and the second Table our duties toward his manhood.

2 That Christ was the Samaritane, that holp the wounded man mentioned in Luke.

3 That faith was the light of the soul.

4 That the tree of knowledge of good and evil in Paradise, was a figure of
Gods Law.

That the tree of life there, was a figure of Gods Gospel: And that the
flaming sword was a figure of the threatenings and the justice of god.

5 That the water in Baptism, was not a holy water in respect that it was
applied to a holy use.

6 That the ordinary and common washinges amongst Turks and Jews, was the
same to them, that Baptism is to us.

7 That nothing can be counted holy, unless it be perfect

8 That Christ in his humane soul, descended into the place of torment
appointed for the wicked, called hell.

9 That that place of Hell is in the center, that is (as he interprets it) in
the middle of the earth.

10 That it is utterly evil for the Elect, to think, speak, or hear of the
fear of God.

11 That Papists, Puritans, Protestants, and the Family of love be utterly
deceived, and in the state of condemnation, save he alone, and those that take
part with him.

12 That no outward thing (as the works of sanctification, unfeigned
forgiveness of others, or such like) can be pledges, either to our selves or
others, of our election.

13 That we may as well say, that Christ is flesh of our flesh and bones of our
bones, as say, that we are flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones

14 That that word kingdom, in the Lords prayer is to be understood only of the
kingdom of love and mercy, and not of his kingdom of justice and power,

15 That Christ did not fully finish our rede^ptio^ upon the cross but that he
suffered somewhat afterward.

16 That the last words that Christ spoke upon the cross, were these, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

17 That all the Jews generally, should be called to the knowledge of God.

18 That the word Sacrament is not to be found in the scripture, and therefore
not to be used, but the word Record, which he went about to prove. 1. John.

19 That there will come a time, wherein there shall be no need of sacraments in
this life: his reason, because there will be such multitudes converted, that
there shall be no leisure to minister the sacraments unto the^.

20. That it is hypocrisy for one christian to reprove an other for swearing,
or any such other offense, which he calls but trifles.

1 He said that the first Table of the Law, taught us our duty toward
Christ's Godhead: And the second Table our duty toward his manhood.
THe first part of this assertion I confess to be true, because Christ being
of the self same majesty and essence with the father, is God equal with him
from before all beginnings, and therefore look whatsoever appertains unto the
father as god, in worship and service, belongs also unto ye son as he is
God: but ye latter part is most false and absurd. First, because it is utterly
void of al ground and warrant of ye word, a reason strong and sufficient enough
to overthrow, not only this assertion, but all others also which have no better
foundation. And secondarily, because yt it follows upon it, yt if murder,
which is one commandment of ye second table, may be committed against ye
ma^hood of our savior Christ, yt then a man may lay violent hands upon his
body already glorified in heaven, which how beastly it is too think or
speak, let the godly judge.

But here this fellow has a statting hole, saying that it may be performed and
practiced against his members, which are as him self. Indeed that the laws
of the second table, and namely this of murder, may be violated against those
that are members of Christ's body, I think no man ever denied: but that those
members of his, should in such sort be himself, that they should constitute
and make his humanity and manhood, was never yet hard of. And if this should be
granted would not this follow upon it, yt as we rightly confess and believe,
that he was in deed borne of the virgin Mary, so should we be borne likewise,
which is all one with the opinion of the family of love, though he seem to
detest it. That there is a very nigh and strait coniunctio^ between Christ, as
the head, and the faithful as his members, may appear indeed by sundry places
of scripture but that the faithful should be called ye ma^hood of our savior
Christ which is one of those two several and distinct natures, that make his
holy person who is god over al to be blessed for ever and ever or that his
manhod, should be called his members is very vile, and at no hand to be
suffered, because thereupon it might be inferred, that then we were, as the
familians say, godded with God.

2 He said, that Christ was the Samaritane that holp the wounded man mentioned
in Luke. Chap. 10.
THis has most commonly bin the practice of heretics to allegorize upon the
scrip tures, that thereby they might feed the humors of the poor and simple
people, who through their corruption woonderfully delife in such a deformed
kind of handling the word, and also that they themselves might seem to have
some proof out of ye word, though very dark in deed: for the matters they
propound and publishe, when they have no plain places or testimonies for the
same. For mine own part, I do utterly mislike of this allegorical handling
of scripture, not only because it has much defaced the true sense and meaning
of Gods holy word, as he that has read Origens works, and some others, may
easily discern but also because it has been the mother to bear and bring
forth many beastly and bastardly children, as the opinions of that detestable
Family, do at this day to the great grief of many good men sufficiently
prove.

But to let this pass, and to come to the particular matter in hand, touching
this place of Luke, I say, that this fellow has offered great injury to the
spirit of grace, in going about to make the scripture speak that which it
never meant to utter or speak. That it is a parable plainly showing that he,
whom God amongst men stirs up to do good unto the needy, how far of or how
near soever he be, should be esteemed as a neighbor, every one that is
acquainted with that text and with the story that goes before it, and the
conclusion that our Savior infers upon it, may easily judge.

The Scriptures, especially of the new Testament, propou^d unto us Parables
after two sorts, some are expounded unto us particularly, and by peecemeal as
it were. Of this sort there are two mentioned, Mat. 13. of the sower, and of
the good seed. We may safely allow of this kind in that place, and in other
places where soever they are found, because, he that cannot err, has opened
the same unto us. There are other some, and these are more in number by many,
then the former, as may appear eue^ in that 13. chapter of Matthew before
alleged, which the Lord has not particularly expounded, and therefore in
them we must stay our selves upon the general drifte and purpose thereof, and
go no furher, least we seem to be wise above measure. For who knows not
that if it had not been to have brideled man's curiosity, and to have kept
down the pride of his heart, it had been al one with our savior Christ to have
expounded all parables by peecemeale. And of this later sort is this parable of
the Samaritane and the wounnamded the general purpose whereof has bin before
noted.

Now hereupon Infer, that besides that it bewrays wonderful presumption
and pride, in the parties so handeling the scriptures, there was yet never any
that could so cunningly all gorize upon the^, but there was ever one or other
absurdity at the least ensuing thereupon. Setting others aside, let us take
this which we have presently in hand. He said that the Samaritaine was
Christ, does he not offer great injury, think ye to that holy person, to
resemble him to so uncircumcised and so unholy a man?

He says that the two pence signified the two Testaments, which how absurd it
is may appear by this, in that the new Testament was not then written. Beside
I would demand of this cold allegorizer, what the wine and the oil poured
into the wou^d, did signify: and whether (if the two pence signify the two
Testaments,) there would not follow out of these words of the text, spoaken to
the host, (take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come
again I will recompense thee,) popish traditions and vnwrite^ verities? When
he shall have answered these questions as also who was the host, what was the
Inn, what was his own beast that he carried him upon and what was the
provision he made for him, ye shall see many more absurdities ensue, and he
himself shall then be further answered. And I add further, that it is contrary
to the custom of our savior Christ: for when he speaks of himself in
parables (as he does many times resemble himself to sundry things) that then
he does usually say, I am the good Shepherd, I am the true Vine, I am the
Door, I am the way, the truth and the life.

3 He said that faith was the eye, or light of the soul.
BUt I say, that if he would have spoken rightlye, he should rather have
affirmed faith to be the hand of the soul, because that by it only, as it were
by a hand, we do take hold of Christ, in whom all the promises of God are yea,
and Amen, and aplie him and his righteousues particularlye unto our selves, and
this is indeed the true and natural meaning of this proposition we are
justified by faith only, So much disputed of between the papists and us.

Moreover, I do not only mislike him for the unaptness of his speech, but also
for the manifest untruth and falshode contained therein. It is a very certain
rule in reason, and allowed of in all arts, that the definition, and the thing
defyned, must not be larger one of them than another, for if it be, the
definition is naught, and many absurdities and untruths will ensue thereupon:
but this definition or description that he has given of faith, is larger than
faith it self (which is the thing defined) as may appear, because there was
never yet any in ye world, but he had some light of ye soul, and yet not
faith: which thing is al so more manifested unto us, by hypocrites in the
church, who have light and understanding in the soul, and yet have not faith:
for if they had, neither ye one nor ye other could beco^de^ned, therefore it
follows, ye this definition or description is false and absurd.

And for the further proof of it, we are to mark, that though the Image of
God through the fall of our first Parents was foully defaced, not only in
themselves, but in their posterity: yet there was left in them and their
seed, certain sparks as it were of light and understanding, which the Apostle
in the 8. to the Romans, calls the wisdom of the flesh, affirming that it
is enimitie to God, and ye it is not subject to the law of God, neither of it
self indeed can be. But all this light or understanding whatsoever, serves no
further then to make men without excuse or defense before God concerning the
matter of their condemnation.

Thirdly I say, that for the confirmation of this his absurd and false
assertion, he has foulie perverted and wrested two very plain places of holy
scripture. The first is Matthew. 6.22, 23. The other is Hebr. 11.1. Touching the
place of Matt. our Savior alleges it, to show, that men do many times even
maliciously and wickedly put out the very light of nature, that is in them,
blearing their eyes and blindfolding sundry ways their own understandings,
that they may not behold the things, which God presents unto them. Now who
sees not, that this place, is so far from furthering his assertion, that it
rather proves the contrary, to wit,, that many men may have light in them,
(which they could not put out, unless they had it) and yet. be destistute of
the gift of faith, which only proceeds from God. In the other place of the
Hebrews, the Apostle himself gives a sure and sound desinition of faith,
commending the same unto us, by the excellent effects that it has to wit, that
it does lively represent and express unto us, things which yet we hope for,
and sets as it were before the eyes of our minds, things that are
invisible, and cannot be seen with our bodily eyes. But how serves this to
prove, that every light of the soul is faith? Nay rather how does it not
overthrow it? For many have had the light of the soul as has been already
proved, yea and at this day many have, as for example, ye Jews, Turks, etc,
which have not yet for all that atteined this excellent gift of faith. And
either the Libertine must confess this, to wit that these have some light of the
soul, and so overthrow that, which he seemed to confirm, or else affirm men,
to be as bruit beasts (because men in respect of ye light and understanding
differ from beasts) which is very bruitishe indeed. This only I will say, for
this time concerning this matter, that if he were not utterly void of the
knowledge and understanding of Gods will by his word, he would never make such
beastly conclusions: seeing that we know, by Gods word, that the light of the
soul, is naturally communicated to al men, as we confess and believe from
God: and faith is a special gift of God, bestowed not upon al men, but upon ye
elect only.

4 He said that the tree of knowledge of good and evil in Paradise was a
figure of Gods law: also that the tree of life, there, was a figure of Gods
Gospel, and lastly, that the flaming sword, was a figure of the threatenings and
justice of God.
IF men may be suffered in their vain speculatio^s, thus to sport themselves
with the word of god, and to endeavor the seducinge and deceiving of others:
al reverence of the Lords truth will be quickly pluckte up out of men's minds:
and infinite thousands carried headlong into eternal destruction. If this be
not with the papists, to make a nose of ware of the scriptures, and with the
family of love utterly to subuerte the histories therein contained, I know not
what it is. For ye first, ye tree was called ye tree of knowledge of good and
evil, not because it had good and evil in it of it self: but good, because it
was (as the rest of the creatures were before sin entered) good: and evil
because of ye effect and consequent that followed thereof. For man (eating of
it being forbidden) did by that means pull upon him and his posterity,
eternal death and condemnation, so that it is called evil, in respect of the
evil, ye through disobedience came upon man and al his race.

Concerning ye tree of life, it was so called, not because it had life in it
self to communicate the same to others (for very absurd is it to tie such an
excellent gift, to so insensible and unreasonable a thing) but because it was
appointed by God to seal unto man that blessed estate of life wherein God
placed him, and continuance in the same so long as he should continue in ye
obedience of his god. And as for ye shaking sword the Lord ordained it
(together with the cherubins which kept the way to the tree of life) to strike
a terror into Adam and Euah, being fallen: yt thereby they might understand,
both what excellent benefits, they had deprived themselves of, and also intoo
what great miseries, they had cast themselves headlong.

Now this being the only true and natural meaning of these matters, how can
that stand, which this Libertine has put down? If he would needs have
allegorized upon the tree of life or the rest, it had bin less evil for him
to have said, that the tree of life, should either have signified God the
author of life (because as the Apostle says, in him we live, move, and have
our being) or else Christ himself, who by the working of his spirit and
power of his resurrection, raises us up to newnes of life and holy
conversation And though I acknowledge this to be true, yet I am not persuaded,
that it can be aptly and fitly gathered out of that place of Genesis. But
further to pursue, the absurdity of this allegorical interpretation, and
plainly to lay it out to the sight of the simple, we say, first, that he
has bewraied ye great pride and presumption of his own heart, because, that
whereas it belongs only to the Lord, too institute and ordain holy signs
and sacraments, and to give the things so ordained force and and power, to
signify and seal the things signified: this man arrogantly has taken upon
him this office of God, not only without any warrant from the Lord himself,
but also directly contrary to his will revealed in his word.

Secondarily he has woonderfully manifested, the beastly blindness and
ignorance of his heart: for, whereas in all signs and sacraments, there
should be ever a certain analogy and proportion, between the signs and the
things signified, there can be no such thing found out between the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and the law of God it self.

Besides, what blockishnes does this argue in him, to resemble ye tree of
knowledge of good and evil, to the whole law of God, and the shaking sword to ye
threatninges of God, as though forsooth the whole did not comprehend the
parts? And if this man's vain should be followed, we should not only have
seven sacraments (as the Papists imagine) but seventy times seven, that is
infinite and innumerable. But of this matter enough if not to much.

5 He says, that the water in Baptism was in no respect to be said or
counted a holy water, no not in respect it was applied to a holy use.
THis Assertion greatly beewraieth, first his gross ignorance in the word of
God For why may not the water in baptism be esteemed and said to be a holy
water, as well as the priests garments, the temple the mountains and other
things were said to be holy? When we say the water in baptism is a holy
water we mean not that it has any holiness in it self, or that it is made
holy, by any magical incantation as the Papists dream) but speaking
according to the use of scripture which cou^teth every thing holy that by Gods
appointment is separated from profane and common uses, and dedicated and
applied by his institution to holy uses. And therefore we fear not to affirm
(whatsoever this babbler shall say to the contrary) that the water in baptism
is a holy water, not only because it is dedicated to a holy use, but also
because it proceeds from a holy institutor, and is by his ordinance,
appointed to seal and set forth unto us, holy things to wit the washing
away of al our sins, in the death and bloodshedding of our Savior: and our
rising up to righteousness and well doing, by the virtue and power of his
resurrection from the dead.

Secondarily, it manifests in what base regard and account he has ye
Sacraments of God, which may appear not only by this, but by sundry other
speeches uttered by him: as that the Jews may receive as much instruction, by
their ordinary and common washinges, as we by baptism. Besides, that there
shall be a time in this life, wherein there shall be no need of Sacraments,
and such like, of which we will speak hereafter in their several places.

6 That the ordinary and common washings amongst the Turks and Jews, were the
same to them, that Baptism is to us.
THis carries with it, in the judgment of al upright me^, great presumption
of profaneness, in that he dare make equal with the Sacrament of baptism not
the ordinary and common washinges of Christians, but even of Turks and Jews,
who before GOD are as Infidels, because they acknowledge him not, in the person
of his son and withal sauoreth very strongly of the Sacramentary heresy:
yea it is far more absurd and vile, because the Sacramentaries, speaking
indeed very baselie of the Sacraments, that is, esteeming them but as bare
ceremonies and signs of holy things, did yet never so far extenuate or
debase the same, as to resemble them (having their institution from God) to
common and profane things, used amongst such, as because they are void of
faith, are justly condemned in and for the things they do.

And note withal the subtletie and malice of Satan, who seeing he cannot
carry me^ headlo^g into destruction, by overmuch reverence, either in judgment
or action to the Sacraments, with the Papists and Lutherans on the one side:
nor yet through an unright and an vnreuerent opinion of the sacraments with
the sacramentaries on ye other side: has at the last stirred up this wicked
instrument, by a new assault, to batter their faith, and to plunge them over
head and ears, into eternal destruction. But as I hope that they which are
rightly instructed of God, by his word and spirit, will look to themselves, ye
they be not surprised with this devilish persuasion: so I humbly beseech the
rest, that have not as yet atteined to so great a measure and light of
understanding, to take heed, that they do not before they be ware, drink in
and that to their utter ruin, this deadly poison of their souls which
carries with it so manifest a contempt of the order of God, and by consequent
contempt of his Majesty, because no despite can be offered unto his
ordinances, but the injury thereof, does in some measure redounde unto
himself.

And indeed to speak the truth if our baptism have no singular privilege
above the ordinary and common washings used amongst Turks and Jews, our
Savior Christ has dealte unadvisedly, that I may say no more, to busy him
self so much about the institution of new sacraments in the new state of the
Church and to occupy the hearts, heads, hands, and every part and member, both
of the ministers administering the same, and of the people communicating
therein. For my part I think godliness and wisdom would teach us to prevent
(what we may) afterclaps for if this man may be suffered so defacing the
sacraments, why may he not likewise offer disgrace unto the word? And if he
may disgrace the word, why may he not in like sort, disgrace God the author
thereof: and so not only a wide door set open to al atheistrie, but also the
very foundations thereof planted and laid. But (I hope) the godly magistrates,
will in time have an eye to these inconueniencies, that at the least, if they
cannot be utterly rooted out, yet they shall not spread their vows and
branches further abroad.

7 He says that nothing can be counted holy, unless it be perfect.
I Would feign learn what can be more repugnant to the holy scripture then
this assertion. Do we not read that many, both things and men, are called
holy in the scriptures, as Exodus. 35.21. the garments of the Priests are
called holy. Also Exodus 19.6. the people are called a holy nation to God.

But I know, because I have heard this fellow speak, that he thinks easily
too shifte of all these and infinite number of such like places because they are
writ ten in the old Testament. How right this answer is, let every godly man
judge, not only because we know, that certain among the Anabaptists
heretofore labored, as also this fellow now does, to impair and to disanul
the authority of the old Testament: but also because ye spirit it self bears
record, that whatsoever things were written before hand, were written for our
learning, upon whom the ends of the world are come, that we through patience
and comfort of the scripture might have hope. And that this truth might be
indeed, the more effectually ratified and confirmed unto us, we have the
practice and example of Christ and his Apostles, who for the confirmation of
their doctrines, have alleged testimonies and examples out of the old
testament, which they would not have done, if the old Testament had been
utterly abrogated, as those fantastical spirits have dreamed.

But admit that this copper would go for current coin, The Lord has not so
skanted us, but that we have a cloud of witnesses, even in the new
Testament, to overthrow this falshoode. Saint Peter calls the mount,
whereupon Christ was tansfigured, holy, Saint Jude calls the faith of Gods
children, not only holy, but most holy. How many times does Saint Paul and
Saint Peter, call all such as are gathered into the bosom or lap of the
Church by the word of preaching, and the ministry of ye same (whether they
are men women, or children) Saints or holy ones. For the proof hereof, turn
to these places following. Romans 1.7. 1. Corin. 7.14 1. Tim. 5.10. 1 Pe. 1 16. 1.
Pe. 3.5. and many other such like: and yet we know that they were clothed
with corruption and had sin, though not reigning, yet dwelling in them,
whatsoever this fanaticall fellow will say to the contrary.

True, yea most true is that speech of the Apostle, we know in part and we
prophesy in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be abolished. I suppose that this man, musing and speking so much
of perfection in this life, iumpeth flatly with the family of love, howesoeuer
he would seem much to dislike the^, and has had some large conference with
A.C.S. who doteth and delivers much concerning this matter in his Dialogues
upon the Romans.

Whatsoever it be we fear not too condemn it as a gross and detestable
error, putting flax to the fire of man's presumtions and proud nature in many
and being a terrible heade-long down fall into desperation to othersome, while
they see and find in them selves, that they cannot atteine in this life to the
same. But to such men's comfort it shall be very good for them, not only not
once too admit such a thought, as that they may atteine too perfection in
this life (a mark indeed whereat we must aim, though verily we cannot hit
the same) but utterly to estraunge it far from them staying them selves upon
this, that all their imperfections are covered in the fulness of Christ's
perfection, and that though they cannot atteine by reason of their own
weakness, to perfect faith, to perfect hope, to perfect repentance, to perfect
mortificatio^ etc. Yet they do thorough gods great goodness, atteine to the
soundnes and truth; of many excellent and worthy graces, as too have steadfast
faith, true repentance, etc.

And thus much I thought good to put down, least either on the one side, we
might be overthrown in our wantes, or on the other side be deceived in a
false imagination of perfection. For here we sail in a dangerous gulf, and
pass as it were between two great rocks or cleffes, if either of which we
touch, we are in peril without Gods rich mercy help, of eternal
destruction, both of body and soul.

8 He says that Christ in his humane soul, descended into the place of
torment, appointed for the wicked called hell. s^. page 118. 127.
WHat great variety of opinions and minds: there is concerning this Article,
he that is acquaynted with Learned men's writings, may easily perceive. For
mine own part, setting aside all partialtie and dealing against any, save
this pernicious man, I will be as brief and short in it as possible I man.

The first thing that I have to say of it is this, that for as much as Saint
Cyprian an ancient father of the Church plainly affirms, that neither the
Roman nor East Churches had this point in their confessions of faith at all:
and for as much as no confession of faith at all, so far as I remember,
penned in general councels as that of Nice, of Ephesus, Chalcedon etc.
touches it any whit, but utterly omitteth the same: And for as much as the
other Articles of our belief, may even in plain words be pro^^ed, out of the
writings of the Apostles and Prophets, and yet there is no such either word or
meaning (as the Papists draw out of it) to be found in the books of the
old and new Testament, that therefore it seems unto me not to be a matter
of any great importance, so that it be expounded according to the Analogy
and proportion of faith.

And though it be true, that this fellow in this point of Christ his descent
into hell, be not so gross as other some are, who imagine that he went down
thither, to harrow it as it were and too fetch from thence the souls of such
of the faithful fathers, as dyed before Christ's death: yet (as shall appear
by that which follows) he is very unsound in the same. For to say that
Christ in his h^^mane Soul descended into the place of the damned, is quite
and clean contrary too that speech of Christ upon the Cross, when he
cried saying. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, understanding by
the word spirit, his soul, and by commending of it into the hands of God
his father, the returning of the same, into the hands of God ye gave it, of
which see Eccle. 12.7.

And his beastliness is so much the more intellerable, by how much he abuses
some places of scripture, for the maintenance of this his absurd assertion. He
alleged indeed four special places, whereof two were taken out of ye old
festame^t, and two out of the new. The first place out of the old is. Leu^^.
16. Where he entreats of the escape grate: the other is Psalm 86.13. The
places out of the new testament be. Romans 10.6.7. Eps^. 6.4.8.9. of which places
we mind to speak particularly.

Concerning ye place of Leuit. he would gather it by an al^e go^^^ thu^, ye the
frape goa^e being appointed by the Lord to be let go into ye wilderness would be
a figure of Christ, escaping free out of hell, resembling the Wilderness too
hell, which wilderness he says (but there is no such warrant for it in the
Text) was full of wild, ravenous and devouring beasts: but the absurdity of
this allegory appears, because not the escape Goat so much, but the Goat
that was appointed to be the peoples sin offering (if any of them were a
figure of Christ) was the figure rather. Besides, it is spoken without al
ground of ye Text in that place, that the wilderness was full of wild
heastes. I suppose that a man may more safely say, that it was called a
wilderness, because it was by much less inhabited then other, parts of the
land were, and so is the word taken, Math. 3.1. Where it is faide, that John
^eached in the wilderness of Judea, which must be understood, not as some of
Saint Frauncis order have thought, as though he had preached to the trees and
beasts of the forests, but because he preached in those places which were
less inhabited then other quarters of the land were.

Touching the place of Psalm. 86.13. I say, that it is as much perverted and
abused as the former. Which shall appear, if we do but a little consider the
words and circumstances. The words lie thus: for thy mercy is great toward
me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. Which verse I take
to be a reason, why David would praise the Lord with his whole heart and
glorify his name for ever, to wit, because God had woonderfully delivered
him (for he puts his soul (which is a part of him for his whole man) from
very imminent and infinite dangers, which he understands by the term of
lowest grave. And this sense is plain, not only because David made the Psalm
being sore distressed, sometimes with inward afflictions, and sometimes with
outward persecutions, by the extreme outrage and fury of his enemies, in the
days of his life upon earth: but also because, if it were not so, this
absurdity and inconvenience would ensue thereupon, that David being dead, and
condemned into the place of torment, should be delivered therefrom, and set
in the place of eternal blessedness, which is not only quite and clean
contrary, to the scope and drift of holy Scriptures (as appears. Luke
16.26.) But utterly subuerteth the justice of GOD, and accuses it either of
inconstancy or rashness, as though that he had, either unadvisedly
pronounced a sentence, or were not constant in his counselles, and steadfast in
the performance of his purposes and ways.

Touching ye place of ye Romans 10. He has bewrayed very gross and palpable
ignorance, being deceived belike with the bare show of the words, descend
into the deep. For if he out of this place would prove Christ's descent into
hell, an other might as easily and with better reason by much, prove his
ascension into heaven, but in truth ye place does not plainly prove, neither
the one nor the other. The true and natural meaning of those words of Saint
Paul, I take to be this that Paul sets that peace of conscience, which the
righteousness of faith brings with it, against all their perplexed and
doubtful thoughts, that seek and hunt after the righteousness of the law.
And these ymaginations or thoughts, are two sold in them, whilst sometimes
they think, how they may avoid condemnation, and other times whilst they
think, how they may obtain eternal life and salvation. For the law
propounding heaven no otherwise, but by an impossible condition, and threatening
death and destruction for the breach of the same, it must necessarily follow,
that every one that stands stiff in the righteousness of the law, must be
enforced to cry out, who shall ascend into heaven? to wit, that he may bring
me thither. Or who shall descend into the deep? to wit, to deliver me from
the same. But the righteousness of faith tells us, that Christ, having
fulfilled all righteousness for us, and having suffered for us, the punishment
which was due unto us, ouercomming in his death, death it self, and him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, yt he might bring us to heaven
also, that where he is as the head, we might be as the members. And if this
were not the true sense (as indeed there can be no other but it) yet were not
his collection out of these words right and sound, not only because it would
follow therevppon, that Christ would be brought out of heaven, but also that
he is even yet at this day in some sort, to be brought again from the dead: and
so not only the truth of his resurrection, flatly denied, but he held under
of death, and the sorrows thereof, which S. Peter affirms Act. the second,
to be an impossible thing.

Now a word or two concerning the place out of the Ephesi. In the former
verses, S. Paul had labored to persuade the Ephesians, to such unity and
concord, as God allows of: and that he might the better perform this, he
shows ye God in Christ has given sundry gifts to his church and the
particular members thereof for yt great and excellent purpose, and this is put
down in the seventh verse. Now that Christ has given such graces to his
Church, he proves it, by a testimony, borrowed out of David. The words as
they lie in the text are these: wherefore he says (that is the holy Ghost)
by the pen and mouth of his servant David) when he ascended up on high (that
is, rose again from death, and went up into heaven) he laid captivity
captive (that is, he made such his captives and slaves, as had before healde
others in captivity and thraldom, meaning thereby the Devil, death, sin, and
whatsoever else did set it self against Christ and his members. Al know that
under a metaphor in this place, there is excelle^tly described, ye triumph of
Christ our Conqueror, S. Paul therein alluding, to the manner of earthly
Conquerors, who after some victory atteined, were sole^nely and triumphantly
received into the places whether they came, their captives going either before
the^, or behind the^ chained. And that he might the better express the
glorious conquest of our Savior Christ, he says not simply, he lead the
captives, but that he lead captivity captive, speaking accordiug to the
propriety of the Hebrew tongue, using the Abstracte, that is, the substantive,
for the concrete, that is the Adjective, signifying thereby also, the great
multitude of enemies, that he carried with him as captives: and he that is but
meanly seen, either in the Scriptures, or in the Hebrewe tongue, will easily
acknowledge the truth of this. It follows, And gave gifts unto men (to wit,
for the continual help and comfort one of them of another, and al tending to
the building up of the body of Christ, which is his Church) verse. 9. Now in
that he ascended (to wit, into heaven) what is it (that is, what means it.)
But that he had also descended, first into the lowest parts of the earth.
These are the words that this Lybertine most presses, that is the lowest
parts of the earth. But I answer, that he much abuses these words: for
the word earth, is not taken here only for this world whereon men walk, but
also for the whole world comprehending heaven, earth, and whatsoever else: and
so those words, the lowest parts of the earth carry with them this seuse,
that Christ descended from the glory of his father into the earth, which is
indeed the lowest part of the whole world, for fire, a ire, water and al are
higher the^ it. Besides, if these words (lowest parts of the earth) should be
taken for hell, this absurdity would follow upon it, that when David says, yt
he was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth (or as it is
in the Hebrew text) In the lower parts of the earth, that when he ^^^uld have
been made, conceived, and borne in hell, then the which, what can be more
absurd? But as this fellow has been fowlie deceived, in alleging of
scripture, for the maintenance of his error: so he is as much deceived and
more also in the matter it self. For the truth is so far of, from
propounding any such gross thing concerning our Savior, Christ yt it teaches
us, ye as he did indeed suffer a natural death (which is the sundring of the
body and soul for a time) so he was both in body and soul, shut up in
woonderful distress: in body, when being in agony, his sweet was like
drops of blood, trickling down to the ground. Luke. 22.44. And in soul,
when he said, my soul is very heavy, even unto ye death. Mat. 26.38. And when
he cried out upon the cross, my God my God why have thou forsaken me. Math.
27.46. And al these laid together, the Apostle Saint Peter calls the
sorrows of death. Acts. 22.24. which he suffered for us miserable sinners,
whilst that he presented himself to the justice and judgment of his Father,
to the end that he might satisfy the same for us: So that necessary was it,
that he should in his conscience, feel this fearful agonye and condemnation
as it were, eue^ as though he had been forsaken of GOD his father, and he had
been angry with him bearing our sins upon his back. And this I take too be
the natural meaning of this article. He descended into hell, that he did in
his very sufferinges and death, not only set himself against all our
enemies, as the world, the flesh, the Devil and eternal condemnation: but
did, as it were, wrestle even hand to hand with them, ouercomming them all for
us, that we, (by the virtue and power of his victory) might be more then
Conquerors, And thus much I thought good to put down, as my full persuasion
grounded and settled upon Gods word, concerning this point: being ready to
yield to any other, yt can show further out of the word of God.

9 That that place of Hell is in the Center, that is, as he himself also
interprets it, in the middle of the earth.
Man's curiousness of the one side, and his ignorance of ye other side, has
been, is, and shall be, the cause of a bottomless pit of error, and
corruption. If we had no other thing to prove it by, yet that which has been
held and propounded, concerning the place of hell, and the manner of torments
in the same, were sufficient enough to confirm that which has been said.

Concerning the pains and punishments of it, I mind to say nothing at this
time because it concerns not the question we have in hand. But concerning the
place, thus much I say that it is fautasticall curiousness at the least, if
not an intolerable pride, for any man too take upon him to point out where
that place should be, seeing that the Lord, has not in any place of the old
and new Testament declared the same.

That such a place there is, prepared of old for the devil and his angels, and
the reprobate, the scripture declares. But where it should be, or in what
place, as whether in the center of the earth, or in some region of the air, or
in some of the uttermost parts of the world, it is not revealed, no more then
the certain time either of the creation or of the fall of the Angels.
Wherefore as we do in all godly sobriety, believe that they were created, and
believe that they did fall, because the word of God does warrant the same
unto us (notwithstanding that the time either of the one or of ye other be not
put down:) so it behooves us, with the like measure of christian modesty, to
behave our selves in this point, that seeing we know such a place of torment
there is, we should believe that, and yet because we know not, where
particularly it is set, we should beware of rash and hasty pronouncing of
any thing, concerning the same For as the revealed counselle of the Lord,
apperteineth to us and our posterity, to know, believe, and do the same: so
we may not enter into those secrets, that his majesty has kept close unto
himself, least we be for our presumption, utterly confounded and over whelmed
of his glory.

And me thinks, ye if we had not these reasons taken out of the word to
bridle our curiosity, yet even in very christian policy, it should stand
us in hand, for the preventing of greater afterclaps, to lay a stop here, and
in all such carious questions what soever. For if one may be fuffred in the
vain and idle imaginations of his own heart and head to discourse without
the warrant of the word, upon this or any other such like point, making
resolute and flat conclusions concerning the same. Why shall it not be lawful,
for others to do the like? And so by that means, we shall have a whole world
of men's fantasies propounded unto us, and in process of time, (man's nature
being gredie of novelty) Gods truth and the grounds and principles of the
same, if not utterly defaced and discredited, yet wonderfully impaired and
abased. And therefore both magistrates and ministers, are in this respect too
have a vigilant eye, in due season to stop the gap to these mischiefs, and to
keep short such persons as this is, who dare so shamelesly propound such
hidden mysteries and erroneous opinions.

10 That it is utterly evil for the elect to think, speak, or hear of the
fear of God.
THe truth is so far of from admitting, either in truth or show, any such
blasphemous and beastly speech, as this is, that it does in flat and plain
terms, put down a plain contrary assertion. A notable proof hereof we have
in this earnest and gracious wish, of the Lord testifying thereby his mercy
and great good will toward his people, saying. O that there were such a
heart in them to fear me, and to keep al my commandments always, that it
might go well with them, and with their children forever. Which (if the fear
of his majesty had bin evil,) he would never have done. This also appears,
by that most merciful promise that he makes unto his own people, saying: I
will give them one heart, and one way that they may fear me for ever (and
not at any time as this Libertine says) for the wealth of them, and of their
children after them.

By which words it appears, that the right reverence and fear GOD, being
sincerely planted in the hearts of his children, is so far of from woorking
any hurt or damage: unto his Saints, that it is rather a pledge and an assured
testimony of his love and favor, not unto them only, but even unto their
very issue and posterity.

I would be loath to charge this fellow further than truth, neither have I
hitherto gone beyond the bounds thereof. For mine own part, I rest
persuaded, and I hope I shall have the approbation of such as be singly
sighted in the matters of GOD, with me that this assertion is not only
repugnaunt too the truth of the word (as has been before showed) but that
it does by a consquente carye with it, not one, but many most horrible
blasphemies.

First if this should be true what should we do with so infinite numbers of
places in the scriptures, which do exact and demand this fear toward God
of us, but utterly blot the^ out of the book of gods word and cast the^ away?
And would not then this follow upon it, that if we reject apart of the word,
we may safely reject the whole. For why should we allow of one part and
refuse another? Or who has given us any such popelike authority? And then
also would not this ensue: that men might likewise (the word being cast away)
deny God the author of life? A point which the Atheistes of our age do very
much urge and press, as by words and deeds appears very manifestly, to such
as are acquainted with their assertions and dealinges.

Beside, does it not flatly overthrow, not only the justice of GOD, which
should serve as a bridle to keep us from evil, if he should not be feared,
but also the mercy of GOD, which should be a spur to provoke us to well
doing? Notable is that place of the Prephete David. Mercy is with thee that
thou may be feared. For the children of God or elected people (of who^ this
fellow seems to speak) are so far of from receiving any hurt or evil, by
meditating, speaking, or hearing of the fear of Gods majesty, that they reap
and receive thereby singular profit. For as Gods mercy, is a singular
argument or matter of spiritual joy unto them, in the days of any their
heauinesses or distresses either outward or inward. So the reverent fear of
Gods Majesty, in the times of their great peace and prosperity, which it
pleases him sometimes to give unto them, is a notable mean to instruct them,
to take heed unto themselves, that they be not carried forward, either by
the pleasures, or by the profits of this life, to the thinking, speaking, or
doing of any thing that may be displeasing before God, or vnansweareable to
that great calling wherein he has placed them.

Thirdly, it takes away one of the seals and pledges of our repentance, and
so by that means shakes our faith, which we had need to labor, to prop, and
stay up, by all the lawful and holy means we can, which God him self has
ordained and set forth unto us in his word to use: specially if we would
but with a single eye, consider, either our own weakness on the one side, or
the strength, subtletie, and continual assaults of our spiritual enemies on
the other side. Saint Paul 2. Cor. 7.11. proves that a reverent fear of
God, wrought in our hearts, by the sight of our former sins, and the
apprehension of his justice against us for the same, is a singular effect and
declaration, of our unfeigned repentance and amendment (even as some good
fruit is a plain proof of a good tree) whilst that, considering our own
slipperines on the one side and Gods heavy indignation and wrath against us
for sin on the other side, we do with care and conscience, not only look
unto our steps, that we fall not into the like mischiefs: but also strive
to ye uttermost of our powers, both to the purpose and performance, of such
good works, as he himself has prepared that we should walk in.

Fourthly, this assertion, sets open a wide gate, to all profaneness and
licentiousness. For if God be not to be feared in respect of his judgment,
even as he is to be loved for his mercies, men may then live as they list,
which bridle, if it be once laid in the necks of outrageous and unruly
people (as you see all are, to prone that way) what mischief and sin, will
not ensue thereuppon? For my own part, I am so far from approouing this man's
opinion, that I think it most meet and convenient, for the children of God,
to have often before their eyes, not only that same filial or childish fear
(which arises of a certain reverence of Gods majesty in their hearts,)
having an unfeigned love of the same, as an inseparable companion annexed unto
it) but also that same servile fear, or fear of servants, which springs
from the terror of his judgments, and the apprehension of his justice.

And the reason that leads me thereto is this, because that as it is meet,
for the strengthening and upholding of our faith, against spiritual combats
and assaults that men should gather unto themselves, as much strength out of
the word, and as many heavenly comfortes, as possibly they may, because that
when we come to the conflict, we shall have need of them all: so up reason of
the pronenesse and inclination that is in us, to all manner of sin before
regeneration, and by reason of an ouerweening yt we have of our selves and of
our own works (as the pride of our own hearts does sufficiently prove it
unto us, and the palpable opinion of merits yt has crept in in popery, does
plainly declare it) and by reason also of the great sea of security and
carelesnes, wherein men are drowned, in these same last and dangerous days of
the world: it shall be good for every one to gather to himself, as many means
as possibly he can to stay him from following the swinge of sin, and as many
swoordes as he may, to cut down the opinion of pride, and presumption that
we carry in our selves, and as many trumpets of terrors and threatening, to
arrowse and wake us out of the dead sleep of carelesnes and security. Which
things we can never perform, if we shake of once, this same easy and
profitable yoke of the reverent fear of Gods majesty.

And herein I am not alone: for the Apostle Paul writing to the Romans (upon
whom God at that time had showed the riches of his grace, in vouchsafing to
make them the vessels of his mercy) does notwithstanding admonish the^, to
take heed that they be not high minded, but fear: and the reason of this his
exhortation is this, for if GOD spared not the natural branches, take heed
least he also spare not thee admonishing them as it were to have all eye to
the fear of God, that thereby they might be contained and kept within the
compass of a good conversation, answerable to that great grace of election,
that God had bestowed upon them. Which thing the Apostle should not have
needed to have done, if the assertion of this lewd Libertine, had had any
ground of truth at all in it?

But that this fellow, might not seem to speak without warrant, he has
labored to pull, and that by the ears, into the wrestling place, two Textes
of Scripture, fowlie perverted, for the maintenance of this, his detestable
error. The one is taken out of the Psalm. 18.44. The other out of Esaias.
54.4.14.

The words of the Psalm are these: Strangers shall shrink away and fear
in their privy chambers. How these words should prove, that the elect,
should be utterly void of the fear of God, no man in his right wits (as I
suppose) can rightly conjecture or judge, The meaning of the Prophet is this:
that forasmuch, as he was the Lords anointed, the Lord would so work for
him and by him, that not only his own people, should be brought in
subjection, but even fortainers and strangers that were not under his
jurisdiction and government, should be subdued by his power: and that for the
better accomplishment hereof, the hearts of his enemies, should be stricken
and seized, with such horror and fear, that they should have little, or no
power at all to resist or withstand him. So that you see, that this place
proves, that the fear of men shall be in the hearts of the wicked, but that
the godly should have no fear of God, at al in them, or that it should be
hurtefull for them, to think, speak, or hear of the same, there is not so
much as one syllable or jot tending to that end.

The words of the Prophet Esaias are these, Fear not, for thou shall not be
ashamed, neither shall thou be confounded: And again, in righteousness shall
thou be established, and be far from oppression, (for thou shall not fear it)
and from fear, for it shall not come near thee. They that will look with
diligence into the chapter, shall find, that the special purpose and drifte
of the prophet, is to comfort the church which should be collected and
gathered of the Jews and Gentiles, but specially of ye gentiles, not to be
afraid for any terror or persecution, that the enemies thereof could practice or
perfourm against them: so that I take it to be ye same in meaning, though
uttered at another time and in other words, which the Apostle speaks
Phillip. 1.28. In nothing fear your adversaries, which is to them a token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God: and also the same which
our savior himself speaks, when he says. Matt. 10.28. Fear ye not the^
which kill ye body and are not able to kill ye soul, but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell, which place serves, not
only to show the true sense and meaning of ye place untruly alleged: but
also to teach, yt there ought to be in ye hearts of gods children, a fear of
gods majesty.

And thus you see that this place thus alleged serves little or nothing to
the purpose it was alleged for, to wit, that the elect should banish far
from them, all hearing and speaking of the fear of God, and not so much, as to
admit one thought of the same, if it were possible, seeing that the Prophets
purpose is, to teach the elect, to remove far from them, only ye fear of
men, which to weak flesh and blood, if it be not ouerweighed with spiritual
strength from above is a terrible thing, to turn men back, from the bold
embracing and professing of Gods holy religion.

11 That Papists, Puritans, Protestants, and the Family of love be utterly
deceived, and in the state of condemnation, save he alone, and those that take
part with him.
THose that are acquainted, with the shamelesnes, and boldenes of heretics and
perverse persons, do well enough know, that it is no new or strange thing, to
hear from them such resolute and peremptory sentences, tending to the
condemnation of others, and the justifying of them selves and their wicked
causes. The practice of former ages (as for example the Donatistes in Africa
condemning the Churches of the people of GOD there,) and the experience of
latter times, as of the Anabaptists in Germany, and of the family of love
amongst us, pronounting sharp sentence of eternal judgment, upon such as
were not, or are not of their faction) does sufficiently euince and prove
this point. So that we may see, with what spirit this fellow is led, to wit,
with the spirit of frensey and brainsicknes, which has carried them, and him
forward, to the iustifiyng of them selves in falsehood and lies, and to the
conde^ning of others for sincerity and truth. Out of which kind of corrupt
and perverse dealing, though the thing it self be evil, yet those that are
wise in God, may gather some profitable and good instructions: as first not to
believe all spirits but to try the same, by the touchstone of the word,
whether they be of god or no, seeing that there was yet never any, how foulye
soever they were deceived, but that they durst yet rashly and boldly, take
upon them, not only to condemn others holding contrary co^clusions, but also
to aduouch their falsehoods as manifest trueths. Secondly, it is very strong, to
show and declare, the mighty effect of truth it self, and to teach them
that do profess it with knowledge, zeal and courage, to wade on in the same
and the defense of it, seeing the wicked and ungodly so stiff in the
maintenance and justifying of their corrupt causes.

But to let these things pass for this time, and to come to the particulers
yt this fellow touches: that Papists and the family of love, are both
seduced, and out of the way of truth, is as clear, as the light at noone tide,
and therefore that they continuing in their blasphemous opinions of their
several sects) should be in the state of condemnation, none yt is enlightened
with ye spirit and truth of ye Lord, will ever deny or doubt of, for (as our
savior says) he yt believes not is condemned already, because he believes
not in the name of the only begotten son of God.

Concerning Puritanes, because, it is a word of a doubtful signification,
(before I declare my mind concerning these men) I will distinguish upon it.
The Nouatian Heretics, so called of one Nouatus the beginner of that sect, who
held yt if a man did sin after Baptism, there was no hope of repentance, were
in old time called (...), which is as much to say, as Puritans. Now if any man
hold this opinion, I am so far of from allowing him in the same, that I fear
not to pronounce (if he live and die in it, without being through Gods
goodness reclaimed from it) that he is in the state of exernall condemnation,
not only because he holds an opinion contrary unto the truth of the word
of God (which says; that if we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the
truth is not in us) but also because he does utterly euacuate, the love and
mercy of God, which in nothing does more effectually and plainly appear,
then in the free forgiveness of al our transgressions, and by a consequent
also, does adnihillate and make of no force, the merits and obedience of
Christ, who was delivered up to the death, even the death of the cross, that
thereby he might not only take away our sins, but also assuredly seal up in
our hearts, the free pardon and full forgiveness of all out transgressions
whatsoever.

But for as much as this name has been slanderously by that Traitor D.
Saunders the first deviser of it (as it is thought) imposed and laid upon some,
that have desired the reformation and redress of some things amiss in the
Church: and since by some other of the Papists his fellows being yet in
induraunce, for their obstinacy in that their heresy, and disobedience to her
Majesty's royal authority, used against the same, for him or any other, to
give such an absolute Censure upon them, I doubt not to pronounce it, yt he
or whosoever they be yt so shall do, do very rashly rush into ye office of
God, to whom alone it belongs to pronounce sentence of absolutio^ and
comdemnation, and for their great presumption, shall abide horrible pain,
unless it please God to give them unfeigned repentance for the same.

And in case these be the men he means by the Puritans, with what equity or
right, he can charge the^ with these things, let ye godly judge, yea I will
report myself in this cause, to ye judgment of those, yt I am sure mislike
both the men, and the matters yt they propou^d, whether ever any of the^ were
heard to affirm, either them selves, or theirs, to be void of sin, or yt if
any have fallen after baptism, there was no hope of repentance and amendme^t,
or any such beastly and blasphemous speech. If not then have the Papists done
evil, to call this name from the dead, as it were, and to give it to sincere
Christians, seeing that it cannot be proved, that they held any such heresy,
and this fellow and others continuing the use of this name, without justifying
the cause upon them are found false witness beaters.

Concerning Protestants, that is to say, such as amongst us do at this day
preach and profess the Gospel, I doubt not but that in good time, they will
have an eye, to such desperate fellows, and cause him and others for their
lying, to feel ye weight of a just judgment, that dare so boldly condemn
them and the truth, which they hold and mainteyne. For this they must of
necessity grow to, that seeing there is but one God, one faith, one Church etc:
and their own conscience tells them, the untruth of this assertion, they
must either defend that Religion that they have already through Gods goodness
embraced and published (which then they shall do, when they resiraine, the
unbridled speeches of such loose and lewd fellows more then heretofore
they have used, by some sharper Censures and punishementes, either of
imprisonment, banishment, and if need require death it self: or else yield
unto him and them in their corruptions and errors, because the thing that they
propounde, and the matters that the Gospel delivers, can no more stand
together (being things directely opposite and contrary one of them to another)
then darkness and light, or then hell and heaven, as has been already in
some measure proved, and more particulerly shall be declared herafter. And this
I suppose may serve for a full and sufficient answer, to this lewd and false
accusation.

12 That no outward thing (as the works of sanctification, unfeigned
forgiveness of others, or such like) can be pledges, either to our selves or
others, of our election.
IT is well said by one, that he that has once passed the limits and
bounds of modesty and shamefastnes, must be indeed notable shameless. And it
is as truly said by an other, that error seldom or never comes alone, but
that it brings with it, an infinite number of absurdities and corruptions, as
handmaides, to wait upon the same. How true this is, may appear, by the lewd
assertions that this man has already put down (and yet by the way I must
advertise you, yt he fostreth an hundredth more in his breast, as perilous as
any of these here expressed) and by the plain answer and confutatio^ of the
same, amongst which his wicked conclusions, this yt we have now in hand, is not
the least evil, both because it is directly against ye truth of the word, and
also because it fights against some points, that he him self holds.

I will take the latter of these two and pursue it first. This fellow who would
have nothing of the threats of gods justice propounded unto ye people, but only
have their ears filled with the joyful and comfortable promises of the word,
that thereby they might be assured of salvation, does take away from them not
only one good testimony and pledge of the same in their hearts, but many and
sundry, yea and those very mighty in effect For by this assertion, he will not
admit, yt either our prayers should be pledges of our faith, and so by
consequent of our salvation (whereas ye scripture, tells us, ye we cannot call
upon him in who^ we believe not: and again, yt who soever shall ral upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved) or that our love of the brethren should be a
testimony of our regeneration and new birth, where as the word assures us,
that by this we know, that we are transiated from death unto life, because we
love the brethren: or that our unfeigned forgiveness of others, should be a
seal of the forgiveness of our sins before God, whereas our Savior Christ
tells us, that if we do forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly father
will also forgive us: but if we do not forgive men their trespasses, no more
will he forgive us our trespasses. See for this purpose. Mat. 18 35.

Now to the other point, wherein I said that it was directly against the truth
of the word, S. Peter shall be a sufficient witness in this behalf, when he
says: Give diligence to make your calling and election sure by good works,
for if you do these things you shall never fall: for by this means an entry
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom, of our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ. The Apostle means not here, that our election
and calling is uncertain in respect of God, for we know by the truth of ye
word that he has written our names in the book of life: that the gifts and
graces of God, are without repentance: that those whom he loves once, he
loves for ever: and that there is with him no variableness no not so much as
a shadow of turning: but because we our selves have our faith sundry times
sore shaken, by the weakness of our own corruption on the one side, and by
Satan's continual malice and assaults on the other side, that therefore we
should what we may (by all the graces of God, either within us or without us)
strengthen our persuasion against such furious combats and batteries.

I think not the contrary, but that this fellow will make a show to speak
many great things, of spiritual feeling and comfort in Christ: but yet for
all that, this is my judgment concerning him, that it seems unto me, he
knows not what it means, because it cannot be so much as supposed, that he
has had any strong wrestlings, with Satan and his own corruption: which may
plainly appear, because he does willingly and wittingly deprive himself, of
such big bulwarks and mighty fortresses of his faith, as this and such like
are. And if this his dealing, did but taint himself only it were a matter of
no great importance: but for as much as under the bare pretense of a spiritual
comfort, he indeuoureth nothing else, but to plunge me^ over head and ears in
the pit of desperation (for why may he not as well deprive us of all ye
proppes of our faith, as the word, the sacraments, etc, as of this and such
like) it behooves every one ye tendereth his own salvation, to beware of this
and al other his pestilent and pernicious opinions.

True it is that hypocrites and dissemblers, may in outward show (as he himself
says) do many good works, but yet that hinders not, why that ye children
of of God, should not either do the like, or conceive some comfort and strength
therein, seeing God has assured us by his word that sow may do. For this
must remain resolut, amongst such as love and fear the Lord, that so long as
we do unfeignedly cast from us, the opinion of merit on the side, and fail
not either in the manner of doing the thing that God commands us, or in the
end, (though we cannot do it in that exquisitenes and perfection that the
Lord demands it at our hands) yet there is no cause, why we should
either not do the thing at al (for that were sin against GOD in leaving
undone the thing that he requires at our hands) neither that we should be
void of comfort in the accomplishme^t of the matter, provided always that
our rejoicing be not in our selves, neither in the things as they come from
us, but only in the Lord, and the goodness of his grace, who has enabled us,
pore and miserable wretches though we be in some measure more or less,
according as we have received grace and assistance from him to perform his
will.

And this is that, that I would have the children of God to embrace, not only
as a counterpoison against the venomous infection of this lewd man's assertion:
but as a matter of consolation and comfort to their assaulted consciences, in
ye days of their affliction and trial. Of which matter I will hereafter,
through Gods assistance, publish a treaty, that I have alredie begun.

13 That we may as well say that Christ is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bones, as say, that we are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones.
THough somewhat have been said of this matter hertofore, in ye first and second
articles of this treaty (and therefore we shall not need here any large
discourse, concerning ye same) yet somewhat I will say, to ye end that ye
vanity and falsehood thereof may more sensibly appear.

First therefore I affirm, that we may safely say, ye we are flesh of of
Christ's flesh, and bone of Christ's bones because ye scripture it self, uses,
yt fashion and manner of speech Ephe. 5.30. Whereas no such ground or warrant
out of the word can be showed, that he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bones.

Secondly, I say yt we may, upon very good ground of reason, warranted unto us
by the word of God, say, that we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones, because that he was before us now living, of whom I suppose, this
Libertine specially speaks both in respect of his humanity, which he took
of his mother, (when the fullness of time was come) and also in respect of his
eternal deity, by which all things were made, and without which, was made
nothing that was made. And this me thinks is playnlie proved, by these words
of the Apostle. Hebr. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever. Wherefore, even as in the very order and course of nature, the father
being before the child, cannot be said, to be flesh of his childs flesh,
and bones of his childs bones (because that long ere the child was, ye father
was) and the latter must be denominated of the former, and not the former of
the latter) so cannot Christ be aptly and rightly said, to be bones of our
bones, and flesh of our flesh, because that we be but as it were his children,
and far after him in respect of succession of time. And if this were not true
and sound, that speech and reason of Adam mentioned in Genesis. 2.23. could not
be right, when he says. This now is bone of my bones and flesh of my
flesh, she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man. But in these
points, it is good to be wise according to sobriety, and to go no further
than Gods word will allow us. For mine own part, whatsoever I have said
against him in this point, I have not done it as of curiousnes, to carpe him,
otherwise than the truth I hope will bear it: and if I have failed (as it must
be confessed in many things we offend all) I have not done it of malice, or
purpose, but of ignorance rather: and therefore I would have no man to
misconstrue my meaning, to the maintenance of any corruption, touching either
the names, nature, person or offices of our Savior Christ. And that which I
speak particulerly of this point, I would have to be understood, of this whole
writing and of every part and piece thereof, and of all other things
whatsoever that either have passed or shall pass from me.

14 That the word kingdom in the second petition of the Lords prayer, is to
be understood only, of the kingdom of Gods love and mercy, and not of his
kingdom of justice and power.
IF his name shall be rased utterly out of the book of life, that takes any
thing away from the word of God, and the true meaning of it (as he that cannot
lie has most certainly assured us of ye same) then this fellow is in a most
dangerous and desperate estate, ye in the pride of his own heart, dare bring
into so narrow and straight a room, that which ye Lord by his eternal
wisdom, has enlarged so far.

For seeing that the glory of every kingdom, and therefore much more of Gods
kingdom (which is greater then all) consists of two parts, to wit, justice
and judgment against the wicked, and favor and mercy toward ye good, and we
pray for the coming of Gods kingdom, this fellow cannot choose, but be much
deceived, that goes about to make ye Lord so scant, ye of his goodness has
given us here, such a large stope and field to walk in. And that this may the
more plainly appear, I will here put down but two points. First I will
show, the absurdities that ensue upon this conclusion. Secondly, I will put
down, the true sense and meaning of this petition.

If this man's meaning might be accepted for current coin, that ground and
principle, which hitherto has been always received and admitted, for an
infallible truth (to wit that Christ has given us a certain form, in which
he has shortly comprised al points and matters, that it is lawful for us to
ask, whether they concern God or men, or respect this life, or the life to
come) should easily and with little or no do at all, not only be shaken, but
cast down to the ground also. But God has more graciously and liberally
provided for us, and for the strengthening of our says, whilst that it has
pleased him to give unto us, by the ministry and means of his dearly
beloved son, so excelle^r, though indeed very short form of prayer: wherein
he has not only manifested, his woonderful and unsearchable wisdom,
comprehending all things, in so few lines or words: but also testified, his
singular love, providing by this means, a most necessary help for the duines
and grosnesse of our understanding, and memory, whilst it has pleased him,
in the same even as it were in a little table, to describe and set out.
whatsoever it is lawful for us to wish and desire at his hunds.

Besides if we should admit this assertion, then this would follow upon it,
that when we pray for good things, we do not demand or crave, the
removing from us the contrary evil things: and then the rule of contraries
should be overthrown also, and we should see nothing in God but mercy and
goodness. Which how false it is may appear by the particular both testimonies
and examples, which do in the word set out his judgments sharply
threained, and justly executed upon all rebellious and disobedient people.

All that know any thing out of the word, know this to be a most true and
infallible rule, both in the commandments given us by the Lord, and in the
prayer which our Savior has taught us, that as by commanding good things, he
has forbidden us the contrary evil things: and as by forbidding evil
things, he has commanded us the contrary good things: so likewise by
teaching us to pray for the obtaining of good things, he has instructed us
to pray against evil things: and by teaching us to pray against evil things
he has taught us to desire at Gods hands, the contrary good things.

To make both of these plain by examples. In the fifth commandment, when he
requires at our hands obedience, to Magistrates, ministers, parents, and all
others, whom it has pleased the Lord, by wit, wealth, or any other manner of
way, to prefer before us, he has forbidden all rebellion, disobedience
contempt, evil words, yea evil thoughts against the same persons. And in the
seventh commandment under adultery he does not only require at our hands,
to absteyne from all filthiness, as whoredom, fornication, adultery, incest,
filthy speaking, unseemly gestures, and all other things whatsoever, which
may provoke to uncleanness: but commanded also al pureness and chastity,
both of heart, word; and behavior. And if this were not true, there were but
one way of transgressing Gods law, to wit, the doing of such evil things as he
has forbidden. Whereas we know by ye truth of ye Lord, that this is also
disobedience to God, to leave undone the good things that he commands.

The like may we say of prayer. In the fourth petition under the name of daily
bread, the Lord does not only teach us to pray for health, wealth, liberty,
meat, drink, apparel, and all other things whatsoever, that God knows to
be meet for us in this world, to sustain, keep, and defend our bodies and
lives by: but we pray also against all things that may tend to the hurt of our
bodies and lives, as hunger nakedness, scarsitie, pestilence, poverty, bondage,
and all such like.

So in the sirt and last petition, we do not only pray against faynting and
falling away from God, against worldly vanities, fleshly lusts, devilish
deceiuings and such like, but also we pray for christian patience and
continuance in all troubles, for contempt of the world, for mortification of the
flesh, for quickening of Gods holy spirit in us, and also for a joyful and
glorious victory, against sin, the devil, and al trials whasoeuer.

Now the reason both of the one and the other is this: because that we cannot
so soon speak of the one, but the other presently offers it self unto our
cogitation and thought: and again we must know and confess, that the feeling
of the one in obedience without the lively apprehension of the other by faith,
is to little or no purpose at all. For what would it profit me to al stain
from evil, and yet not to do good, seeing that the lord requires both the
one and the other from me? Or, what should it avail me, to have evil removed
from me by prayer, and not to have gracious and good things by the same means
in the name and for the sake of his son Jesus Christ bestowed upon me. Let
this therefore remain as a resolute conclusion, that this fellow does evil,
thus to allege and streighten, that which the Lord has so graciously
enlarged.

Moreover upon this there follows another absurdity (as this generation
always is very fruitful, procreating and begetting infinite children like
unto it self) and that is this: that if Gods kingdom comprehend nothing but
mercy and love, and that there is no justice in this place to be found, that
then his kingdom, shall not be so large as earthly kingdoms are, who are
ordained of GOD himself, to maintain the good, and to punish the evil: and by
a consequent, that there are no wicked men, upon who^ that part of his
kingdom, which consists of justice and judgment, should be executed: and by
another consequent that follows upon this, this Libertine should be found
contrary to himself, who said before in the 11. article, that all that were not
of his profession, were utterly deceived and in the state of condemnation: And
then another error would flow from hence, that as Origin dreamed, both
Diuelles and all men should be saved in their religion, Turk, Jew, Papist and
all, which how false it is, has been in part declared before.

By this you may see, what an of spring and generation there is of heresy and
corruption, and what a world or sea of absurdities, such gross opinions bring
with the^. Let every one of us seeing these great mischiefs and
inconveniences, be learned and warned thereby, to withstand the beginnings of
evil, and to stick fast only to that with soundnes and sincerity of truth,
that God has revealed unto us in his word, casting far from us, the idle
inventions, and wicked devises of our own heads, knowing that such
imaginations, are not only great defamings to Gods glory, but foul
corruptions, yea great condemnation to our own soul.

Now somewhat concerning the true meaning of this petition, and so an end for
this point, And though herein I might refer my self, to that which I have
written heretofore expou^ding the lords prayer, in a little treatise that I
did write of summarie meditations, yet because occasion is here offered, to
speak somewhat largely, and by expounding of one petition, light may be given
to another, I will with the good leave and liking of the godly reader, in as
few words as I can discourse somewhat concerning this point.

We know by the truth and light of Gods word, that Gods government stretches
it self, far and wide over all, so that there is no creature, neither in
heaven nor in earth, nor in places under the earth, but either willingly or
unwillingly (as you would say) it must of necessity be subject to this his
most sovereign and high power. And this we may call ye general jurisdiction
or government that GOD exercises over all, from which no creatures, no not ye
devils or wicked men (though he do not rule them or guide them by his holy
spirit) can be exempted, though they gladly wish and desire the same.

We know further by ye truth and light of the same word, that as earthly kings
and princes, have in several quarters and parts of their dominions, many
thousands of their subjects, all which make but one body: so the Lord has
some in heaven, who^ we call the church triumphant, (because in the victory
and conquest of Christ, they do already in soul, triumph over sin and hell,
and some here in earth, which we call ye Church millitant, who through the grace
and strength, that God be stoweth upon them, do battle as against corruptions
in others, so specially against sin in themselves.

But as there is no earthly kingdom, though it comprehend all the people of the
same, under the name and title of subjects, but it has notwithstanding, not
only many factious and seditious persons therein, but counterfeite subjects
also, upon which the prince and magistrate, will in the day of the
manifestation of their transgression, take just vengeance, according to their
several transgressions: so the Church, here cannot be so purged (though it
please God many times, by exercising his judgments, to she we his justice
against wicked hypocrites and rebellious persons) but that some chafe will
reinayne with the wheat: And yet when the day of wynowing shall come, then
shall the good corn, be received into the Lords gra^ner, and the chafe
shall be burned with unquenchable fire. All this tends not only to show what
resemblaunce there is between earthly princes gouernmentes, and Gods: but also
to prove, that this spiritual kingdom of God consists chiefly in two
points. One is, that he bear rule over a ready, willing and unfeigned hearted
people, as it is said in Psalm. 110.3. the other is that he confound his
adversaries in their boldness and pride.

So that in this petition, we demand these two things, Gods mercy toward
his elect and his judgment and indignation upon the wicked of what sort soever
they be. For as we cannot desire the clear light of truth, but that we do
withal wish the remoouing, of darkness and ignorance, so we cannot desire God
to guide his faithful people by his spirit, but we do on the other sede
desire him to over throw and confound, al those yt do obstinately withstand his
holy will, and proudly lift up the^ selves against him, at no hand suffering
themselves to be brought in obedience and subjection to his blessed
government, whatsoever contrary show many of them will notwithstanding
pretend.

If any man would think this to be against charity, because we are commanded
generally to may for all men. I answer that this is no whirte at all against
it. For we must not measure tharitie by the line of our own reason, but by
that figure or rule that God who is in him self the God of charity, has
sanctified and set forth unto us in his word, and there we shall find, that
though we be commanded to pray for ast men generally (that is for all sorts and
degrees of me^, as magistrates, ministers, men, women, young, old, and that
this is enjoined us, because we certainly know not, who besides our selves
every one of us in particular are elected and reprobate) that yet if it be
granted in the bare letter, it utterly overthrows Gods eternal reprobation,
who in his justice has ordained many to be vessels of his wrath, as in his
grace has appou^ed some to be vessels of mercy, and is directly contrary, to
such prayers as Christ himself the sun of GOD, Saint Paul and other holy
men have made as may appear. John. 17.9. Galathians 5.12. 1. John. 5.16. and
sundry such other places, whither, for avoiding of tediousnes I remit the
reader.

To conclude, because I fear, I have been ouerlong in this point, this I take
to be the meaning of this petition, that for as much as Gods kingdom is
general over good and bad (though the wicked indeed, cannot properly be said
to be his subjects) and that he is glorified both in the destruction of the
wicked, and also in the salvation of the elect: we pray therefore that he
would overthrow the wicked generally, and namely, and particularly
Hypocrites, who are not sincerely subject to his kingdom and government,
though they would seem so to be and that on the other side, he would govern
his chosen ones, as outwardly in his church, by the scepter of his own word
and discipline, so inwardly in their consciences, by the gracious working of
his holy spirit, mortifying in them daily more and more, the lusts and
concupiscences of their own hearts, till he have brought them through the
vale of their pilgrimage, for ever to triumph with Jesus Christ, their captain
and leader, and withal the faithful, and glorious company of heaven,
continually to praise his most holy name.

Whereupon I conclude, that if the meaning of our Savior Christ in this
petition, be so large as it is indeed, and I hope, has been hitherto plainly
and plentifully proved, all that love the Lord Jesus Christ to their
immortality, will abhor and that from the bottom of good hearts, such
presumptuous spirits, as in the pride of their understanding, will with this
exclusive particle only, restrain that, that God has graciously enlarged,
specially seeing the purpose of our Savior was not only to set forth God his
fathers mercy, but also his justice, who in ye fulness of knowledge that was in
him, (foreseeing well enough the relaption of man's heart who if he heard of
nothing but mercy, would wax careless, and if he heard of nothing but
justice, would be cast down above measure) did therefore most wisely temper
sweet things and sower things together, to the end, that by his goodness
the godly might be comforted, and by his instice the wicked might be
terrified, teaching us as it were by his example, to deal so, and not utterly
to abolish out of men's hearts the fear of God (which arises in some sort,
of a sensible feeling of his justice and judgments) as this Libertine would
have us to do. See before Article 11. and in other places.

15 That Christ did not fully finish our redemption upon the cross but that he
suffered somewhat afterward. se page 40. to 56.
THis speech he uttered amongst many other absurdities, as a ground of yt his
gross opinion, concerning Christ his disce^t into hell, of which we have spoken
before, in the eight Article.

The untruth of this his assertion appears, in that it is contrary unto the
words of Christ himself, when he said, [It is finished,] meaning thereby that
ye redemption and salvation of all the believers; was now accomplished in that
same one and only sacrifice, which then he offered and not as this fellow
imagines and expounds it, that the malice and envy of ye Jews toward
Christ, was then at an end, when they had crucified him. For besides, that
this his speech, is a mere conjecture, without any show either of words or
circumstaunces taken out of the Scriptures, it is flatly and directly contrary,
to that which is expressed by S. Matthew in the seven and twenty Chap. where
after his death they declared their malice toward him, one while in words as
whilst they called him deceauer and an other while by deeds as whilst they
went about, by setting their watch, to keep him down, from rising again.

And yet in the. 28. chapter of that Gospel, their malice does more plainly
appear, in that they went about to conceal and deface the truth of his
rising again, partly by bribing the soldiers that wacht the sepulcher, partly
by devising a most false lie, saying yt his disciples had stolen him away by
night: and partly by spreding and conueghing the said falshod over as it were
by tradition, to their posterity, the people of the Jews.

Moreover it is flatly and directlye contrary to the plain words of the
Apostle. Col. 2.14.15. saying that Christ even upon the cross, did put out
the hand writing of ordenaunces that was against us, which was contrary unto
us, which also he took out of the way, and fastened upon the cross, and has
spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly,
and has triumphed over the^ in the same cross meaning thereby that Christ
has set us free by his sufferings on the cross, not only from all the figures
and ceremonies of the law (which tended specially to these two ends: to
wit to declare first, the great corruption that was in us, and the great
condemnation, that by the same we deserved: as for example, the cutting, away
of the foreskin, and the usual washings, to signify the outward filthiness
of man's corrupt nature: the kylling of beasts for sacrifice, to declare, that
we our selves, had deserved death, yea even eternal death: and secondly to
represent Christ, his death and blessed obedience, who was indeed figured
likewise by the same) but also from the power of Satan, of whom we were held
captives at his pleasure. So that now Christ having yielded that Sacrifice and
obedience for us, neither sin nor Satan, nor the law nor condemnation are
able to lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, seeing God is on their
side, who spared not his own son, but gave him for them all to death, even
to the death of the Cross, that so he might reconcile all believers unto
himself.

Besides, seeing that the word, [redemption] does properly importe the freeyng
of some one or other, from the power of an other, that kept the same parties in
captivity and bondage, and this was usually performed, when the price or rate
set, for their redemption and liberty was satisfied and paid: and seeing we
know, that as we were under ye thraldo^e of the Devil and eternal co^de^nation
by means of our sins: so we were delivered by yt price of our redemption,
Jesus Christ the righteous, in whom it pleased God, to reconcile the world
unto himself, while he made him that knew no sin to be made sin for us,
that is to say, a sacrifice and price for sin: and seeing ye this Sacrifice
or price was not performed and paid but by offering up of himself once for all,
upon the Altar of ye cross, we cannot therefore be otherwise persuaded but yt
he has fully redeemed us, by this only and sufficient sacrifice.

Indeed we confess, and must of necessity confess it, because it is the
truth of the Lord, that sometimes this word [redemption] as also this word
[death of Christ] is used in scripture, not only for the price of our
redemption, and the sufferings of our savior, but for all the fruits and
effects, that at his death, and after his death he performed, or does
perform in the behalf of his elect: As his resurrection ascension,
intercession and such like. But yet, when the word thus speaks (as it uses
not these kinds of speeches without great reason) to wit, because Christ's
death, resurrection, ascension, etc. cannot be divided (for to what end
should it profit us to know that Christ were dead, if he rose not again? and
what should his resurrection profit us, if he were not ascended? And in what
steed could his ascension stand us, if he did not thereby, fulfill the office
of a continual mediator between God and his people?) so it does no whit at
all confirm thereby either this or any other absurd assertion, that this or
any other such fantastical spirit shall blow abroad: But putting apart for
the whole, which is a matter very usual in the scripture, he does by the
part understand ye whole, and by that yt goes before, mean that also which
follows after. Which kind of interpretation or sense, this fellow will at no
hand accept or allow of. And yet this notwithstanding we shall see that these
things are severally mentioned also in the new Testament. Let one place or to
serve for many, As Romans 4. 25. It is said that Christ was delivered to death
for our sins and is risen again for our justification. Also Romans 8.34. It is
said that Christ is he which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again. Who
is also at the right hand of GOD, and makes request also for us. The holy
Ghost giving us thereby to understand, both when he speaks generally, and
also when he speaks particularly, that we should learn to look for, both
the whole, and every part and piece of our justification and sanctification,
in the person of his son and not in our selves at any hand: and teaching us
also further, that seeing we know that sin, has not only hindered the
course of Gods mercies toward us, but let in upon us withal the floodes of
his justice, seeing we believe also that Chrstes righteousness to our comfort
consists of 2. parts, yt is, the taking away of our sins, and the clothing
of us with his righteousness, and innocence, to ye end that thereby we may
stand with boldness and purity in ye presence of God, and seeing all this is
brought to pass by his death and resurrection, we should therefore both
generally and particulerly look into ye same according to ye warrant of ye
word for our instruction and comfort, and not confou^d and iumble them
together as this fellow does for the approbation of erroneous and absurd
opinions.

16. That the last words that Christ spoke upon the cross, were these, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.
Though it be a matter of no great importance in respect of it self, toe
know which were the first or which were the last words that our savior
uttered upon the cross yet because, that these words fight against the
truth of the story as it is put down by the Evangelists and were alleged by
this fellow, to improoue the true exposition of these words. It is finished,
handled in the, 15. article some what in few words shall be said of the same.

By comparing the Evangelists Matthew and John, who do at large set out, the
history of Christ's death and suffering the one in the. 26. chapter of his
gospel, and the other in the. 19. it appears that Christ, after that he with
a loud voice had cried saying, Ely Ely Lamasabatany, yt is, My God, my God, why
haste thou forsaken me: and after ye they had taken a sponge and fuled it with
viniger, and Jesus himself had received of it: he cried again with a loud
voice, as Matthew reports it verse. 50. not erpressing what words he used
in that cry, but yet Luke in his 23. chapt. ver. 46. says he uttered these
words, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. and John. chapter. 19.
verse. 30. says, he said, It is finished. By which places it appears that
our Savior Christ uttered both these speeches last upon the cross, and not
the other which he affirms.

17 That all the Jews generally, should be called to the knowledge of Christ.
I Rest persuaded that this assertion, sauoureth, (as many of the other do) of
the idle unagination and dotage of his own heart and brain, because no such
thing can be resolutely and certainly concluded, either by the plain words of
the holy scripture or by any circumstance thereof, for mine own part, this is
that, yt I am persuaded, that all Christians may safely hold concerning this
doubtful and intricate question, to wit yt forasmuch as the scripture in many
respects, make ye Jew and Gentil equal as appears. Romans 3.9. Romans 10.12.
Romans 11.32. and in many other places: and we know by ye scriptures, that ye
doctrine of salvation, was generally offered to all the Gentiles, and yet all
received it not: nay which is more, amongst those which gave heretofore, and
give at this day, an outward consent, to the doctrine taught, many are
castawaies, that therefore we may safely conclude, that though the Lords truth,
should be generally revealed, to all the Jews, yet all the Jews, should not
have an effectual calling, and by co^sequent, should not be wholly restored,
to the hope and fruition of eternal life.

For if yt were true, then should the Jew not in many outward things only,
but in ye hope and possession of better things, be preferred before the
Gentiles, which I suppose no man in the world will ever be able to justify.

He yt will go beyond this, may be wise in his own co^ceipt, and vanish away
when he has done, in ye idle imagination and dotage of his own heart.
Wherefore it shall be good, to put a stay here in time, and in this and such
like points to let go the curiousness of our own heads, wading no further
therein; then the reveled will of ye lord, has set out: which he has
manifested to this end, that we and our posterity might know, believe and do
the same, staying our selves and our wisdoms in the obedience of that only,
and not to search beyond it, least we be overwhelmed of his glory.

18 That the word [Sacrament] is not to be found in the scripture, and
therefore not to be used, but the word [Record.]
IF question were of words only, and not of matters also, we would easily
grant the first part of this assertion, both because it is true in the
letter, though alleged to a false end: and also because the Apostle requires
us, that we should not strive about words, which is to no profit, but to ye
perverting of the hearers. But forasmuch as this speech carries with it some
dangerous consequences, it shall be good for us, to look somewhat into it.

True it is that S. Peter says yt if any man speak, he should speak as the
words of God: yet this hinders not but that we may without danger of sin
and offense, use such words as we find not in the scriptures: if so be that
the words be not, either in them selves, or in the end whereunto they are
spoken, contrary to godliness and honesty: specially then, when, though we have
not the words them selves in the Scriptures, yet we have others of the self
same signification, and the matter also it self that those words import,
comprised in the holy Scriptures.

To deal eue^ with this particular word Sacrament I find it, to be of double
use amongst me^. Sometimes it is used in the law, and the^ it is put, for a
pledge, of some bargain, covenant or ha^dfasting, Now why we should not use
if, seeing that the Lord has ordained sacraments, to be seals and pledges of
his mercy toward us, and of the couenauntes that in the same mercy he has
made with us, I can see no reason unless we would go about (as I suppose this
fellow shoots at this mark) to frustrate and deprive our selves, as of
terms and words, that do very significantly, set out unto us holy things, so
of the holy things themselves. Sometimes it is used in military art, and
then it is put for a solemn profession or oath as if were, that captains and
generals of armies, ordained, to lay upon soldiers, thereby the better to
keep them (after that they were chosen to the rooms and places of soldiers)
in the faithful observation and persormance of such points as they in duty
did owe to the common wealth and prince who^ they served. And this kind of
promise or oath, conceived and that in prescript words was call led a sacrament,
because they did use for the ratification and confirmation of it, certain
holy things as they supposed.

Now, seeing yt the Lord himself, even for ye tying of our faith more fast unto
him, has ordained sacraments, and for ye better confirmation thereof, has
annexed, certain holy things thereunto, such as the elements are in the
sacraments, which are holy, because they are appointed to holy ends and uses
as before has been showed article. 5. Why should not we, use such words,
as may lively and sensibly instruct us, in the truth of those things though
that the scriptures use not the same words.

For mine own part, I see no reason, why we may not for learning sake, use
some words not in use in the word, so that we do it not without some good
cause, nor innouate or change any thing, from the doctrine of the Apostles and
prophets.

Moreover, seeing we have words of the like signification, as sign, pledge,
seal, (and as this fellow him self also confesses) Record: there is no reason
why we should abstain from the use of that word, which, though it differ
in sound from the rest, yet does it in substance and effect, agree very well
with the^ and expresses the same things that they do.

Besides this, if this man's rule were true, we should not use the word
trinity, nor many other words that our christian religion embraces, because
we have not that word in use in the scripture. But leaving this man in his
dotage, we do and may very well and safely use it, because that though we
find not the word there, yet we find the matter by the word signified
there. It is much to be seared, lest yt under this large and lose conclusion,
this fellow, would first in some dangerous opinions heretofore set abroche
by Seruetus and others: and therefore I would wish all christians to take heed
of such slye, subtle, and corrupt speeches.

To all this yt hitherto I have put down, I have thought good to add this
cautio^, that as my meaning is not, to improve any, in the use of any lawful
word, with ye conditions that I have before expressed: so it is not my mind,
to approve or allow any, in the use of strange and affected terms, under
which heretics of all times, have customably shrouded themselves, and in which
faculty ye heretics of our days, specially, and particularly the family of
love, are very pregnant, and plentiful, as to every one but meanly acquainted
with there books, does plainly appear.

19 That there will come a time, wherein there shall be no need of sacraments in
this life: his reason, because there will be such multitudes converted, that
there shall be no leisure to minister the sacraments unto them.
WHat ground he should have for this assertion, I think no man of sound
judgment can well perceive. Sure I am that the scripture, does in sundry
places both by examples and testimonies, conclude the contrary. Take one place
for all. The Apostle Saint Paul, tells us, that the Lord ordained, the
sacrament of his supper to put us in remembrance of him, and of the graces that
we reap and receive by him, even until his coming again in the clouds
with power and great glory, to judge the quick and the dead. This fellow
minds (as it should seem) by uttering this conclusion, not only to make void
this plain place of Saint Paul, but to rob us as of the sign that should
put us in mind of Christ's remembrance, so of the remembrance of Christ
himself, and of the graces that in him and by him are daily bestowed upon us.
For of necessity, one of these two things must needs follow, either that
this man's assertion is true, which no godly man I suppose will ever consent
unto, and Paul (his writing is unsound which be it far from any to think,
much more for any to speak, and utter) or else Paul's speech must be true
and his false, which I am sure all of understanding will easily confess: and
the reason hereof is, because that the one of them are as directly contrary to
the other, as light and darkness truth and falsehood.

Now out of this I infer further, that if the Lords supper it self, be
perpetual and must continue in the church of God, how few or how many soever
the members thereof be: then the sacrament of baptism, having the same
institutor, that the other has, to wit Christ Jesus, and being ordained for
the same end, that is for the strengthening of our faith in the truth of Gods
promises: and for the same people, that is, for all those, that are gathered
into the compass and boosome of Gods Church must likewise be perpetual and
endure unto the end of the world in the Church howsoever ye multitudes thereof
increase.

And forasmuch as we acknowledge no more sacraments in the Church of God, but
these two, and it has been before proved, that these two shall be perpetual, it
follows there upon, that there shall be no such time in this life as this man
dreameth of, wherein there shall be no use or need of the sacraments. As for
the reason that he adds, I take it to be so far of from having any force in
it, that it is nothing, but a cunning or fine color or mist rather cast before
men's eyes to darken them from beholding an Anabaptisticall conclusion, who
hold, that men may atteine to such perfection in this life (which thing also
ye family does stiffely urge) that they shall not stand in need of the word and
sacraments. It is a strange assertion, to say, that ye multitude of such as
should be converted, from dead idols to the living God, should hinder the
administration of sacraments, which God himself has ordained for their good.
Belike this fellow suppose^h, either that the Lord did not foreknow the number
of those, that should be called into his Church, or else were not able
sufficiently to provide, that those, that do apperteine unto him might have
their liueries and cognisaunces, where by they might be known to be his
servants, both of which or either of which to think, were intolerable
blasphemy.

Beside we know, by the truth of Gods holy word, that whatsoever this fellow
dreameth of multitudes to be converted, yet the number of those, ye shall be out
of the bosom of the church, shall be greater, by much, then those that shall be
gathered, into ye outward society and fellowshippe thereof. And yet amongst
them many also shall be cast away. So that unless all the world, or the
greatest part thereof should be converted unto God (which I am sure neither
this fellow nor any for him will ever be able to prove we need not fear,
that either multitudes should hinder the administration of sacraments, or that
leisure should not be sufficient for the same, and yet though either the one
or the other could be proved, what are we, that we should dispense utterly
to leave of, the institution and order of GOD: nay rather, it were the duty
of every good man, that seeing he cannot do all that the Lord demands, yet
he should do that that the Lord inableth him to perform, for otherwise we
might easily cast from us the whole yoke of the Law of God, because we are not
able i^deed, wholly to fulfill it though through the goodness and assistance of
our God, we walk now and then in the performance of some part and piece
thereof.

20. That it is hypocrisy for one christian to reproone an other for swearing,
or any such other offense, which he calls but trifles.
If this fellow had said, that many men in reproving others do fall into the
sin of hypecri^y, pride, or such like, whilst that they would seem in
re^^^^ing of others to be better than others, or to loath that in others,
which perhaps inwardly they foster and feed in them selves, he had spoken the
truth, because it is a fault, that men may not only be easily over taken
withal, but sundry times indeed sall into the same, seeking thereby their own
credit and praise. But for a man to condemn any good thing (as this fellow
seems to do) for the evil or corruption of the party that intermedleth
therein, it argues folly more then palpable. First because things of
themselves good, howsoever they may be profaned by wicked men, cannot of
themselves and in their own nature become evil. Secondly, because if that
were true, we might easily condemn as things evil and unlawful, both the
word and sacraments, specially if they were preached and administered unto us
by evil ministers, or wicked men made a show to receive them, which
sauoureth strongly of Donat^^^y and Anabaptistrie. But whether d^eth not this
man's arrogancy and impudency drive him (...) Mark I beseech you how by
this speech he dares make GOD the Author of evil: to wit of hypocrifie. For
GOD demands this duty of us, that we should have an eye one over an
other for good, and that in the spirit of mildness and brotherly love, we
should friendly admonish and charitably repro^ue one another. To this end is
it said in Leuiticus. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou
shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer not sin upon him. Our Savior
Christ also wills us to tell our brother his fault, and y^^ this fellow
dares, say, that (...) is h^pocrifie so walk in the ^^edie ^^e of these h^^^
co^inande (...), It this be not to charge God with evil, ^et al men ^idge, and
if this be not the o^erth^^w of Gods law, and word I know not what is: But
this fellow ^aieth not here, but pro^^^^eth to^ utter as great and gross
blasphemies calling swe^ing and other transgressions of the first and second
table, but tri^^^s, Be l^ke this fellow is newly godded with God (as the
familians say) or else he would neue^ take upon him thus Popelike, to dispense
with the holy commandments. If he that breaks one of the least
commandments and teaches men so, shall be cast into utter darkness, what shall
become of this fellow that fears not to (...) some of the greatest, and ^ot
(...) men to do the same (...) ex^^^ating of sin (...) person pract^^ing ye
same little or no (...) at ^otion. B^^^^ it differs not much from the
Stoickes opi^^on (...) sin equ^^^. But ^e rest p^^swad^^ by the truth of Gods
word, that not (...) one ^^aue is. more gres nous that ^^^^her before God and
man (which may^ p^ainely appeare^: by the orde^ that God himself ob^^^^eth in
propo^^^ding his law in the (...) tables) but also that even one and the self
same sin, may (...) aggrauated and made mo^^ he^nous by the circumstances, of
time, pla^e, person, and manner of doing. So far of are we therefore from
accounting the greatest sins trifles, as this fellow does, that we counce the
least offense that can be committed against Gods law, by thought, word, or
deed, to be of and in it self, without Gods great mercy pardoning ye same, a
mean to pull upon us eternal death and condemnation, which argues that the
thing it self committed, must of necessity be a greater matter by much, the^
a trifle, or ^ls GOD as a very rigorous and unjust GOD, that for trifles and
matters of no importance, lays so sore is judgment upon the world. But for
this matter I say, let God be just when he speaks, and pure when he
judges. And as for this Lioertine, and all other pexnicious Heretics
whatsoever, let them receive that which is due unto them to wit, shame and
confusion of face before God and good men.

One thing more out of this last point and so an end. I see in this
instrument of Satan, a lively image and picture as it were of his Diuelishe
corruption. They that are acquainted with the suggestions of Satan, know,
that al his assaults do at all times and in all things, tend ever to
extremity. For example, if he cannot draw men to idolatry, he will labor
to bring them to contempt of true religion: Again, if he cannot prevail to
make men covetous, he will assay by all means possible to draw them to
prodigallitie and wastfulnesse, so hard a thing is it, too keep and direct
and right course sailing in this world of wickedness, wherein we are tossed up
and down with the tempestuous waves of our own corruption and Satan's malice,
between these two most dangerous gulfes and huge rocks. The self same
thing, does this fellow, led no doubt, by the spirit of satan, propound and
practice in this place. For seeing that he cannot carry away men, into a
eurious beholding of other men's transgressions: and thereby into a forgetful nes
of their own, he does lar bour by this his speece, to make them utterly to
neglect that great duty of brotherly admonition and reproof, which both God
and christian charity does require at their hands. And feeing, that in the
vglye sight of sin, he cannot terrify men's consciences to despair, he
endeuoreth, by debasing bey onde all right and reason, sin it self and the
miserable effects and fruits thereof, to make men void of al remorse and
conscience of the same, the greatest instrument and mean ye Satan does use to
indurate and harden men's hearts therein. Those that are taught of god have
learned by the light of his word and woorking of his spirit, not only to
take heed of such dangerous and desperate extremities but also in all holy
obedience to God, and dutiful love to their brethren, rightly so to divide the
times, that they will have a season, wherein to look to them selves, and those
things, that be amiss in them, laboring according to the n^^sure of grace
received, the a^e^dment thereof: and also another time wherein they will by the
spirit of love and gentleness labor what in them lies, ye reformation of
their brethren Again, because they know, that man's judgment is bleared, if
not altogether defaced, through sin and transgression, many times calling
good, evil, and evil, good: and beside, being partial to themselves in their
own causes, often justifying themselves in those things, wherein they should
condemn themselves, they do use to measure out sin by an other line, the^
by the crooked understanding of their own hearts: that is, by the truth and
touchstone of the word, which is able not only to instruct them to put a
difference between good and evil, but even between evil and evil, and good
and good. For by the truth of that word they know, that there is difference
and degrees both in the one and in the other. And that this is truth, it is as
clear, as the light at noone^ide. There rests no more but this, to know and
believe for our encouragement in well doing, that as many as walk, according
to this rule, shall have peace upon them, and mexcie, and the like shall be powered
forth upon all the Israel of God. (:)

FINIS.
An advertisement to the Godly Reader.
SInce the printing of this work was attempted, certain rumors have bin spread
abroad, by this lewd Libertine, or some of his favorers, that he never held or
propounded many of these or such like propositions. For mine own part I
thought good, to advertise the (gentle reader) of the falsehood of this report,
and that not only upon mine own knowledge, (though therein I might have said
much, as who has bin this 9. or. 10. years somewhat acquainted, with these
and such like cursed conclusio^s of his: as that we need not to pray specially
for forgiveness of sins: and that if we keep our selves in our castle Christ
nothing that we can commit in this flesh, can be sin unto us: and that now
since we are married to Christ, there are no more me^ because al are become
women) but upon the assured testimonies also, of good and sufficient witnesses,
in whose hearing and in mine likewise he did not many months since, shamelesly
utter and speak, the matters and points before rehearsed. Yea if the beastly
books that he has penned, as one which he calls his music, another which
he calls his axe, and such others might be brought to light, the world should
then see, not only these, but even a whole sea of such like absurdities and
falsehoods, broched and spread abroad. So that there is no reason why the
christian reader, should believe, such flying reports published, very
cunningly, to the discredit either of this, or any other thing, that may be
set out against him, specially, considering that it is Satan's common custom,
both in himself, and in his servants, to color their wickedness with lying,
that thereby they might, the more mightily deceive: and experience has taught
us, that it has been the very use of su^drie heretics, as in old time of the
Priscilianistes, and in these days of the family of love, to say and vnsaie.
And therefore I wish the godly Christian to have an eye to this, not only to
credit this or any other erroneous person, upon a bare denial of his or
their untruths, but for the better sifting of them, to require a plain, and
an open confession, of the contrary truths and an yielding thereto, and then
no doubt it shall sufficiently appear, whether the retracting of their
errors, be plain and simple yea or no. Thus beseeching the Lord, to give
those that be his, understanding in all things, that in sound knowledge they
may prove, what that good, holy, and acceptable good will of his is, and in
blessed obedience, labor with care and conscience, to perform the same, I
end, for this present. At London the 27. of this May. 1581.

Jmprinted at London at the three cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson for
Thomas Man. 1581.


