THE SCHYSMATICAL PVRITAN.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WITNEY concerning the lawfulness of Church Authority,
for ordaining, and commanding of Rites, and Ceremonies, to beautify the Church.

By GILES WIDOWS Rector of St. MARTINS Church in Oxford.

TITUS. 1. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them, that are
defiled, and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but their Mind, and Conscience are
defiled.

Printed at Oxford for the Author. 1630.

TO HIS GRACIOUS LADY, KATHARINE, DVTCHES of BVCKINGHAM HER GRACE, all health,
prosperity, and salvation through Jesus Christ.
MADAM
Importunity of friends has with vn-answerable persuasions constrained me, to
imprint this Sermon: because an ignorant zeal of some hasty spirits, would cry
down the lawful Authority of the true Doctrine, and discipline of our
Reformed Church. I therefore desire your Graces favor most earnestly, to
accept these my first fruits, sacrificed on the Press; and to wish them safe
protection. My obliged duty directs, and necessitates me, to be thankful unto
you, for your special favors beyond my desert, to dedicate myself, and these
my orthodoxe labors to so good, and Gracious a Lady. The Lord Crown your
merits with spiritual, and temporal blessings for Christ Jesus sake, and that
for the hearty prayers of

Your Graces most humble servant and Chaplain GILES WIDOWS.

TO THE PVRITAN.
IT is your practice, to run from the Church. Iam sorry, that so learned, and
so holy men, as you would seem to be, do want true Christian patience, to
hear orthodox holy doctrine. But let me entreat you, to understand me this one
time. I hope it will be for your edifying. This is my prayer unto Almighty God
through Jesus Christ. My business with you is the Puritan: whose name
distinguished, whose essence re^d'red in the very property, and whose several
kinds essentially differing, I give into your own hands, that you may see, and
learn true Reformation.

Concerning the name (Puritan) it is ambiguous, and so it is fallacious. For
some good men are called Puritans: and they are Puritans indeed. They are pure
in heart, and so blessed, that they shall see God. Mat. 5. 8. And some evil
men are called Puritans, who desire to seem to be just, and holy; but in their
doctrine, and discipline, they are the underminers of our True, Protestant,
Reformed Church. Are you angry, because I tell you the truth. Be angry but sin
not, and I will tell you, the essential definition of this fallacious Puritan.

A Puritan is a Protestant Nonconformist. A Protestant, this is his Genus, his
kind of being. A Nonconformist: this is his differentia, his essential
difference, his essential Quality. A Puritan is a kind of Protestant. For he
will be tried by the Scriptures concerning his faith, and his Christian moral
life, so far as his Spirit will endure the text. But the scriptures
deduceable sense in Essentials, Essentiates, Efficients, Finals, Subjects,
Effects, and their Modalities, being opposite to their tenets, confounds this
Professor, and overthrowes his Chair: but he ashamed to forsake his seducing
profession a long time vehemently clamarous, takes fast hold only on the
letter, and chapter of the text. So then this Puritan is a sullen fallacy of
the Reformed Church: being confuted, he will not learn to turn: still he is
pure, not really, but in his own suppose. The Lord grant him grace to reform.

This Puritan is a Nonconformist. For he is oppositely set, a Contradictist to
the Scriptures deduceable sense in three things. The first is the 39 Articles
of our Churches Reformed faith. The second is our Common Praier-booke. The
third is the Canons of our Church. And yet the doctrine of the Articles, the
faith of the common prayers, and the lawfulness of the Canons, are contained
in the deduce-able sense of holy Scriptures. The Articles of our Reformed
Churches says, which he opposes, are these: the 3. 6. 9. 16. 17. 20. 21. 23.
26. 27. 33. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. This is proved in the several kinds of this
irregular scripturist. The prayers in the common prayer-booke, which he
contradicts (being collected, and translated out of the Masse-booke, yet
corrected, and purged from gross errors) those selected prayers he refuses
every one, because they were thence collected. The Absolution he disliketh,
because he makes a quere, whether the congregation did faithfully, and
penitently confess their sins. The Lords prayer he will not say, because
he will make a prayer like to the Lords prayer. Nunc dimittis, etc: he
reiects, because he will not any prayer, or hymn, but such as he thinks fit
according to his own will. The Letanie he says is composed of coniuring, and
swearing, and of unnecessary and unlawful Invocations. The collect on
Trinity Sunday, he says is composed of an Impossibility. And that the last
collect but one read at holy Communion is composed of untruths. He is
ill-disposed., oppositely affected against prayers at Christnings,
Confirmations, and Burialls.

I make answer thus. To pronounce, He pardons, and absolveth all them, which
truly repent, and unfeignedly believe; is the actual duty of Evangelicall
Priests, and so good a duty is no sin. Ministers (must) say the Lords
prayer. The Lord has said it. Luke 11. 2. And they must make their prayers
according to the form of the Lords prayer. It is the text, they must use no
vain babbling: their form of prayer must be effectual, not vain; brief, not
stuffed with tautologies, and iterations. Read Matthew. 6. ver. 7. 8. 9. God did
regard us with a Savior, in that he did regard the Blessed Virgin with a
Son, and a Savior, therefore we say the Magnificat. We shall be saved by the
same faith, as old Simeon was, therefore we say Nunc dimittis. In the Letanie
we pray to be delivered from sin, and punishment. And how must Christians
pray for to be delivered, but by Christ's agony, and bloody sweat, etc? And is
this swearing, or coniuring? Is praying in the Winter, to be delivered from
thunder, and lightning, unnecessary? Lightning, and thunder are Gods secret
judgments: he may afflict sinners with them in the Winter: though naturally
summer be the time for those terrifying Meteors: but because they are Gods
secret judgments, therefore we pray always for deliverance. Is praying for
thieves, and whores unlawful, the one being included in all men, travayling by
land, or by water; the other being included in all women laboring with child?
Our Savior says, that his Heavenly Father is merciful to the just, and
unjust, and that all Gods people must be so merciful Math. 5. 48. etc: And S.
Paul says, do good unto all. Gal. 6. 10: and therefore we must pray for all.
On Trinity Sunday we pray to be delivered from all adversity; and it is thus in
the Lords prayer: Deliver us from all evil: And shall we not pray, as the Lord
has taught us? In the last Collect but one at the holy Communion, we Confess
our unworthiness, and blindness: And wheresoever sin is inherent, and a
fighter, there must be necessitate causae, (sin being an actual cause,) an
unworthiness of Gods favor, and blind ignorance; not in the necessary
precepts of says, but in Contingents, with what particular blessing, when,
where, and how God will bless sinners. Prayers at Baptism do regenerate:
though you deny this. It Is the text: Ask, and you shall have. To pray is to
Ask. To be Regenerate is to have. The blessed Apostles did confirm the
Churches, which they before had converted. Act. 14. 22. Act. 15. 32. For
confirmation is a Principle of the doctrine of Christ next to baptism. Heb. 6.
1. 2. Therefore S. Peter, and S. John did pray and impose hands to confirm the
Church with the holy Ghost. Act. 8. 17. And little Children being more weak in
the state of Grace, then such Converts, must necessarily be confirmed by the
Bishop, the Apostle of the Diocese; though not by miraculous, yet by seven,
of the holy Ghosts gifts. We must pray for the dead. Thy kingdom come. Oh Lord
raise the dead prisoners in the grave. And herein we pray for their souls, and
bodies. God be with them, to comfort their souls deprived of their bodies; I
say to comfort them with hastening the Reunion, and the consummate joy of
soul and body. Thus the Primitive Fathers: Iunius, B. Bilson, Mornay,
Chameirus. This is not to defend Purgatory, but the received answer against
Purgatory.

These things being thus answered; observe that this Puritan would obstinately
cast out of the Church, Gods saving mercy, saving hope, saving charity, and the
seven gifts of the holy Ghost. And what then is his religion, but faction?
But mark those, that cause division in the Church, contrary to the doctrine,
which you have received. For they, that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but
their own bellies; and with fair speech, and flattering, deceive the hearts
of the simple. Romans 16. 17. 18.

The third thing, in which this Puritan is Nonconformist, is the Canons of our
reformed Church. These, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 24.
29. 30. 31. 48. 49. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 60. 61. 73. 127. etc. But who is this
Puritan? What is his name? Mr Rogers in his Preface to the 39 Articles, says,
that since the suppression of Puritans by Archbishops, Parker Grindall; and
Whitegift, none will seem to be such irregular Professors. But the eye that
beholds their daring oppositions in the Church, may very well believe, that
such Rebellions are taught in their Conventicles. What Rebellions? Their
teaching against the Kings Supremacy, a rejecting of our Reformed says, a
refusing of Gods holy worship written, which is the Common Praier-booke; a
despising of Canonical obedience; a repugning against our Reformed Church. Yet
this seditious Schysmatique would be the most true Reformist of Church, and
Religion: but read the Survey of the Pretended holy discipline and hence it is
evidently proved, that he knows not what he is, nor what he would be.
Therefore for his better edifying, let him learn to believe, to pray, and obey
according to the understanding Rules of this Reformed Church. For the 39
Articles are true precepts of faith; all Collected out of holy writ. The Common
prayers are godly prayers. The Canons are true, and wholesome laws. Therefore
he, that will not believe, pray and obey according to this established estate
of Church government, is noe pure man in heart. He studies Consusion of Church,
and Commonwealth. The specificall kinds of this Puritan promise neither truth,
nor goodness: and therefore let noe man favor their unrighteous dealing; and
let our Church stand fast in her faith, instruct, correct, rebuke: that this
Nonconformist may be a true Reformist.

The species; specificall kinds of this Puritan are these. 1. the Perfectist.
2. the factious Sermonist. 3 the Separatist. 4. the Anabaptist. 5. the
Brownist. 6. Louesfamilist. 7. the Precisian. 8. the Sabbatarian. 9: the
Ante-disciplinarian. 10. the Presuming Predestinatist. These ten kinds in their
opinions are the best Christians: and every one differs in the Reciprocal
Quatenus (i. e.) in his proper essential Quality from other, as much as white,
and black: yet the same subject of inhesion (man) may be all these ten, as the
same eye is white, and black: though whitenes, and blacknes differ essentially.

Perfectist is he whose pureness is continuata perseverandi actio sanctificans;
never to sin after baptism. This is the Nouatian Catharist. But St Paul did
sin after baptism. Romans 7. This is a perfect keeper of Gods law. Thus he is
a Papist. But S. Paul could not do the good, which he would, but the evil
which he would not. His opinion is, that a Christian sinning after baptism is
damned. Our Reformed faith is; That by the grace of God, he may Repent, and
amend: and thus S. John; if we confess our sins, he will forgive. 1. John.
1. This Puritan sins against the 16. Article.

factious Sermonist, is he, whose pureness is, to serve God with sermons, and
extemporary prayers made according to his supposititious inspiration. His
opinion is vain glory: Preachers Compos'de not according to his hasty rule, he
says are vn-worthy, and therefore they must not be heard to preach, nor
resorted to, at holy Communion. Then S. Peter, (if unworthiness might depose
Preachers) should never have preached after his forswearing his master. Our
reformed faith is, that we may use the ministry of unworthy Ministers. And it is
strange that he commends himself to be worthy: whereas S. Paul is not a
teacher of his opinion. 2. Cor. 2. 16. in these words. Who is sufficient for
these things? This sins against the 26. Article. Another opinion of his, is
that preaching is better than Prayer. But both being most necessary: Preaching
for to instruct the people; and prayer to worship God, instrumentally to cause
regeneration by baptism etc. It follows, that this Sermonist is a peevish
disturber of Religion. A third opinion of his, is, that private Prayer made by
a tardy commer to Church is the sacrifice of fools. As if too late coming to
Church were not a sin to be repented of: and that one so ill prepared to
join with the congregation, should not pray for remission, and Gods blessing,
and then praise the Lord with the whole Assembly.

Separatist is he, whose Pureness is Pharisaicall. He commends himself in the
Temple to be far above all others for holiness: Our Savior says that the
Publican repenting was more just than he. Luke 18. 14. His opinion is, that
only he is the Elect, the Regenerate, and faithful child of God. And that all
others are reprobates, the wicked, the unregenerate, and the damned: But Gods
judgments are unsearchable. Romans 11. 33. And who art thou that iudgest? why
do thou Judge etc? Romans 14. 4. 10. 11. 12. 13. The judgment of our Church is,
that all that are baptized are regenerat: Thus, Seeing that this child is
regenerat and grafted into the body of Christ's congregation etc. And the Church
regulated by scriptures is the pillar and ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
therefore believe our Church. Regeneration is by infusion of grace, by sowing
the good seed: (it differs from increase of grace, and perseverance.
Regeneration is ortus boniseminis, the springing of good seed: This good seed
did grow in stony and thorny ground. Regeneration is the individual act, making
Christians. Increase of grace and persevera^ce preserve Christians. And moral
persuasion cannot regenerate stony and thorny hearts dead in sin. Therefore
regeneration being the individual act of God bound to his Church by his own
covenant, judge as our Church does, concerning the baptized; that all baptized
are regenerate. The grace of Gods covena^^ does admit of noe Separatists: for
it did not separate, but bind Isaac and Ismael unto God in obedience: neither
does it separate, but unite the baptized unto Christ. As for the separating
judgment according to the merciful decree of election who are the saved: this
belongs only to God to pronounce. But let all Christians religiously pray and
live according to the grace of restitution, and humbly submit their judgments,
concerning the secrecy of personal election. The Separatist sins against the
17. Article, which says that Gods election is secret to us, for we know not
the elect by their particular names. He sins against the 35 article at the 2.
4. 5. 6. 7. 10. 11. 15. 19. 20. 21. homily. For these do charitably exhort
the whole congregation to obey and honor God; whereas the separatist is noe
friend of Publicans and sinners: but the uncharitable accuser of our Saviors
pitied company.

Anabaptist is he, whose pureness is a supposed birth without original sin.
And yet our bodies are parts of Adams nature, that did sin. And no man was
borne without sin, Christ only excepted. His tenet is, that infants must not
be baptized. Yet Isaac was circumcised the eighth day. And to be circumeised,
and baptized are one, and the same in effect. And Abraham's Religion, and ours
are the same. Gal. 3. 9. 14. 15. 16. 17. And therefore by a necessary seal of
the Covenant, we must do, as Abraham did; bind little children in covenant to
God. This Puritan sins against the 9 and 27 Articles. The one affirms that
infants are borne in original sin; the other, that infants must be baptized.
If infants be borne without original sin: then it is noe controversy; That
original sin foreseen is not the meritorious cause of reprobation. The sinner
deserves, and the judge intends punishment. So it is certain, that sin is not
the foreseen intending efficient of that preordain'd punishing decree. And it
is without question, that Gods Supremacy may pardon or punish pro absoluto
beneplacito, only as he will, seeing it is the prerogative of supremacy, he
being supreme Judge. But he cannot be just in decree, if he so reprobates, but
for sin foreseen. For the law was not, that any should die in Adam, if he
had not eaten of the forbidden fruit: and therefore this law in prevision
transgressed is the meritorious efficient of reprobation.

Brownist is he, whose pureness is to serve God in woods and feilds. He is a
wilderness of pureness. His opinion is, that Idolatry cannot be reformed
without pulling down of Churches. But King Hezekiah commanded the Levites to
sanctify the house of the Lord, and to carry forth the filthiness out of the
sanctuary etc. 2. Chron. 29. 5. And our Savior whipped the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple: though it was profaned, yet without any pulling down, he
calls it the house of prayer. Mat. 21. 12. 13. This Puritan sins against the
35 Article, at the 1 homily, which teaches a decent keeping of the Church.

Loves familist is he, whose pureness is to serve God as well at his Neighbors
charge, as at his own. Omnia sunt Communia: no one says, that the things,
which these Loue-Masters possess are their own, but all are Common. Yet S.
Paul says, that he is worse then an Infidel that provideth not for his own
family. If he be poor, his poor pureness must not labor with his hands to get
his living, though he be a Mechanicke, he must only meditate on the word. Yet
the text says he that will not Labor, let him not eat. He in his conceit is
a greater S. then S. John the Baptist, and that he is in persecution for the
Gospel; and therefore Ananias does sell his possessions, that the poor
brother may participate of his brotherly kindness. Concerning S. John our
Savior says that he was as great a Prophet, as any borne of a woman.
Concerning Ananias S. Peter says that he dissembled with the holy Ghost:
Concerning this poor Saints persequution for the Gospel: his punishment is
justly to be inflicted on him for abusing the gospel with his deceit to
maintain idleness: His neighbor seduc'de to sell, is undone: this is injury
which must not escape unpunished. This Puritan sins against the 38 Article.
For this truth is to be believed, that as in persequution, the rich did releive
the poor Saints: So in the time of peace, all able men must labor, to
preserve the Common wealth. Here, note, that Loues-familist in the 38 Article
is called the Anabaptist: and it is true subiectiue; sed non formaliter. The same
man may be Loues-familist, and the Anabaptist: but to be formally the
Anabaptist, is not to be Loues-familist their definitions differ.

Precisian is he, whose pureness is, not to swear before a Magistrate. yet this
kind of swearing is commanded Deuteronomy. 6. 13. He teaches that unlawful swearing
is a greater sin, than murder. God indeed is greater than man, Hence is the
compare, But the effect destructive is greater by murder, for thereby man's
life is destroyed, but unlawful swearing cannot wound so deep. And God
commands that the Murderer die the death, blood must be shed for blood; he
deals not so severely with the swearer. This Puritan sins against the 39.
Article: which teaches that it is lawful to swear before a magistrate.

Sabbatarian is he, whose pureness is to preach down all holy days. Preaching;
the isntrumental directing cause to keep holy the sabbath day, he makes to be
the keeping holy the Sabbath; but Gods holy worship, common prayer is this
keeping holy the sabbath day. For preaching the holy direction teaches holy
worship common prayers to be the holy practice of that day to praise the Lord
for our Redemption etc. This is the sole principal end of preaching on the
Lords day. The Sabbatarians preaching is a Sylua synonymorum, Tantologies,
Iterations. His praying is too much brainsike babbling. His opinion is; Labor
thou six days: therefore there must be noe holy days, but the Lords day. It Is
true in an understanding judicious sense: Thus. Thou must praise God for the
Creation, Redemption, Restitution, and preservation of the world: To praise God
for these causes, only the 7. day is set apart: which is not the Jews
Sabbath, the sabbath only for the creation. But this is the day following: when
Christ rested from subduing sin, hell, and death: when the Lord Jesus ceased
from his work. Heb. 4. He then appointed a certain day, by saying to day ver.
7. And because Christ rested from his work of restoring his kingdom to Israel
in the same manner, as God did from his, ver. 10. appointing the first day
after the creation to be the sabbath. Therefore the first day of the Jews
week, the scripture calls, and it is instituted for to be the Lords day; for
this is the day of Christ's rest religiously to be celebrated with holy worship
in remembrance of our justifying, sanctifying, saving, victorious, and
trivmphing Redemption. But concerning other holy days there were seven
together, in the time of the law. Deuteronomy. 16. Therefore when God was to be
praised for preserving Israel in tents, when he brought them out of Aegipt etc:
then the text says not, labor 6. days, but keep holy 7. days etc. So when
God is to be praised for the Angels good news to the Blessed Virgin, for the
Nativity of our Savior, for his circumcision etc: then the Church teaches not
6. days labor, but to praise the Lord on the holy time appointed. This
Puritan sins against the 35. Article at the 7. 12. 13. 14. 16. and 17
homilies. For these do teach the holy observing of feasts unto the Lord.

Anti-disciplinarian is he, whose pureness is above the Kings Supremacy.
Imperious Imagination! His holiness is the Churches greatest Authority, and as
good a Rule for to know the Reformed true faith, as holy writ. He is a strict
obseruer of the law, therefore his Religion is the best religion. But our
Savior teaches, that mercy is the best part of Religion. Matthew. 9. 13. And he
never learned, that Christ's kings office is above Christ's Priests office, in
spiritual things: for as much as Christ a Priest, died for to make
satisfaction for our sins, to God the Supreme Judge, who is Christ a king: and
that from this office of Christ a king, the king is derived: and that the
Priest is derived from Christ's Priests office. This Puritans tenet is, that
kings must be subject to the Puritan-Presbyters Censure, submit their Scepters,
throw down their Crowns, and lick up the dust of their feet. Thus Mr Rogers
in the 11. page of his Preface to the 39. Articles: and thus T. C. teaches in
his Reply, page 180. Thus the oath of Supremacy, and allegiance are broken.
This Puritan is an Arch-traitor. His proud holiness sins against the 21.
Article, which affirms, that Princes in their Dominions have supreme
Authority to gather together General Councels, and against the 35. Article at
the last homily, which preaches down Rebellion: and against the 37. Article,
which says, that the King is supreme Governor of Church and Common Wealth
next, and immediately under Christ in his Dominions; in all causes, and over
all Persons Ecclesiastical, and Civil. His tenet is, that all Priests should
be Equal. But who ever gave all Priests authority to ordain, and did exalt
inferior Priests, and pull down Superiors for that equality; but Farellus,
and Viretus (by Sermons) two Geneva-Presbyters. But by what Law? Whence was
that authority? This Puritan sins against the 23, 33 and 36. Articles, which
teach the lawfulnes of Archbishops, and Bishops Superiority, and Jurisdiction.
This Puritan is an enemy to Church-Ceremonies, as if Gods Ministers, and his
house should be naked, without all external beauty. He says, that he is only
for essentials at baptizing, etc. And yet Metaphysicall divinity is far
beyond the sphere of his plainly, and briefly, etc. For the Scriptures
deduceable sense transcends his capacity. This Puritan sins against the 20.
Article.

Presuming Predestinatist is he, whose pureness is an inspired knowledge, that
he shall be saved by Gods absolute election. He is so sure of his salvation, as
if he were now in heaven: as if thete were no life in him, but Gods essential
glory. This is to sin without fear or wit. He considers not, that the World,
the flesh, and the Devil are such cruel, and subtle enemies, that they did
so terrify S. Peter as that he denied, with an oath, that he knew the Rock
of Salvation, and the other Apostles fled. And pray thou Continually, that thou
enter not into temptation. Thus the 17. Article teaches thee. And presume not
that thou art absolutely certain of salvation, for in denying Christ's souls
local descent into Hell, which is against the 3 Article, thou deniest a part
of Christ's subduing evil spirits, and his triumph over the power of hell: for
this end Christ descended to the spirits, that were disobedient in the days of
Noah. 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19. 20. And thou seem to deny that good works are the
striving isntrumental causes for salvation, in that thou regardest not
Examples of good life, by abhorring Apocrypha scripture, which is against the
6. Article. Suffer the words of exhortation: be not factious in the Church, to
mainetaine an Imperious ruinating holiness, to amaze silly people, to gain a
competency, by way of collection. God has given the tenth part in all Israel
for an inheritance, to mainetaine the Priesthood. Number. 18. 21. And if the
humane positive law has not made provision according to this divine law, stay
the Lords leisure, till he shall assist the king, and the general Council of
this land, to reform this thing, as yet full of difficulty. If thou have no
Benefice; faction can never bring thee any de iure; but reformation may. Down
on thy knees; repent, and amend: and praise God Almighty, for as much as thy
Dread Sovereign Lord, and king, has spared thy life so long; thou being
nothing better in tenet, than an Arch-Traitor. Down on thy knees and give
hearty thanks to God; in that the Most Reverend Archbishops, and the Right
Reverend Bishops, thy holy and Ghostly Fathers, have not delivered thee over to
Satan, Maiori Excommunicatione, cursing thee forth, from the Church, and all
humane society, thou being a most contumacious Schysmatique. It is not
sufficient, that thou deny, that thou art any such Puritan; for thy faction is
visible (almost) every where in this land. Down on thy knees, and pray for
Gods holy spirits illumination; that thy zeal may be according to the
infallible knowing faith, and that God may thus incline thy heart to our true,
faithful, reforming Christian Religion. The Lord Almighty, and most merciful,
make the light of his countenance to shine upon thee, and to reform thee. Then
the Church shall enjoy her much desired unity: In which how happy a thing it is
for Brethren to dwell together, for Christians to live, and die; I desire you,
to consider; I pray you; I beseech you: Even I, though I am very disdainefully
hated of you, am so charitably affected: and I labor always to the utmost of
my prayers, and studies, to instruct you with true sanctifying reformation, and
so shall till death remain,

Your hearty well-wisher to solid Reformation, GILES WIDOWS.

1. COR. 14. V. VLT. Let all things be done decently, and in order.
THE 19. of the 39. Articles of Religion affirms, that the Church may err,
that the Church has erred. The reason, why the erring Church is become the
lost sheep, is because she submits not unto the only true rule of faith,
which is Gods faithful word. The 20. Article says, that the church cannot
err: that it is no erring church, but a true church, not a church void of
authority, but a church having authority, to decree Rites, and Ceremonies, to
handle, judge, and decide the hard, subtle, and deceiving controversies of
faith. For this well tempered, and well governed church observes Gods not
deceaving, nor deceaved word to be her principium fidei, her principle of faith
to be faithfully believed: to be her true signifying Rule, to be taught,
learned, and kept. Whatsoever is contrary to this heavenly voice, she hates
being all diabolical lies: whatsoever exposition does make scripture to be
contrary to scripture she examines, confutes, and reformes by the true rules of
exposition. Whatsoever is besides scripture she reiects for man's inveution,
for humane tradition, for superfluous, unnecessary. Herein the church is a
faithful keeper, and a faithful witness of holy writ. And let the church;
let this church persevere a faithful witness, and a faithful keeper of Gods
most true, and most holy word, to preserve her authority in rites, and
ceremonies, in resolving Faiths factious controversies; to expound the
scripture learnedly according to rule in summo gradu necessitatis, in the
propriety of truth; and to reject man's flattering additions prudently,
according to Gods all-sufficient precept. This is the sum of S. Paul's
spiritual council to advise and instruct the church.

Let all things be done decently, and in order. Which words are the substance
of the 20. of the 39. Articles of religion; and they contain four parts. The
first is Command Authorizing: Let. The second is, how many things are
Authorized: All things. The third is, the obeying of this commanding
Authority. Be done. The fourth is, the manner of obeying this command. This is,
Decently, and in order. In the command Authorizing observe Who, and what
Commands: who commands? This is first God the Holy Ghost* secondly S. Paul.
What commands? This is Gods will; this is Gods word. Let. In how many things
there are authorized, observe the doctrine of faith, the discipline, the rites,
and ceremonies of the church. All things. In the obeying of this commanding
Authority: observe who must obey: and this is the church. Secondly, that she
does obey: in keeping the doctrine, discipline, rites, and ceremonies
commanded. Be done. Let all things be done. In the manner of obeying this
command observe how many-fold this manner is; and this is twofold: first
decently: secondly in order: in the outside by beawtie, decently; within, and
without according to rule: In order. Let all things be done decently, and in
order. You have the division of my text: God commanding the Church to
decency, and order of doctrine, and discipline: and therefore let no man
accuse me ignorantly, that I am not come to edify: for if Gods, S. Paul's
doctrine, and discipline may edify, I shall edify. And let noe temporizing
faction act the dissembling Hypocrite, and say, that my doctrine is not true,
but railing: for I am come to you with the doctrine of our received, and
established faith. And let no trembling Neuter plead that my words are too
deep mysteries to be understood. No: but let him strive to know his Faith, how
it differs from heresy, that he may be truly faithful in the pure, and
undefiled Religion. My text does not stay to request, but requires: my text
does not entreat, and pray, but does will, and command you to be faithfully
religious: and that in a word, and that in the first word of my text.

Let. This word is command: though it is but a sign, yet by it command is
understood, and understood to speak: not by prohibition, to make any stopp, or
stay: but with command to make have, and not to fail at your peril. This Let
is the active part of Gods command in the first place of S. Paul in the
second place, in person commanding, thirdly of the scripture, which is S.
Paul's command, which is Gods sovereign and uncontrollable command. You
know the almighty power of Gods command; that by it he made nothing to be all
things. For he spoke, and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast. And
shall he now speak, and shall nothing be done? Shall he now command, and
shall nothing stand fast? Gods word is sharper then any two edged sword: and
it is as possible to resist Gods word, and live eternally, as it is to resist a
sword dividing the heart and after that, to enjoy this temporal life. At the
giving of the law, Gods voice was so terrible, that the people, that heard,
entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more for fear of
death. Heb. 12. 19. For Gods voice did then shake the earth, and it shall once
more shake both heaven and earth. Heb. 12. 26. Here is majesty, and power: and
Gods will must be done, for he commands, to the terrifying of heaven, and
earth. Gods word is not a bare sound, but his word is a converting word: and if
the converted will* not stand in grace, God having given the will, and the
deed, what do they that resist, but neglect great salvation? But see, that
ye refuse not him, that speaks: For if they escaped not, who refused him,
that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him,
that speaks from heaven. Heb. 12. 25. It concerns you then very much, to
hear Gods command: S. Paul, Gods deputed commander, tells you that it
concerns your salvation: and loose this loose all the world. But what is the
matter, that men's hearts are so little known to a commanding God. Who has
bewitched them, that they will not obey truth? It Is true, that there must be
Heresies: for lying and dissembling tongues do deceive, seduce, and under a
color of a little godliness, bring Church, and Common wealth into confusion,
and destruction of soul and body. And is it not then high time to exhort you
with S. Paul, Beware of dogs; beware of evil workers Philip. 3. 2. Beware of
them, that bark at the Articles of religion. Beware of the^, that bite at the
government of the Church. Beware of fiery zeal set on fire by a factious
spirit. Beware of despisers of Governors, of inuentors of evil things. Beware
of the disobedient. For they hate the doctrine, and discipline; the rites, and
ceremonies of the Church, which is my second part of text, employed in these
words.

All Things. By all things, are not understood all things of this world: for
they are enmity against God. But by All things, are understood all things,
which God commands to build, and beautify the Church, which God commands to
govern, and preserve the Church. So that these All things are all
Ecclesiastical things: all things, that belong to the Church. The text does
mention prophesying, speaking with tongues, prayer. 1. Cor. 14. faith, hope,
and charity. 1. Cor. 13: all spiritual gifts. 1. Cor. 12: the Ceremonies of
the Church. 1. Cor. 11: the sacraments; Baptism, The Lords supper: 1. Cor. 10:
the Ministers dues 1. Cor. 9: Meats offered to idols not to be eaten 1. Cor.
8. Marriage, and single life. 1. Cor. 7. Forbearing to go to law one with an
other 1. Cor. 6. Excommunication 1. Cor. 5. reverence due to the Clergy. 1.
Cor. 4: division, and sects in the Church. Chap. 1. 2. and 3. Doctrina
generalis hic traditur circa Doctrinam, and precepta diuina? leges de decoro,
and ordine Ecclesiae, circa ritus, and circa externam disciplinam: so Pareus.
By all things are understood the doctrine of the Church; divine precepts; laws
for decency, and order of the Church; the Churches rites, and external
discipline. The doctrine of the Church is here understood. The doctrine of the
primitive Church, which is the law, and the Gospel, the old, and the new
Testament, and here is understood the doctrine of the Reformed Church, which is
the 39. Articles of Religion. This is the material breife of all Christian
doctrine, and let this suffice for this present. For to speak particularly to
every part of faith in the old, and new Testament, and in the 39. Articles of
Religion, is more then the tongue of men, and Angels is able to deliver within
the short limits of an hour. The discipline of the Church is here understood,
which is the ordayning of Superiors and their governing: and it is the
practice, and humble obedience of inferiors. This is Moses, and all inferior
Magistrates judging, and governing. This is Aarons, and all inferior Priests
expounding, and instructing the people: and it is the Magistrates, Priests, and
peoples reverent worshipping the Lord, and their sincere keeping of the law.
The Imperial, and Preistlie government still remain, not in rigor, for that
our Savior has mitigated: but they are still Authorities: one supremely
commanding, the other is supremely instructing. Kings are nursing fathers, and
Queens are nursing Mothers: and they are so much higher than Priests, as
Christ's Kings office in spiritual things is higher than Christ's Priests office
in spiritual things. The superiority still stands a superiority in the
Clergy. There was a superiority still in the Ministry. Christ above the
twelve Apostles, the twelve Apostles above the seventy disciples: S. Paul
above Timothy, Timothy above the Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus in
doctrine, and manners of the Church. 1. Tim. 1: in ordaining Bishopps, and
Deacons 1. Tim. 3: in having authority to punish the Elders offending, and
other Church-offenders. 1. Tim. Chap. 5. and. 6. At the 326. year after
Christ, the Council of Nice decreed, that there should be in the Catholic
Church three Patriarchs; one at Rome, one at Alexandria, one at Antioch to
govern inferior Bishops. Religion was planted in this land by S. Paul, So
Parsons the Jesuit: and by Simon Zelotes, So Mr Mason out of Necephorus, and
Dorotheus: and by Aristobulus Bishop of Britain, so Dorotheus: and by Joseph
of Arimathea, so John Capgraue: and that in the life of Tiberius Caesar, so
Gildas: in the 35 year of Christ, so learned B. Morton cap. 3. sect. 9. of the
Grand Imposture has observed out of famous Papists, Cardinal Baronius, and
the Jesuit Suarez. From the year of the Lord 179. there were Archbishops and
Bishops in the Church of England, and Wales, so Lelandus: and they have
successively continued to this day. In their first consecration till 600 years
after Christ they were Primitive Bishops: From 600 years till 1533 they were
Popish, corrupt, sick with heresy almost to the death. From 1533 they have 5
years excepted, continued good, because reformed Bishops. Here note that our
Church did not begin a little after Luther, but being sick with Popery, she
the^ recovered her Apostolical faith. Like as a sick man recovering, then
enters not into the World to begin his life, but into the recovery of his
former health: so Popery and Puritanisme being purged out of these parts of the
Catholic Church, 'twas not then a new planted: but a new reformed Church. All
things. Here is understood Ecclesiastical discipline. The King does govern by
Christ's regal power and command. The Bishop does govern by the key of
knowledge and by the key of jurisdiction. The Bishop does govern in the Church
by the key of knowledge in that he gives authority by ordaination and mission
to able and fit men for to preach, to pray, etc. in the Church. By the key of
jurisdiction the Bishop does govern in the Consistory by examining and
censuring with the help of his Iudge-assistant. To know all Church Discipline,
I refer you to the Rubricke in the Common-praier-booke, to the Canons of the
Church, etc. This part of my text is All things, and therefore I must not omit
the rites, and ceremonies of the Church: for they are understood in these All
things. The rites, and ceremonies of the Church, which were tipicall in the
Jews time, did signify Christ to come: and therefore at Christ's coming they
were abrogated. Quia veritas venit, signum tollitur: so S. Augustine. Because
Christ is come into the flesh there is no use of a sign, to signify, that
Christ is to come. But in our church the ceremonies are not typical; but they
are signs of church-beauty for moral ornament. And that to beautify gesture
in acknowledging the Lord Jesus to be King of heaven and earth, of the
triumphant and militant Church; hence it is, that in Church Assemblies we bow
at the name of Jesus: or to beautify gesture at prayer, when we pray, The body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve soul and body to everlasting life,
etc. hence it is, that we humbly, and reverently kneel on our knees at
receiving the Lords supper. Or in token, that we will not be ashamed to confess
the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner, etc.
hence it is that little Children baptized after the form of baptism are
signed with the sign of the cross: or to signify the sincerity of the
Ministers unspotted faith: hence it is that our Church-priests do wear the
surplesse, at performing holy worship to God: or to signify the undivided love
of husband and wife, till death them depart: hence it is, that in marriage the
ring is given for a token and pledge: or to signify a thankful remembrance
unto God, for giueing us Christian examples, and encouragements, to persevere
in the true Apostolical faith: in that God gave us his Son, his one, and
only Son to be our Mediator; and the Blessed Virgin to be his Mother;
according to his humanity, the holy Apostles to preach Christ Jesus, the
Savior, to the ends of the world; for giving us many and miraculous
deliverances from great, and apparent dangers; hence it is that Holy Days were
ordained, and are kept: The nativitie of our Savior: The purification of the
Blessed Virgin, etc. to praise the Lord. And herein we transgress not the
fourth commandment. Six days shall thou labor, etc. For that law binds us
to thank the Lord for the creation, and Restitution of the World* and God
requires but the seventh day to perform our holy thanksgiuings unto him in the
public congregation: and yet he requires other holy days upon other special
reasons, as it is proved hereafter at Leuiticus 23. Church pictures are an
external beauty of the Church, a memory of honor to the dead; and S. Gregory
calls them lay men's books. Church. Organs are musical signs of our
exultation: they are the loud, and as sweet as loud, expressions of the
Churches greatest joy toward God: so are church-Bells, though sometimes they
are the churches solemn call, that Gods people should assemble to worship the
Lord with holy worship. And seeing that I have proceeded thus far in the
Narration of church-rites, and ceremonies, give me leave to tell you, how
ancient Godfathers, and Godmothers have been in the church: and how long
interrogatories have been used at baptizing little children. They are as
ancient as Dionysius the Areopagite, as it appears in his seventh chapter de
Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, who lived in the 70. year after Christ. The church
is not Abraham's private house, when he was witness to his son Isaacs
circumcising: but the church is catholic, and therefore she must accordingly
have witnesses to preserve her catholic communion of faith. It Is a ceremony,
a rite of the church, to bring the dead body, the corpse into the body of the
church. For that body Christ did sanctify with his blood, and did make it the
temple of the holy Ghost: And therefore at performing of our last duty, we
must not thrust it out at church-dores; but honor it with
church-entertainement. For blessed are the dead, for whom the Lord Jesus laid
down his life. I have given you a view of All things, of All things in my
text. It Is Church doctrine let your faith believe it. It Is Church discipline,
let your lives observe and Keep it. It Is Church ceremony, let your frequent
use exercise and renew it. In the first place you shall honor God your
Almighty Father. In the second place you shall honor the unity of brethren:
which the Psalmist commends with admiration: Oh how good and joyful a thing it
is, brethren to dwell together in unity. God has not authorized these things,
that you should neglect them, but his good pleasure is that they should Be
Done. Let all things be done, which is my third part of text, and follows next
to be handled in these words,

Be Done. This is the obeying of a commanding authority, It Is the Church that
obeys: For she observes, and keeps the doctrine, the discipline, the rites and
ceremonies of the Church. The scripture is the command: Let all things be done:
and the Church obeys. And then compare, which is the greater in authority,
either that which commands, or that which obeyes? To obey is under authority,
command, and therefore the Scripture is greater in authority then the Church.
The Churches obedience is not only passive, still to be an hearer only: but the
Churches obedience is also active, for she must not be only an hearer of the
Scripture, of the law: but she must be a doer also. First she must hear the
Scripture say, Let all things be done; and then she must do, what she hears
commanded to be done. (...), Fiant, inquit a vobis, and vestro consilio. So
Pareus: when the Scripture has said it, Then let all things be done by the
Church, and by the judgment of the church. Here the Apostle has by Scripture
given authority to the Church to govern decently, and in order, in doctrine,
in divine precepts, in Church Discipline. And therefore the Church may in the
first place expound according to rules of exposition, and make any laws which
she sees to be decent, and orderly in every place. Omnes Ecclesiarum,
Episcoporum, Doctorum leges etc. de decoro, and ordine externo, etc. disponere
debent. Pareus. The laws of Churches, of Bishops, of Doctors, must beautify,
and order the Church. Let all things be done decently, and in order. These
words do authorize the Church to ordain Church-orders, expositions, rites,
and ceremonies, and that not of late, but from the Apostles times: so Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, St Cyprian, St Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S.
Augustine, and five Counsels say the same. But what does the Scripture say,
that there must be any such traditions? Yes the scripture says the same. Read
1. Cor. 11. 2. and 1. Cor. 11. 34. And Church-ceremonies are contained in the
scriptures, not in express sentence, but by pregnant consequence, by virtue
whereof the Apostle does grant a general license, and authority to all
Churches, to ordain any ceremonies, that may be fit for the better serving of
God: so our Right reverend and learned Bishop Morton. The same ceremonies will
not sort in all places, and therefore our Savior left them to the different
disposition, and custom of times, and countries: so Calvin lib. 4. Institut.
cap. 10. parag. 30. Therefore to deny this power to the Church, to ordain
ceremonies, is to deprive her of christian liberty: so Bucer. If our
Church-ceremonies were dumb, non-significant, they might be well condemned
for unlawful, but they being significant, are lawful: so Kemnitius: being
significant, they are profitable for admonition, and testification of our
duties. so B. Jewel, Kemnitius, and Zanchius. The ceremonies of our church
have special signification: they are signs, and do signify, not with
sacramental signification, but with decently moral. For they are signs of
Church-beauty for moral ornament, as you have heard by the bowing at the name
of Jesus, and by other Church-ceremonies in my former particular. Our
Church-ceremonies, our Church-traditions are grounded on good authority; for
they are contained in the Scriptures; in genere ent is, aut in virtute causae,
either in their general, or in the power of their fundamental cause. My Text
will serve for the general to signify all Church-ceremonies; and my Text
serves for the cause, to ordain all Church-traditions that are lawful. All
things decently, and in order; there are all Church-ceremonies signified. Let
them be done: there is Church authority given by Scripture, to cause them to be
ordained. But to bow at the name of Jesus, this is express Scripture, Philip.
2. 10. To kneel at prayer, this is express Scripture, Psalm. 95. 6. and we
pray at receiving the Lords Supper. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve
my soul and body to everlasting life. To take up the Cross and follow Christ,
is express Scripture, Mat. 16. 24. And to take up the Cross is the
fundamental cause of the sign of the Cross to be done decently and in
order. The man and wife are one flesh, is express Scripture. Mat. 19. 6. And
to be one flesh by covenant, by troth plighted by Church Authority, which is
the essential union, is the fundamental cause of the signifying union, which
is the ring given in marriage, to signify, that man and wife are no more
twain, but one flesh. It Is express Scripture, that it is granted to the Church
to wear fine linen, white and clean. Rev. 19. 8. There is a similitude
between the triumphant and militant Church: and so an expression of the ones
glory by the others signification: and is it then contrary to decency, and
order to wear the surplisse? Holy days are contained in the Scripture: The
Lords passover, which we call Easter. Levit. 23. 5. The feast of unleavened
bread. Levit. 23. 6. The feast of first fruits, Lev. 23. 10. to the 24. verse.
The feast of Trumpets, Lev. 23. from 24 to the 34 verse. The feast of
Tabernacles. Mordecai had his Holy day, Hest. 9. Iudeth had her Holy day.
Iudeth 16. Macchabeus had his Holy day. Macchab. 1. 4. And seeing that Holy
days did not transgress the fourth commandment before Christ's coming; the
Apostles Agapae, Festival days, and our Church-holy-daies, do not
transgress that law. We should be very unthankful unto God for the
multiplying of his great mercies, if we did not solemnly keep them: the
reason is showed before. In his rebus, de quib. nihil certi statuit scriptura
divina, mos populi Dei, vel instituta maiorum pro lege tenendasunt. D. August.
Epist. 68. to Casulanus. In those things, which the Scripture has not verbatim
set down: the customs of Gods people, or the institutions of our Predecessors
ought to be received for laws: so that they be deduced from Scriptures, and
be not contrary to Scriptures; they are S. Augustines limitations. Seeing then
that the church has authority given her, let her exercise her authority. Let
all things be done. For as long as the church is ruled by Scripture, She is
the pillar and ground of truth 1. Tim. 3. 15. to the unlearned, to the
catechized, to the vulgar understanding: then S. Augustine being an infant in
faith, believes, quia dixit Ecclesia, because the church did teach him to
believe. As long as the church is ruled by Scriptures, She cannot err, hell
gates cannot prevail against her, Mat. 16. 18. And therefore let all things be
done decently and in order, whatsoever our well reformed church commands to be
done. Let the Priest wear the surplisse: let little children to be baptized,
have their Godfathers and Godmothers; let the baptized be signed with the sign
of the Cross. Let all communicants kneel reverently at receiving the Lords
Supper. Let all bow in solemn assemblies at the name of JESUS. Let them that
are to be married, be married with the Ring. Let Holy days be kept: Let the
Lord be praised upon Church Organs, and on the Sabbath and Holy days, thus
let him be magnified with the musical sound of all Church-bells. Let the dead
be honorably buried. You have a little book of Articles, which contains seven
generals, all our church-traditions. The first is concerning the churchyard,
Vicarage-house. The second is concerning the Ministry, divine service, and
Sacraments. The third is concerning Ecclesiastical Courts. The fourth
concerning Schoolmasters. The fifth concerning the parish clearke, and Sexton.
The sixth concerning the Parishioners. The seventh concerning churchwardens and
Sides-men. Let all these things be done. For the doing of them well, does
honor God, and save your own souls. But if church-offenders are grown
hard-hearted, stiff-necked, stubborn, not to be reformed by neighbourly love,
good counsel, wholesome exhortation: Dic Ecclesiae, tell the church. For all
things must be done Decently, and in order, which is my fourth part of text.

Decently and in order. Here is the manner, how Gods command first, secondly
how the churches command is to be obeyed, and this is Decently and in order: On
the outside by beauty, Decently, within and without according to rule, In
order. Nihil peruerso ordine, vel per contentionem, vel per inanem gloriam
faciatis: so S. Hierome upon these words: where there is perverseness,
ouerthwarting faction, there is noe church-decencie: factious contention, and
vain spirited glory is noe part of this church order. Non temere, non
indecore, non insane, ordine conueniente, so S. Chrysostom. Not rashness, not
vnseemelines, not distemper is the decency or order, that which is seemly, is
church-decency, that which is convenient is church order. Omnia cum pace, and
disciplina: so S. Ambrose, the peace of the church, this is church-decencie,
the discipline of the church, this is church order. The decency of the church
is opposite to vanity to sordidnesse, to luxury. The order of the church is
opposite to confusion, and troublesomenesse. so Pareus. The decency of the
church is, that Gods temple should be all glorious, at least very convenient,
that church-vessells, and the material parts of the church be clean, and
comely: that the Priests vestments be seemly: that all church actions
public, and private be void of lightness, and superstition: that
church-teachers, and hearers behave themselves with divine gravity, modesty
and piety, as it becomes them, that stand in the presence of God, and his holy
Angels. Church order gives every one his convenient place, to superiors,
superior places; to equals, equal places; to inferiors, inferior places; to
every church-necessary a necessary place. Order observes church-time as well as
church-place, and it stays not there, but appoints who shall be
church-teachers, and who shall be church-hearers, and to keep both in order,
there are appointed times to pray, to preach, to sing psalms, to catechize, to
communicate, to baptize. etc. (...) caueatur, aedificatio ecclelesiae, and
singulorum maxim promoueatur: so Pareus. The transgressing of church-decencie,
and order must be shunned: the edifying of the church and of all in the church
must be carefully observed. And we must go a little farther: the beautifying
and honor of the Church must be carefully regarded: And we must on a little
farther. The able gracious practice of the Church must be preferred above all
the edifying, beautifying, and external honor of the church. S. Hierome
says, that there is no church-decency, no church order, where is
perverseness, and division: and therefore Thomas Cartwright was noe true
teacher of church decency, and order, let his 21 dangerous points of doctrine,
and his one and fifty untruths, falsifying of Scriptures, fathers of the
church, Historiographers, and other classical Authors, be witness: as it is
observed by D Whitguift, in his book against M. Cartwright. S. Chrysostom
says where there is rashness, unseemliness, distemper, that there is noe
church-decencie, noe church order, and therefore the precise ones are noe
teachers of church-decencie, and order: for they are rash to thrust that upon
us for true religion, which began at the 250 year after Christ, and was put
down by the first Council of Nice. S. Ambrose says that there is
church-decency, where is the peace, and the discipline of the church: for these
are the well grown fruits of the Apostles doctrine: Let all things be done
decently and in Order. There is church-decencie, where is noe lightness; and
there is church order, where is noe confusion: and therefore frequenters of
woods for churches have noe church-decencie. For a suppose of their own pates
rings them a peale to frequent woods; that idolatrous Temples must never be
frequented, if once idolatrous: and yet religion being reformed, those temples
(though once idolatrous) are again to be frequented to worship God with holy
worship. So Calvin, Peter Martyr, Beza, Bucer, and B. Jewel. And to convert
idolatrous temples into christian Temples was the practice of the Primitive
church at 179 year after Christ in king Luoius days. There is no
church order, where is confusion, where the same preacher, or teacher does
contradict one doctrine with an other, and contradictions of doctrines are in
Thomas Cartwright, as Doctor Whitguift has observed. And there are
contradictions in Bellarmine, and his fraternity: for there are 37 general
parts of doctrine, and 239 particular doctrines in which one Romanist
contradicts an other, as Pareus has observed in his Irenicum. There is
church-decency, where the church, and every part of the church is kept seemly.
And there is church order, where superiors are in superior places, equals in
equal places, inferiors in inferior places. And there is no Church-decencie,
where ruin, neglect, dust, and filthiness are Church-keepers: this is almost
customarie in these days. A wood, a private conventicle, a factious sect, I
fear, is more solemnly frequented in many places in this land, than the Church
of God. And there is no Church order, where Superiors are made inferiors, Kings
to cast their Crowns at the feet of Schismatiques, schismatic Pastors: yet
thus M. Thomas Cartwright would have it: And he calls the Deane of a
Cathedral Church, the Canons, the Major, and Minor-Prebends, the Chancellor,
the Chaunter, the Pistellers, and Gospellers, he unmannerly calls them all
Abbi-lubbers. Thus what Church Order has established, he with a word of
disgrace, would put down against all order. There should be decency and order
observed in performing Gods holy worship, (which is the common prayers) And
this is reprou'd by some, by others it is embraced, but it is with a running
reverence: by others it is cut off in the middle to the dishonor of God, and his
Church: by others it is mumbled up in an unknown tongue, as if Papists were
unwilling that all should know what they say unto God, yet every one had
religion in his own tongue, Act. 2. It Is decency, and order, that we should
stand up at the rehearsing of the Apostles Creed, to signify, that we do,
and will stand to our faith: but this standing up, some do maliciously oppose,
and this standing up others do unwittingly neglect. The Font is the commanded
place for baptism, yet some do baptize in Wells, in Brooks, in Rivers, etc.
to defend, to uphold a factious spirit. It Is decency, and order to edify the
Church: but some care for no edifying. To believe as the Church believes this
form of words, is faith enough: and the best of that false believing side, are
afraid of essential and demonstratiue exposition; of the infallible rules of
exposition; the scripture being granted to be the only axiomaticall principle
of faith. The learned rules of exposition of Scriptures, which neither S.
Austine nor any other father has expresso praecepto; these rules Papists dare
not follow. Some respect only the factious edifying, well known to the
factious brethren by opposing Church-decencie, and order. But beyond this
edifying they never intend to proceed, like S. Paul's silly women, who are ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And therefore
the able gracious practice of the Church is neglected by them. A father of the
Church must not be heard in his own language, because that spends time, and
does not edify. And Church Organs the musical instruments of the Churches
gracious practice, are tedious to them, because they do not edify. To ring
the Church-bells in peale on the Lords day, this the separatists call profaning
of the Sabbath. And it is their ignorance, being unable to tell the difference
between the worlds servile works, which are forbidden by the fourth
commandment, and between Churches musical works, which in their due time
done, do praise the Lord. It Is Church-decency, and Church Order, that the
scriptures be taught learnedly, and gravely: but now the children of the
Prophets go for Church-Doctors: and a Mechanicke, a presuming spirit is
received amongst the Perfectists for a lawful preacher, if their
non-Ecclesiasticall spirit calls him: yet the Text faith, No man takes this
honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Hebr. 5. 4.
But one will object, what means all this discourse, but to occasion appearing
of evil, and to give offense to the weak brothers conscience? Be not
deceived; here is no appearing of evil: no offense. Here is nothing, but
Church-decency, and Church Order, which neither appear evil nor are they any
offense: for appearance of evil, and offense are opposite to these well
governing and obeying properties. And who are the weak brethren? Thomas
Cartwrights Disciples? In their conceits there are none so godly, none so holy
in the Churches of God. Thus far I have followed an unseemly, a disorderd
company. This was the cause, that you should know who are the indecent, and
the irregular in our Church, that you may avoid them. I commend the decency
and order of the church unto you: and do exhort you in the words of S. Paul,
1. Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no division among you,
but that ye be joined perfectly together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. And do you assuredly believe that Non-conformists have not the
spirit of God to guide them. For they are the troublesome inventers of division.
For whereas there is envying, and strife, and divisions among them, are they
not carnal? While one says, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, whilst they
will hear none, but a division making preacher, are they not carnal? S. Paul
says, that they are carnal 1. Cor. 3. 3. 4. But I have taught you better
things, then to be carnal. Here is church-decency to cleanse the Lords house,
and to beautify it: and therefore learn to be decent with church-decency.
Here is church order to set all things uniformly in Gods holy Temple, and
therefore learn church-holy orders that you may be decent, and well-ordered
Temples of the holy Ghost: that in this life you may so live together in true
faith, and religious charity; that in the world to come you may live together
in immortal glory. Which God for his infinite mercy grant unto all through
Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and
one immortal God be ascribed all glory, honor, power, might, salvation, and
thankesgiving this day and for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

