THE DEBT BOOK: Or, A TREATISE UPON Romans 13. ver. 8. Wherein is handled: The
Civil Debt of Money or goods, and under it the mixed Debt, as occasion is
offered.

ALSO, The Sacred Debt of LOVE.

By HENRY WILKINSON, Bachelor in Divinity, and Pastor of Wadesdon in
Buckinghamshire.

2. CHRON. 16. 9. Iehouae oculi discurrunt per totam terram, vt firmum se
exhibeat erga eos quorum animus est integer erga ipsum.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. and G. M. for ROBERT BIRD, and are to be sold in
Cheap Side at the sign of the Bible. 1625.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. (*)
Most gracious Sovereign:
DEbt is a thing which has exercised the minds of most men in all ages, but
the pens of very few in this kind wherein I handle it. The Ciuilians I know
tell us what it is, and determine the cases incident to their faculty worthily
and skilfully; but to show how Debt not duly and seasonably paid, falls heavy
upon a man's outward estate, yea, and reflecteth bitterly, sometimes upon the
conscience, this few or none (that I know) have hitherto undertaken. And yet we
see not any thing more frequent in experience, then the dismal effects, which
Debt produces in the life of man: some it pierces with perpetual cares, some
it impouerisheth, some it imprisoneth, some it banisheth, to some it cleaves,
and to their seed for ever, like the leprosy of Naaman, to Gehazie, till they
he consumed utterly. It stays not hear but in some cases; it staineth and
polluteth men's consciences. The wages of the hireling, the portion of the
Labourer in the Lords harvest, the patrimony of the fatherles, the widows
right, kept back by force or fraud, are due Debt: the cries whereof as they
are entered into the ears of the Lord, so can they not choose but pierce the
consciences of the unjust detainers of them unless they be seared or otherwise
sealed up by some just judgment of God leaving them to their wilfulness and
obduration.

The ordinary silence of Ministers in this argument may make men think,
perhaps, that we justify, either the security of those who willingly continue
in the bonds of Debt, or the sinfulness of those who pay them not at all. The
sins of the times and the vices of the several ages of the world have been
imputed, for the most part, to the Pastors and Ministers of those ages and
times, who by holding their tongues have seemed to consent thereunto: though it
may be they mourned for them in secret. This has made me willing to say
somewhat in this thing, to free myself and others, whom it does concern, from
the censure of posterity, for seeming by silence to give way to that which
clogges a Christian life otherwise comfortable, with intolerable troubles and
molestations; and to draw on others, who are better able to give their
counsel and directions for the preventing or removing of this misery of Debt
which has wasted the state, and perplexed the souls of many thousands in the
world.

This Treatise I have desired not without your Gracious permission to present
unto your Majesty, as the ablest instrument of God, by justice to reform the
unrighteous dealing of such as will not pay their Debts, and by Law to
restrain the grievous exactions of usurious lenders, and by mercy to relieve
the misery of such as in the business of Debt are not willing doers, but
unwilling sufferers: such I mean as either by the hardness of men's hearts are
constrained at their need, to borrow upon conditions to them intolerable, or
as cannot get their own though never so due, without spending more then the
thing is worth, in trying a doubtful issue for an undoubted right, which is
the case of almost all the inferior Ministers of the Kingdom, who cannot
without such cost as they are not able to bear, recover their due, if a
covetous or crafty or wilful opposite will deny it. It might possibly have
seemed fitter for one of my coat to have handled some matter of Faith, or
tending to mortification or some controversy of the times, these I know are
more properly pertinent to my calling, had not other men of better gifts done
them abundantly with good success and approbation; but this argument of debt
as a barren soil, has lain untilled like a desolate wilderness: no man
regarding to reduce that into order, which has disordered and put out of frame
the thoughts and actions of the wisest men in the world. In managing whereof if
I have done the office of a faithful Minister, let me pass under the
protection of your Gracious countenance; if in any thing I have failed (as
easily a man may do) I humbly crave pardon, but no protection. Pardon alone
will serve his turn, who will throw the first stone at his own error when he
sees it.

In an argument of this nature its easier to speak pertinent things to men of
low degree, then to Princes and Potentates; the state of Kings is above
private capacities, and reasons of State beyond common rules, yet my hearts
desire and prayer to God shall be that the cares of your Kingdoms (impossible
to be governed without a most excellent spirit in your Majesty, and special
divine assistance from God) may not be aggrauated with the snares of Debt.
Debt is a burden to a free spirited man, be he otherwise never so well able
to bear it.

And though it stand with the power and magnificence of great Princes freely
and daily to grant just requests, and be also a more blessed thing to give
then to receive, yet ordinarily it is counted a more necessary, just, and
conscionable act to pay Debts, then to give gifts: If the one at any time but
prejudice to the other; for although in them both, goodness and greatness,
work together: yet the giving of gifts is more properly a fruit of power and
greatness, payment of Debts an act of goodness, and true goodness will then
stand in greatest perfection, when all earthly greatness will be laid in the
dust.

The Lord of heaven bless your Majesty with a religious, aprosperous and long
Reign over us, and make you as supreminent in goodness, as you are glorious
in greatness; that you may not only long enjoy these earthly Dominions, but a
Crown of Immortality, a far most excellent and exceeding weight of
Celestial glory, by the only merit of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, to
whose blessing and grace I shall as humble duty binds me, commend you while I
live in my truest Affections, and heartiest Prayers.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subject HENRY WILKINSON.

THE Contents of the Chapters in this Treatise, upon Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing to
any man, but this, that ye love one another; for he that loves another has
fulfilled the Law.
CHAP. I. THe words opened, and a discourse touching Debts in general, with
reasons why we should not continue in them. page 1. CHAP. II. That we should
owe no man any thing so much as lies in us. page 7. CHAP. III. The division of
Debts, and of the first kind of civil Debts imposed by others namely
Hereditary. page 10. CHAP. IV. Of legal Debts, and first to the Magistrate.
page 17. CHAP. V. Of Debts to the Minister of the Gospel. page 24. CHAP. VI.
Of Debts to the poor. page 43. CHAP. VII. Of Debts procured by our selves, and
first of necessary Debts. page 55. CHAP. VIII. Of voluntary Debts transient and
permanent. page 57. CHAP. IX. A confutation of such Apologies as men plead for
their continuing in Debt. p. 67. CHAP. X. Directions for avoiding Debt that it
break not upon our estate. page 79. CHAP. XI. Directions how to get out of
Debt, if we be already entangled. page 100. CHAP. XII. Of the sacred Debt of
Love, that we ought to love one another, and why. page 114. CHAP. XIII. Of the
diversities of love: and of the nature of Christian religious love toward one
another. page 119. CHAP. XIV. The qualities of religious love. page 120. CHAP.
XV. The effects of love, with rules to dispense the fruits thereof. page 124.
CHAP. XVI. That love is a fulfilling of the Law according to the measure of it,
and that yet hence it does not follow: that either the perfect fulfilling of
the Law is possible in this life: or that any can be justified by the works of
the Law, in this state of corruption. page 134.
THE DEBT BOOK.
ROMANS 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another; for he
that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.
CHAP. I. The words opened; and a discourse touching Debts in general, with
reasons why we should not continue in them.
IN the words before, the Apostle exhorts to render to every man his due,
tribute, custom, honor and fear to whom they belong, and in these things not
to remain debtors to any; but so far as in us lies to yield to every man
his right; from which particular enumeration, he proceeds here to the
general admonition, to owe nothing to any man but love, this is (...), says
Chrysostom, a Debt never fully paid, but always to be yielded and always
due; the Argument is thus. Debts must be paid, but love is an universal and a
perpetual debt, therefore it must be yielded to all: the Verse is resolved
into two propositions.

First, we must not be in debt in such things as can be discharged.

Secondly, we must always continue and keep on foot the debt of love. A
reason is annexed of the latter Proposition; He that loves another has
fulfilled the Law. For the understanding of the former proposition, we must
consider what Debt is. Debitum est quicquid obligatione aliqua alteri
praestatur: Debt is whatsoever is performed to another, upon any bond or
reasonable consideration: Now as is the obligation, such is the debt;
obligations are of three sorts, of Nature, of Grace, and of Civil contract.
Bonds of Nature and Grace are perpetual, so long as the parties remain, as a
child owes a perpetual respect to the Parents, and they to him, even by
nature: so Christians are united in the bonds of grace, which must not fail
but ought to continue. Yet the civil bonds of debt, which come by borrowing
and lending, by buying and selling, or any interchangeable duties and services,
do then cease when they are paid and performed. The proposition is to be
understood of this third kind of debt as we may see by the exception in the
Text, which keeps that debt on foot which cannot totally be discharged.

Now when he says, Owe nothing to any man, I took it not to be a simple
prohibition of all civil debts, which cannot be avoided, while humane
contracts stand; but it is an admonition duly and truly to discharge all such
debts, and so much as in us lies, not to continue in them. Hortatur, says
Chrysostom, vt nullius rei quam solius dilectionis debitores maneamus,
soluentes scilicet quicquid rerum aliarum aut officiorum debemus. He exhorts
that we remain not debtors of any thing, but of love only, paying forthwith
whatsoever other things or duties we do owe; this does Bucer follow, and other
the best Expositors.

The instruction is this: That whatsoever civil debts or duties we owe to any,
we must truly and duly pay them, and so much as in us lies not continue under
that bond and obligation. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, is an
excellent rule, Mat. 22. 21. and is it not even as true and as good; render to
your neighbor that which is your neighbors? If the workman be worthy his
wages, Luke 10. 7. then even the hireling must have his due; the poorest
labourer his due; specially the labourer in the Lords harvest. If it be a brand
by Gods Spirit upon the wicked, that he borrows, but paieth not again, Psalm.
37. 21. Then should every good man, so much as in him lies, pay every man his
own, and not willingly continue under the bond of debt.

First, because debt consumes many a undo a man in the forfeiture.

Secondly, in many cases it is a servile Deuteronomy. 28. 43. He shall lend to thee,
but thou shall not lend to him. Solomon is more peremptory; The borrower is a
servant to the lender, Prou. 22. 7. supposing them equal before, as we may see
by his submissiuenesse and flatteries, and obsequiousness, and servile
observations. By Debt a man's state and person is in a manner mancipated to the
lender. (...), gifts for loan of money, make free men servants, by turning, as
I conceive, the state of him that so borrows, from freedom to seruility.

Thirdly, by long continuance of a

Fourthly, Debt may prove uncomfortable fortable to a man's own Conscience,
for what if payment be so long deferred till a man be not able to pay? till he
be compelled to engage others? what if it be deferred till a man dye? then that
which might have been satisfied by ones self, will very hardly be
discharged by his Executors. A man well able to pay his own debts, may leave
an Heir that shall not be bound to pay. Lands pay no debts, or not in have; not
at a man's need.

Fifthly, a man indebted cannot (while he so continues) live comfortably,
because, though otherwise frugall and industrious, yet he enjoys not the
labor of his hands, but he sows, and another reapeth; or he reapeth to
another that which he sows: he earneth wages, but another man's bag must be
filled with it, and so he labors for the wind; specially when he borrowes
upon usury, for that will eat out all a man's increase. Nor can a man thus
continuing, prepare to die contentedly, by setting his house and outward state
in order. For, if debts must first be paid, as undoubtedly they should, and
then Legacies and Portions, what certainty can be assigned to the fatherless
and widow, when whatsoever is most precious in a man's house or substance, must
be drawn out to the satisfying of the Creditour, before they can be sure
that they eat their own bread? Many men seeming rich, are found poor and
naked, when every bird has her own feather.

CHAP. 2. That we should owe no man any thing.
THese grounds being thus laid, I proceed as the words lead me.

(...).] Two negatiues in other languages make an affirmative, in the Greek,
Duae negativeae plerumque vehementius negant, two negatiues for the most part
do more vehemently deny, as Heb. 13. 5. (...): in this place in hand, each
negative has it is several weight, for if we must owe (...), to no man, then
suum cuique read, pay every man his own: if we must owe, (...), then we must
pay all fully, without compounding at an undervalue, out of pretense of
poverty.

First, be indebted to no man, so much as in you lies: not to a rich man,
least he draw you before the Tribunal: not to a poor man, lest his
maintenance detained be a crying sin in you: not to a Landlord, lest he take
occasion to root out you and your Family: not to a Tenant, lest his stock in
our hand, which might have been improued unto profit, make him fall short in
payment of his rent: not to a Minister, lest he be impouerished, and instead
of hospitality to others, be cast upon the courtesies of a merciless world: not
to the fatherless and widow, lest in the bitterness of their soul and sense
of their want, they make their moan to God, who will certainly judge their
cause: not to a servant lest he be discouraged, and put upon shifts
uncomfortable to himself, unprofitable to you. Owe nothing to a friend, lest
you be burdenous where you should be helpful, or lest failing of payment prove
a ship-wracke of friendship: not to a foe lest he exact rigorously, and work
upon some vantage: Owe not to a Neighbor, lest you lose your liberty: not to a
Stranger, lest you fall into some snare: not to a buyer, lest you disapoint his
own necessity: not to a Seller, lest he enhance the price of his commodity:
not to a free Lender, lest you disable him from managing his own affairs: not
to an Usurer, lest he consume you as a Cankar. We should owe no man any thing,
if we be in case to pay it; no not our own Fathers, to whom we should, vicem
rependere, make requital rather then run further upon that skore. By making
too bold, even with parents in this kind, many men have lost their very
patrimony.

There is in borrowing, a kind of obnoxious ill-liberality, which an ingenuous
spirit brooketh not, if there be any other remedy. Besides, there is such a
corruption in the hearts of men, that even a free lender will think he may
well abate the fruit of his benevolence some other way, and that makes him
cease to be a free lender. Lastly, by deep and great debts, there is such a
world of cares upon the heart of the debtor, that it breaks his sleep, it
distempers his affections, and afflicts him so continually, that Augustus
Caesar, hearing of a man that died exceedingly in debt, desired to buy the
Pallet or Bed upon which a man so deeply indebted could sleep; intimating
thereby, that great debt is such a corrasiue as is able to molest the mind of
any man, even of an Emperor, and to make it restless.

CHAP. 3. The division of debts, and of the first kind of debts, imposed by
others, namely, Haereditary.
(...), Owe nothing.] That our proceeding may be such, as he that runs may
read it. Let me here propound in a short division, the substance of the
ensuing discourse, touching civil and mixed debts, which fall first to be
handled. Debts are either imposed by others, or procured by our selves. Imposed
by others, are hereditarie, or legal. Legal are of three sorts, to the
Magistrate, to the Minister, or to the Poor. Debts procured by our selves, are
either necessary, or voluntary. Voluntary are either casual and transient, or
permanent and standing debts: The remedies whereof are either such as prevent,
or such as remove the disease: Of all which in their order. The sacred debt of
Love is also to be handled in the second proposition. But first of Hereditary
debts, which are the first kind of civil debts imposed by others.

These are such as Parents impose upon their Heirs, or Testators upon their
Executors by will and testament; or which necessarily fall upon the state of
the deceased. A Testament or Will, is; Voluntatis Vlpian in d. lib. 1.
nostrae iusta sententia, de eo quod post mortem nostram fieri voluerimus. A
Testament is a just declaration of our will, touching that which we would have
done after our death. By this a man may have a calling to the payment of debts
and legacies; and consequently unto debts which cannot perhaps with comfort,
perhaps not without loss to himself and others be avoided.

Now if a man, in regard of the trust reposed in him, and of the means allotted
for performance of the same (without which, and his own acceptance
concurring, no man stands charged) will undertake the execution of any man's
Will, then must he accomplish what is enjoined and prescribed, by the true
meaning of the Will, according to Austins rule; Aut Testatoris voluntas
seruanda, aut haereditale carendum. Either must the Will of the Testator be
observed, or the inheritance must be lost. In debts then thus imposed, this
remains to be done; We must pay them speedily at the time prefixed, lest they
lose their acceptance, by hanging too long in our hands: We must also pay
them faithfully and fully, without keeping back from any that which is
intended to them.

Among things which pass by Will, besides that which is given to kindred and
friends, there are sometimes sums of money and yearly pensions allotted to
Colleges, and Schools of learning, to Hospitalls, and Highways, to the
poor of certain parishes, and to other godly uses, and then the debt so to
be paid, is not merely civil, but a mixed debt: of a common nature in
respect of the matter, as money or goods; but in respect of the godly and pious
use, of a higher strain. In all these we must deal truly and worthily, both
with the dead, and with the living: For as the counterfetting and forging Lege
Corn. de falsis.
of a false Will, was punishable anciently in some cases by death, in some by
banishment and publication of goods: so the suppressing of a true will, by not
publishing or not performing it, to those whom it does concern, is a sin and
an iniquity, not much inferior to the other: the one iustifies a dangerous lie,
the other conceales a necessary truth, not without perjury perhaps in both. It
was sometimes David's complaint; Defecerunt veraces Psalm. 12. 1.
a filiis hominum. The trusty are failed from among the sons of men. The
complaint is still just, in this particular as much as in any. I am persuaded
very few Wills are executed by the common sort of men, in estates of any value,
without some notable fraud, partly by alleging (when paiments should be made)
defect in the state, and partly by concealing legacies from those who cannot
demand them, out of ignorance of the Will; to whom I say, that so long as wrong
reckoning is no payment, that the debt remains in the sight of God, how ever
it be crossed out of their accounts. They shall also find, that Luke 16. 11.
for being unfaithful in the dispensation of earthly talents, they shall never
be trusted with the true treasure. It may also one day be their own case,
that as they have cancelled and made void the Will of the dead, by deteining
debts and legacies from the right owners, so by the just judgment of God, the
like Mat. 7. 2.
measure may be meated to their widows and fatherless children, by those whom
they shall unworthily put in trust: we may not think an account discharged,
when a fraud and a deceit is cunningly contrived. A debt cannot be paid but by
real satisfaction, without which the obligation remains in full strength and
force; upon the conscience whereof, an honest heart cannot but be tenderly
sensible: And therefore I am not of Cyprians mind, who took order; Ne quis
Clericum tutorem Cyp. Epist. 66.
aut curatorem testamento constitueret. That none should appoint a Clergy man
Guardian or Executor by Will, lest he should be molested with the affairs of
this life. I rather think that men should be chosen out of all vocations and
callings whatsoever, of most unstained conversation and conscience most
alienated from covetousness, least entangled in worldliness, for the
dispensation of our estate to whom it is intended.

Before I leave this point, let me ad one caveat to Parents and Testators, not
to charge their Wills with that which their state cannot discharge; for this is
the way either to have nothing done at all, or to expose their executors or
successors to perpetual suites and clamours. A man were better sell all that
he can spare, and pay his own debts himself, then out of an ambitious humor
of leaving so much in lands to his Heir, lay withal upon him such a mass of
debts and legacies, as shall mancipate him to the inevitable yoke of the
Usurer, till he can redeem himself, by selling what is most precious in his
patrimony: which when one is compelled to do, let him then consider whether
the great possessions which came to him by inheritance, were not partly the
spoil of the Church, the prey of the poor, and the fruits of oppression,
which like Aurum Tolosanum, the gold of Tolosa, Aul. Gel. lib. 3.
makes every hand unfortunate, into which it comes: let him also well consider,
whether the intolerable mass of debt, be not that immovable yoke, spoken of
by Micah, and threatened to them Micha 2. 2. 3.
who covet fields, and take them by force, who root out men and their
families, threatened, I say, to them, and their posterity. Let them lastly
consider, whether a small thing to the righteous man be not Psalm. 37. 16.
better, then great riches to the wicked and mighty; howeuer some of them
flourish till the measure of their iniquity be at the full. Thus of the first
kind of debts imposed by others: the next are Legal.

CHAP. 4. Of Legal debts; and first to the Magistrate.
THE debts imposed by humane laws and ordinances, are of diverse sorts, as
Subsidies, Fifteenes, Tenths, Oblations, and other pensions to the Church or to
the Common wealth, in peace or in war. These are common burdens, which every
man in his place must necessarily bear. as a member of a politic body, and
readily for avoiding offense and molestation justly ensuing upon neglect. These
fall due either to the Magistrate, specially to the Kings Majesty, or to the
Minister, or to the Poor. In all these I know there is a moral right, and so
they may be called moral debts, in respect of the common ground of divine or
natural justice: But we call them legal debts, Secundum regulam legis
determinantis, in respect of the Law, determining thus much to such a man, of
such a calling, at Aquin. prima, secundae quest. 99. art. 5.
such a time: it is Aquinas his distinction. The ground of such debts as come to
the Magistrate, is from divine Authority, though for the manner and measure of
them determinable by law. For if the Magistrate be Gods Minister (so is he
Romans 13. 4. 6.
called both (...) and (...)) if for our wealth, if for the punishment of evil
doers, and praise of them that do well, if he labor and attend continually
upon this thing, is there not an equity manifest to the conscience, that such a
workman, so ordained of God for so excellent a service, should have his reward?
Or does not the Apostle conclude inuincibly? For this cause pay we tribute,
Romans 13. 6. and Ver. 7. pay therefore tribute, custom, fear, honor to whom
they are due. Ministers of Peace and Justice, as they should not consume their
inferiors: (for so the remedy will be worse then the disease) so should they
not be constrained to spend upon the stock, and to wast their own estate
further then as members of eminent ability, should bear a burden for the
common good, proportionable to their strength. But Magistrates ought to have
Tributes and Pensions of their inferiors, as pledges of subjection, as
recompenses of service, and as means to defray expenses for the public good;
even equity and necessity requires all this.

Now because in Monarchies (the perfection of earthly governments, and types of
the heavenly) the King is supreme Governor, not only over all persons, but
in all causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil, to see them done and managed
according to Gods will, by Officers qualified with gifts and callings requisite
for such matters: And seeing these Officers of eminent place and trust, at home
and abroad, are employed immediately by the Kings Majesty, and consequently
maintained by him that sets them on work; hereupon it is, that by virtue of
some laws perpetually in force, and by virtue of some Statutes, devised for
supply of casual occurrents, besides the power of Prerogative Royal, Tributes
and Customs, Subsidies and Tenths, with many other pensions fall due to the
King, and so are counted legal debts, though moral in their original, yet
legal, ex determinatione legis, the Law prescribing how it shall be for
quantity and circumstances. In payment whereof, it is the wisdom of our State,
that though where nothing is to be had, the King must lose his right, yet he
seldom does lose any thing of that which is found due by Officers employed and
put in trust; and it were pity it should not come entirely into his treasury.
For how should the most illustrious estate of such a Monarch? how should such
ministers of State, of Justice of Peace, peareless (I am persuaded) for worth
and wisdom? How should such a Navy? such men and munition as must be always
in a readiness against casual events? how should such Armies as may be
requisite in a tumultuous and raging world be maintained at his cost? how
should true Religion, and the Gospel sincerely preached, (for which the world
hates us, and yet without which our life would be tedious, and a very shadow of
death) be defended by his power against the malice of the Devil and his
instruments, if all the springs and fountains of the Kingdom, did not
constantly run into the Ocean of his Treasury?

As our Nation has not been backward in the payment of this debt, so has it
been more happy then any nation in the world, in our two last Sovereigns,
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, both of blessed memory, to whom it has been
paid. For, besides protection by the Sword of Power and Justice, common to
other Subjects (yet not every where so common as were to be wished) we have
had the true Faith of Jesus Christ professed, and the preaching of the Gospel
established and countenanced by public Authority, for the space of sixty six
years without interruption. A most inestimable blessing, for which we own even
our selves unto them, as Paul speaks to Philemon, Philem. v. 19.
and for which none but God only can make recompense. The Children that now
are shall not forget King James when they are old; the Elder also shall
reverence his memory, because by his princely care, and express direction, for
Catechizing the ignorant, not only the younger are able to give an account of
their Faith; but even the elder, though unwilling to appear, senes
elementarij, old men learning principles, yet they do both countenance the
work by their presence, and do increase daily in knowledge and zeal.

Thus our two late gracious Sovereigns, most memorable for great matters, but
for none so much, as in that they were an incomparable pair for defense the
true Faith, and propagation of the Gospel, have had (as they deserved) the
love of our hearts, and a real performance of those pecuniary debts whereof I
speak, and shall be had by us and ours in an everlasting remembrance: which we
doubt not shall daily be renewed by that most noble branch springing from that
root so blessed to our Nation, our dear Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, that
now is. Concerning whom we cannot express the greatness, either of our
hopes, or ioies which we conceive. For his life, hitherto unspotted of the
world, so free in youth from the lusts of youth; so far from intemperance in
the fullness of plenty; so preualent over pride in such a fortune; so unstained
by Popery in the school of Spain; so attentive and judicious in hearing Gods
word; so full of goodness when it was not in request; such a life, I say,
hitherto in the blossom and spring does promise precious fruits in the
ripeness and maturity.

Blessed are those guides, living and dead, who had the seasoning of such a
vessel of honor and grace, and failed not in the service: and blessed is his
Majesty, who in his Christian education laid such a foundation of religion and
wisdom, of godliness and honesty; as is the unspeakable joy and comfort of
all his loving subjects, and will bring him infallibly in a course of
holiness, to a perfection of life and happiness at last.

Our Savior pleads the right of Mat. 22. 21.
Caesar, even then, when Tiberius a subtle Tyrant was that Caesar. Paul in this
place does most earnestly urge the payment of Tributes and all other duties to
the Superior powers at that time when Nero, whom elsewhere he calls the 2.
Tim. 4. 17.
Lion, was the Roman Monarch. What else does this teach us, but that how-euer
the importunity of governors may at some time be grievous in exacting; yet the
subject, (if release cannot be had by supplication) must be always obedient
in performing to the uttermost of his ability. How much more should we having
by the gracious providence of the Almighty, such a King set over us, as we
trust will prove a man after the heart of God; as David did in Israel, and a
pattern of grace and zeal, as Iosuah was in Judah: How much more, I say,
should we most cheerfully yield unto him the homage of our hearts, the
service of our hands and the portion of our substance required by Law to the
uttermost mite: besides, our continual prayers unto God for his present and
future happiness.

CHAP. 5. Of Debts to the Minister of the Gospel.
ANother debt imposed by humane Ordinance pertains to the Minister, as Tithes
and other pensions in the right of the Church. These I call, imposed by humane
Laws, not as wauing the claim by Divine right (till I be otherwise
instructed then yet I am): For, if Tithes were due to the Priest of the most
high God Genesis 14. 20 Genesis 28. 22.
paid by Abram; if vowed by Jacob, before the Law given in mount Horeb; if they
were due under the Law, to the Priests and Levites, by divine right for the
service of the Tabernacle; If a maintenance be due to the ministers of the
Gospel, as the Apostle pleads purposely, 1. Cor. 9. from verse 7. to the 15.
and Gal. 6. 6, 7. If God have ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel, and that he who is taught in the word should communicate
unto him of who^ he is taught in all good things: then surely I see not, but
that tithes at least, or some better thing, should be due to the Minister of
the Gospel by Divine Ordinance; and that those who take them from us, should
give us a better thing, as those who under the Law had a mind to redeem their
tithe, were bound to ad to the price every Leuit. 27. 31.
fifth penny above the true value. But I make it not my task to dispute this
question, my betters have done it lately and worthily. I here consider tithes,
and other portions of the Ministers maintenance as a legal debt due by a
double right. First, the faithful labourer in the Lords harvest is worthy his
wage, ex debito, not ex gratia, by debt, not by courtesy; though he be 2. Cor.
3. 7, 8, 9.
but an earthen vessel, yet his treasure is very precious, and his Ministry
much more excellent then that of the Law.

Secondly, that he ought to have the tithes in kind by virtue of the positive
Law of our kingdom, most agreeable and consonant to the Original Law of God,
Ephesians. 4, 12
in lieu of his service for the gathering of the Saints, and for the edifying of
the body of Christ by the Ministry of the Gospel; so that it is not a mere
Legal but a Moral debt, as I noted of that to the Magistrate out of Aquinas.
A mixed debt, so let me call it, because the service is holy, and the things
ministered are spiritual, though the recompense be temporal goods or money. I
need not cite the words of the Henry 8. an. 27. and 32 Edw. 6. an. 2. cap. 3.
Statute, the practice is payment, under pain of triple damage, even in
Impropriations, where the work is not done by him that takes the wages. What
then can be alleged why this debt should not be paid? So assigned by God,
who holds his workman Luke 10. 7.
worthy his wages, as well in the New Testament as in the Old; so confirmed by
Law, proportioned to the Numb. 18. 21, 22. 24. etc.
authentical pattern; so dearly earned by the continual pains of the
faithful Pastors, who have the most dreadful charge of Souls. I speak not
for Improprietaries, they will be sure to shift for themselves. I put the case
with all the favor that may be, yet not otherwise then stands with the truth
in many places.

That which they answer for non-paiment of this debt, is, that they owe us no
such matter; for Debitum est quod iure ab inuito exigi potest: That is a debt
which may lawfully be required of a man against his will; but this cannot so be
exacted say they: for their land is Abby-land, and consequently exempted as was
the Abbey; or their land is freed by composition, prescription or custom: and
for these they will stand, tanquam pro aris and focis, as for their altars and
their houses, indeed against their altars and houses of God, To whom I say not
any thing to plead for the belly, as they suppose: If I had the tongue of the
eloquent and learned, their bellies would have no ears to give me audience in
such an Argument; I speak only for discharge of my own conscience, in
service of the truth, and to clear my self for ever from consenting unto
sacrilege in any man, or matter.

First, their land is Abbey-land, belonging Places exempt.
to such a Monastery before the dissolution; so let it be, and so let them
enjoy it, unless it be a thing consecrated to the Church; if so, then except
they be Prophets, or Prophets Children, or superannited Levites (who always
had their allowance and portion in things consecrated) or in the nature of
these, let them take heed and look well to themselves, because it is a snare
to devour that which is holy, and after the vows to make enquiry, Pro. 20.
25. It is an ancient Canon; Semel dicatum Deo, non est ad humanos vsus vlterius
De reg. iuri^ in Decr. reg. 51.
transferendum: That which is once dedicated to God, is not to be translated
afterward to the uses of men: That is, if it be consecrated rightly to the
service of God it may not be alienated to the private common uses of men, not
employed in that service; some few cases are excepted, whereof this is none. To
this they will say, That they find themselves hereof possessed by inheritance,
and they have digested it already well enough. If God be pleased with it, I
wish them all prosperity; their lot is fallen to them in a fair ground: they
have a goodly heritage: yet I had rather have my part in a lot less
disputable. But, admit all is well, and that they hold what they have without
any scruple, I envy not unto them the least dram of their right. But, what
does become of the Tyth of those lands? are not those more specially
consecrated in their original, and in their use more properly necessary to the
maintenance of Gods service then the Lands themselves? Why then is the payment
of these denied? and in lieu thereof, some pitiful contemptible pension ill
paid, to the miserable defacing of the Ministry in that place.

The same Authority, say they, which gives Ministers the Tithe in places not
exempted, has exempted our lands from payment of Tithes in kind; thus we have
it, and so we mean to hold it.

I dispute not the power of Princes and Parliaments, it is above my capacity,
and out of my element, I always yield to Law, presuming reason of state in it,
though I see it not. But what if the Law be not so clear as is imagined? The
alienation of these Tithes, (which came to the King at the dissolution of
Abbyes, together with the lands) was at first an Act of the Pope, by an
injurious usurpation upon the right of the Church, and against the Laws of
God and man then in force. If this were in the Pope a sacrilegious Act,
hateful to God, who detesteth robbery Esaias 61. 8.
in the sacrifice, it is not to be thought, that our Statute Law intended, to
justify that in any which is sacrilege in the Pope; or to make that just,
which is originally unjust. I do not think that our Statute Law intended,
either to abolish Tithes utterly, or to decide the right, but to change the
possession for the present time, till the claim of the Church might more
evidently appear. But suppose the Law for non-payment of these Tithes were as
clear as the practice, yet as in the business of the Tabernacle, Moses was
admonished, See thou do all things according Exodus 25. 40. Hab. 8. 5.
to the pattern showed thee in the mount: so in matters of the Church, all
things should be done, chiefly in matters of importance, according to the
pattern of holy Scriptures. Now whether the Law enioyning Tithes in general,
or the Act releasing that payment to some, be more agreeable to the Original
pattern, let any man judge that is not a party. For mine own particular,
when I find it punctually set down, That as those who ministered 1. Cor. 9. 13*
14.
about holy things, did live of the things of the Temple, and they which waited
at the Altar, were partakers of the Altar, that so the Lord has ordained, that
they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: Me thinks it hard
dealing, that we should be barred of the benefit of the ancient ordinance of
Tithe, till some other Law of provision disanulling the former can be produced
out of the Scripture.

Another exception against true payment, Composition*
even where lands are not exempt, is composition with the former Incumbents. Of
this kind I have heard many pretended, but I could scarce ever see any
produced, lest some thing of advantage should relieve the present Minister,
which shows the obnoxious diffidence of a guilty heart, when the cause is
naught; for otherwise men are forward to make proof of their right, for
satisfaction of such as have just cause to question it. But suppose a
composition as firm as covetousness and craft can devise it, I would gladly
learn, how it stands with conscience or common sense, that the act of an
Incumbent only for term of life, remoueable upon preferment, or misdemeanour,
should prejudice his Successor in a place of painful service, to the utter
impouerishment and undoing of all posterity? Is it possible, that in any
lawful contract, the fruit of the godly and religious labors of a free and
ingenuous man, in the Lords harvest, should be bought and sold before he is
borne, by those who are mere strangers unto him? Or if this cannot be done in
any godly and righteous course, why should not the ancient rule take place;
Quae contra tus fiunt, pro infectis haberi debent: That those things which are
done against right, ought to be esteemed as if they had not been done. The old
word is, Caveat Emptor, let the buyer look to it: but I think, both the buyer
and seller, being in this case brethren in evil, had need to look to it,
lest they swallow that in earth, which they shall digest in hell; I doubt it
will one day be a cold comfort to those who are parties to such an act, to
consider upon their deathbed, that by their sinful hands the Church is
deprived, for the time present and to come, of what soever has fallen within
their power to dispose of. Can that man have any hope to be found a true member
of the Church triumphant in heaven, that lives and dies a betrayer and spoiler
of the Church militant here on earth?

Prescription is another mousell of the Prescription.
Ox that treads out the Corn: the original of this work of darkness is
commonly thus; There are few great rich men to be found, that can endure with
patience to pay any Tyth in kind; hereupon they take their opportunity, when
some Minister is incumbent, either not able to do the work, or not resident,
or some other way obnoxious, to agree with him for their Tyth at an
undervalue, a pound perhaps in the hundredth, pretending, that they can use the
matter so, as that the Tyth shall be little or nothing worth unto him; yet
this yearly pension they will allow for zeal to the Church, and good will to
the man, whom they will not stick to mollify with complements, or with any
thing else that shall cost them naught: these conditions are continued from the
father to the child, by the same arts and practices, till a new man come to be
presented, who for quietness sake must take things as he finds them; or if he
dare contend, they will scourge him through all the Courts of the kingdom.
When thus it has been carried for two or three descents, though men know in
their consciences, that, Non firmatur tractu temporis, quod de iure ab initio
non subsistit: That it gets no validity by tract of time, which is not grounded
upon right from the beginning: yet from these deceitful practices thus
continued, prescription does arise to put the Minister to perpetual silences,
who having spent his patrimony in the University, has neither time nor money
nor evidence on the sudden to manage the Churches right, though a
prescription once begun, consume it daily more and more. For if the prescribers
add by purchase or enclosure to their demaines within the same Parish, the
thin and ill-fauoured prescribed pension, like the Genesis 41. 4, 7.
thin ears of corn, and lean Kine in Pharaohs dream will swallow up all the
Tithe of the portions so annexed, and be never a whit the fuller.

On the other side, if the prescribers chance to sell, its no sauoury bargain
unless the Tithe be included, and the Minister excluded out of that portion,
and confined to some smaller piece of ground more proportionable to his
pitiful pension. The time was when our Savior Ioh. 2. 14, 15, 16.
in a fervent zeal cast buiers and sellers out of the Temple, what will he do
one day to those who thus couetously incroach upon the patrimony of the Temple?

Customs are no less pernicious to Customs.
the state of the Minister in keeping back his due, then these; for as these
exempt some particular persons or places in great matters, so customs swallow
all so far as they go like a general Deluge; if they find a Benefice like the
Garden of Eden, they will leave it like a desolate wilderness. I speak of
such as are pretented upon usage without any evident reasonable cause, whereby
the Churches patrimony is most injuriously detained: and why should not every
man that is able to oppose reason and truth against them, cry them down? For
though it be true that diuturni mores consensu vtentium comprobati Just. lib.
1. ^^^. 2.
legem imitantur, that manners long continued, and approved by consent of such
as have used them are a kind of law; yet consent and practice is not enough to
give a custom the power of a law, unless it be consensus rationabilis, a
consent grounded upon reason, nisi enim consuetudo ratione munita sit, non est
consuetudo, sed corruptela: If custom be not fortified by reason, it is not a
custom but a corruption. Now it will be hard to prove either reason in the
thing or consent of the Minister, who is always a party in those things which
are obtruded as custom upon the Church. If men will swear that it is their
custom to pay no tyth wood, then you must have none, though the greatest part
of the Parish be wood-ground* If men will swear that it is their custom not
to pay tyth Wool, for sheep not wintered in the field, then you must have
none, though they have a full stock that takes I benefit of the Common for
eight the most profitable months of the year; but it may be you shall have
some proportionable rate: nothing less, but some such contemptible scraps as
are not worth the gathering up; which how it stands with reason, or the good
liking of the Minister let wise men judge. Yet if men will affirm upon oath
that these and the like are the customs of their Parish, we have no remedy;
and customs seldom fail for lack of swearing. If thieves had come unto thee;
if robbers by night, would they not have stolen that which were enough for
them? If Grape-gatherers had come to thee, would they not have left some Graps,
Obadiah, verse 5. but customs sweep all away, they leave in a manner nothing.
The Church, says Austen, discoursing of customs, being August. Ianuar. Epist.
119.
placed in the midst of many Tares, and much Chafe, tollerates many things; Et
tamen quae sunt contra fidem, and bonam vitam non approbat, nec tacet, nec
facit: yet such things as are against faith and a good life, it neither does
approve, nor conceal, nor practice. The like say I in this, the Church, whose
cause I plead, tollerates many pressures, susteyneth many injuries; but
customs against all reason and right, against justice and common sense, it
neither approves, nor concealeth; nor practices the like it self toward
others.

When the malignity of all these exemptions, compositions, prescriptions and
customs, like ill constellations, bring penury and misery upon the Clergy.
When these four come upon us, like the four several sorts of Vermin
mentioned by the Prophet, the Palmer-worme, the Locust, Joel 1. 4.
the Cankar-worme, and the Caterpiller, the latter still consuming the residue
of the former, is it not time to mourn and complain when out meat is cut off
before our eyes, and joy and gladness from the house of our God? Joel 1. 16.
Is it not time to say with Amos, O Lord God Amos 7. 2
forgive we beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small. Querelae
(says one) Liuius l. 1.
ne tam quidem grate, quanda fortasse necessari^; Complaints are not then
welcome when perhaps they are necessary; but it were better to complain, and
admonish, and reprove, then that a curse should rest upon us as it did upon
Judah, for robbing God in Tithes and Offerings, Mal. 3. 8, 9. If answer be
made, that the case is not like; I confess it is not like in many
circumstances, but it is very like, if not the same, in substance: For if God
have as peculiar an interest in us, and as fatherly a care over us, as in and
over the Ministers of the Law; then, if the defrauding of Priests and Leuits
were sacrilege in the Jews, how*euer the style and word may be mittigated;
yet our curbing the Ministers of the Gospel by force or fraud, will prove
something which cannot be answered in the day of account.

In this point I had much rather refer the Reader to the godly Sermons of the
most learned Doctor Raynolds, upon the Prophecy of Obadiah, specially upon the
5. and 6. Verses, then say any more my self; only let me add these few
things: First, let that of Jeremy be well considered; Thus says the Lord
against the Ammonits, Ierem. 41. 1, 2.
has Israel no Son? has he no heir? why then does the Ammonite possess
God, and dwell in his Cities? Behold I will cause the alarm of war to be heard
in Rabbah, of the Ammonits, and it shall be an heap, and his towns shall be
burnt with fire, and Israel shall be heir unto them that were his heirs,
etc. Let me now enquire as God did of Israel and God; has Leui no sons? or
has the Minister of the Law no heir? why then does the Lay man possess the
Clargie? Why does he encroach upon the portion of the Minister of the Gospel*
Remember the imprecation upon the haters of Leui, Deuteronomy. 33. 11. Smite through
the loins of them that rise against him, that they rise not again. The Lord
turn the hearts of the spoylers of his inheritance, who do not now as the
Jews, Agg^y 1. 4. neglect the house of God to build their own, but take away
the maintenance and revenues of Gods house to enlarge their own. The old word
was, Decimas read and dives sis, pay tithes that thou may be rich: and it
is Ieromes observation, Decimi^ redditis vbertas, no^ redditis fames fuit; That
there was plenty when Tithes were paid, and penury when they were not. But the
present practice is, pay not Tithes that thou may be rich; and it is the
common opinion now, that its all one, whether Tithes be paid or not, and that
the Lord in that respect will do neither good nor ill. Is there then no
difference between the clean and the unclean? or between well gotten goods,
and the wages of iniquity? If under the Law a man otherwise Agg. 2. 14.
clean, did hold in his hand a thing polluted and unclean, if he washed
himself never so often, yet he was still unclean: all the water in Jordan, and
the ceremonies of Leuiticus could not cleanse him, so long as the polluted thing
remained in his hand. The Ministers portion wrongfully usurped and unjustly
detained from him, is an unclean thing in the hand of the oppressor, who so
long as he holds the unclean thing in his possession, cannot but be
polluted and unclean in Gods sight. The Lord I trust will at last remove the
veil of ignorance and covetousness from their hearts whom it concerns, that
they may see the breaches which they make upon Gods Ministers, and will give
them true repentance and amendment, that their sin may be forgiven, and
their polluted consciences purged in the blood of Jesus Christ, applied to them
by a lively Faith; and remember Lord in mercy those who have compassion on the
daily ruins and decaies of thine house, and let not the kindness be wiped
out which they show to thine house, and to the Officers thereof. Thus much of
the Legal debt to the Minister, which I take not to be merely civil, but a
mixed Debt, because though that which is yielded be a temporal thing, yet it is
the compensation of a spiritual service.

CHAP. 6. Of Debts to the poor.
A Third kind of debt imposed by Law, is to the poor: the burden hereof is
laid upon the richer sort, according to their ability. I speak not now of
alms which is voluntary and left to discretion; yet required in Deuteronomy. 15. 10,
11.
Scripture with much importunity: but of such moneys as are paiable by virtue
of the Law, made in the days of Queen ELIZABETH, and Reg. Eliza. 43. cap. 2.
continued in the reign of King JAMES of blessed memory for the raising of a
stock to set the poor on work, for relieuing of the lame, impotent, blind,
aged, and such as are not able to work, and for putting out of poor children
to be prentises, which ever being not only pollitike but godly also and
religious. I hold the debt not merely civil, but a mixed debt, as was the
former: for the cheerful and ready payment whereof let me use these motives.

First the care which God has had always for the poor: He does not only
plead their cause Deuteronomy, 15. 10, 11. And open thy hand liberally to thy brother,
to thy poor, to thy needy; for even for this cause the Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thy work, and in every thing that thou put thine hand
unto; but he allots a portion of the third years Tithe, not only to the Leuite
(who never is excluded) but to the stranger, the fatherless and the widow;
Deuteronomy. 26. 12. As Hierome has observed upon Ezech, 45. and calls it (...) the
poor man's Tithe. (...).


God allotted them a portion in his own lot and portion: when God takes order
that every thing may not be taken as a pledge, not the upper or nether
millstone, Deuteronomy. 24. 6. and that if a poor man lay his garment to pawn, it
shall be restored before the going down of the Sun, Exo. 22. 26. Does not this
restrain from offering hard measure to the poor in his extremity? Besides,
we know, that as the poor lie open to the greatest injuries, men treading
down where the hedge is lowest: so God takes special notice of the wrong done
unto them, he denounces his judgments against such as do concutere tenuem,
shake them to pieces, as Ahab did Naboth, 1. King. 21. Such as take their corn
from them, Amos 5. 11. Such as grind their faces, Esaias 3. 16. as root them out
and their families: Mic. 2. 1, 2, 3. He also counts a scorn to them, a
contempt to himself; Prou. 17. 5. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his
Maker; let not us therefore deny them their right, whom the Lord does take into
such special protection, as to interpret a kindness or unkindness to them, as
done unto himself.

Let us also remember that this is Gods will and appointment, that the poor
should always be in the Land, for exercise of their patience, and trial of
the richer men's benevolence, and his own glory out of them both. For the
abilite of the one being accommodated to the necessity of the other;
thanksgiving unto God arises from them both, as from the Physician and the
Patient when a bodily cure is done. We must not think that when the cause of
the poor is so often and so tenderly in the Scriptures commended to the rich,
that all this ado is for a penny now and then to a beggar when we list; but
it is to draw us to a wise consideration, how the strong may support the weak,
how we may bear one another burden, and as fellow members serve one another
through love, that the wealth of one supplying the want of the other, there may
be no defect. Wherefore when such Laws are devised and established by
authority, as inioine a performance of Gods revealed will, touching the poor
of the Land, in such sort, as may be comfortable to them and easy to us, ought
we not most willingly to pay this debt both in respect of God and of man?

A second motive to the payment hereof is the provision of the godly in former
ages for the poor. In the Primitive Church Deacons were appointed for the
daily ministration of necessary things, Acts 6. 1, 2. Paul ordained in the
Churches of Galatia and Corinth, that on the first day of the week every one
should lay by in store, as God had prospered him for relief of the poor, 1.
Cor. 16. 1, 2. How earnestly also does he exhort the Corinthians to liberality
toward the poor Saints, by the example of the Macedonians, who had been
beneficial to their power and above their power, 2. Cor. 8, 9. This I mention
to show, that the more the Gospel was embraced, the more bountifully was Christ
relieved in his members. When after the bitter storms of persecution, the
Church in succeeding ages had rest, then were Hospitals erected and endowed
with reuennues, that the poor might both be harbored and nourished: They had
also receptacles for the sick. The first founders of which kind, was Fabiola,
prima omnium (...), instituit in quo aegrotantes colligeret deplateis, et
consumpta languoribus atque inedia miserorum membra foueret, Hieron Epitaph
Fab. Fabiola was the first of all that built a receptacle for the sick, into
which she might gather the diseased out of the streets, and might cherish the
bodies of poor wretches, consumed with languishing and famine.

Our own Nation wants not examples of this kind, which I rehearse to this
purpose, that the voluntary contributions of Gods religious people in all ages,
may make us more willing to bear the necessary burden imposed by law as a debt
upon us. If our hearts and hands had not been straightened too much this way,
there had been no need of compulsory means; but, Ex malis moribus bonae leges:
For the hardness of our hearts was this law made. Out of the sinful defect of
Charity in the greatest part of men, has arisen a legal imposition of this
duty, that many hands might make lighter work. Some I know we have, who may
truly say with Job; that, They have not restrained the poor of their desire;
that they have not caused the eyes of the widow to fail: who have not eaten
their morsells alone, but the fatherless has eaten thereof, Job 31. 16, 17.
Some there are who in the strangers and poor, have entertained, Christum
conuiuam, even Christ as a guest, as Hierom speaks it. But there are others
again of competent wealth and state, who the more they have, the less good
they will do, and so long as they were left to themselves, would never touch
the burden with the least of their fingers: and now that they are compellable
by law, it is incredible to hear how they quarrel at every Leuey, how they
make the Collectors attend, how they grudge against the poor, adding sorrow to
their affliction, forgetting that of Paul; That God loves a cheerful giver:
2. Cor. 9. 7. And that of our Savior too; that, It is a more blessed thing to
give then to receive: Act. 20. 35. whom I would mitigate, if they were
tractable, with these considerations, as further motives to pay this debt.

First, they bear not the yoke alone, but jointly with others of their own
rank, as equally laid upon them as indifferent men can devise it: we must pay
scot and lot (as is the word) unless we will be, Homines nullius census, Men
of no account. Secondly, this payment to the poor is not made to maintain
idleness, the mother of lust, a sin of Sodom; but to raise a stock to set
such to work, who would otherwise be unprofitable burdens of the earth,
living on the spoil, not eating their own bread; whereas a small contribution
out of every hand a little to raise a stock, does take away the common evasion
of idle persons; I have no work, therefore I must beg or steal. A stock will
find them work, and a diligent hand at work will not only feed, but also
enrich. That which makes us tremble at the multitude of the poor, (and say
with the Prophet; Thou have multiplied Esaias 9. 3.
the nation, but not increased the joy) is, our failing in setting the poor to
such work as they are able to do, for want of a stock always in readiness
to keep them employed. Thirdly, whereas many true laboring men are not able
by diligence and assiduity to support the weight of their charge: by the
payment of this debt, opportunity is offered to raise them up who sink under
their burden, and who in sense of their necessity, having made their moan to
God, will be thankful for a supply to him and to us. Our plenty being
applied to our brethrens want in such a case, is like precious seed, sowed upon
good ground, tilled and prepared; we need not doubt of an increase at harvest.
Fourthly, whereas many are aged and past their work, blind, impotent, diseased;
by the payment of this debt, we are helpefull unto those whom it were sin and
shame to forsake. Hic, ad cuius intuitum nobis vomitus Hieron. Epit. Fab.
erumpit, nostri similis est, de eodem nobiscum formatus luto, ijsdem compactus
elementis: this man, at whose presence our stomach is turned, is like unto us,
formed of the same clay, and composed of the same elements; whatsoever he
suffers, we may suffer the same our selves: Esaias 58. 7
Turn not then thine eyes from thine own flesh. Whereas the visiting of these
would be very tedious unto us, yea impossible, by true payment of this little,
we are, Clementes per altena ministeria, merciful to them by the ministry of
others, which in our persons we could not so well be. Lastly, whereas the
breeding of poor children in families of small employment and rude education,
does utterly cut off all proof and hope; by the payment of this allowance,
imposed by law, diligent and discreet Officers are enabled to bind them to
occupations answerable to their capacity, that so as good plants, translated
from a barren to a better soil, become profitable and fruitful; so these
transplanted from idleness and rudeness, to a family of employment and
discipline, may be of use and service, both in peace and war. I am persuaded,
the wisest of us cannot tell, how to dispense so small a portion as goes from
us by this means, to so many excellent purposes, when the Statute is duly
executed; and if it fail in execution, the fault is not in us, if the debt be
truly paid. Let it not then be tedious to us to do so much good, with so
little cost or loss, if that can be counted loss, which being sown on earth,
we shall reap in heaven. When we see wicked men so violent in doing ill, as
Oppressors and Idolaters daily are, should not we be ashamed to be weary of
doing well? Quale hoc est, cumpeccatores in malis Hieron in Epist. ad Gal. cap.
6.
operibus quotidie augeantur, vt nos in bono opere lassemur: What a thing is
this, that when sinners are strengthened in evil works, we should be weary of
our welldoing.

I speak not any thing in this discourse for the vagrant Rogues and Beggars of
our nation, they are the Sodomits of the Land, without God, without Magistrate,
without Minister, Children of Beltal, without yoke, none can rule them, nor
make them ashamed, though they live in prodigious lusts. 2. These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, shall not cate, says Paul, yet they will eat the
sweat of other men's faces, though they be idle and unprofitable, and to every
good work reprobate; these I leave to such extremity as the Law of God and man
lays upon them: Prou. 31. 8.
I open my mouth for the dumb, who will not speak for themselves, and for the
godly poor, who had rather be helpefull then chargeable to others; and for the
aged and impotent, whose misery moves compassion without an Orator. For these
I speak, who if there were no Statute of provision to enforce the payment of
this debt, or to direct the uses, yet have a just claim to the alms of the
rich, and the rich has such an interest in them, as that they are called as
well their needy, and their poor, as their brethren, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. which I
chiefly understand of those, who being joined to us by vicinity or affinity,
are by Gods providence put upon us, as a part of our charge, to whom,
Eleemosinas non facere crimen habentis est, Hier. in Psalm. 112. to these not to
give alms were a sin in him that has where withal; so that if there were no
law at all, yet there is such an equity in the thing, and such a necessity in
the poor, that a rich man ought to be a law unto himself; he ought in this
case, to Prou. 3. 9.
honor God with his substance, which cannot be better done, then by parting to
such as want it, the fruit of his benevolence. I say not as some do; that,
Eleemosiua est debitum, that alms is debt; which in some sense may be true;
but, seeing the law requires a portion of the richer, seeing there is an
equity and a piety in the thing, seeing the necessity is perpetual, The poor
ye shall have always with you, Mat. 26. In this concurrence of law and
conscience, the non payment of this debt is uncomfortable and sinful. Thus of
legal Debts, which for most part are not simply civil, but mixed.

CHAP. 7. Of Debts procured by our selves: and first of necessary Debts.
DEbts imposed by others, having hitherto been handled; now follow in order,
Debts procured by our selves: these are either necessary, or voluntary.
Necessary are such as could not by discretion or industry be prevented, nor
discharged by any means within our power. Put case a man's house, which he is
bound to repair, as being tenant to another, be utterly consumed with all his
substance by casualty of Fire, the condition of reparation, which is always
reasonable in such contracts, brings upon this man a necessary debt, which
neither could be prevented before, nor performed in this case, which by Gods
providence is befallen him. Suppose a man in time of dearth have spent all his
money, and cattle, and substance whatsoever; his lands also for bread: It was
the case of the Egyptians in Joseph's time; what remedy has he, but Genesis 47.
to run in debt, though he mancipate his very body for the payment. If these
seem (as indeed they are) unusual events, let us consider things more
common. Whena a man's wages, which he can earne, are so small, and his
domestical charge so great, as that the one cannot support and sustain the
other; then comes Debt, as a wayfairing man speedily, and as an armed man
violently, that will not be kept off. This, as I conceive, might be the case
of the man of God, the poor Prophet, who feared God, and yet dyed in debt, 2.
King. 4. 1. and it is the case of many a poor man, whose whole family depends
upon his industry and frugality; he rises early, and late takes rest, and
eats the bread of care, yet cannot for all this live out of debt. Some men
also turn from one trade to another, from husbandry to grazing, from that to
merchandising, Vt mutando industriam mutant Hieron. in Esaie. 43.
infaelicitatem, nihilominus dispensatione dei, his quos saluare dignatur,
omnia nitentibus eueniunt contraria; Though men by changing their employment
would change their hard estate, yet by the dispensation of God, even to those
whom he vouchsafes to save, all things fall out cross when they have tried all
the ways. These debtors, thus enforced by necessity to groan and to struggle
under the burden, are to be pitied by the lender, to be releiued by the
giver, and God undoubtedly will requite it.

This Debt is no sin, nor any other pecuniary debt of it self, but a cross
it is: in some, a punishment of sin, in all, an exercise of patience, and a
discipline of humility, and so, Paupertas salutaris, a wholesome kind of
poverty, teaching men to lay up treasure in heaven, when things here upon earth
frame so little to their contentment.

CHAP. 8. Of Voluntary Debts, transient and permanent.
VOluntary Debts are such as might at first have been avoided, or satisfied
and paid within some time convenient, yet* were incurred notwithstanding and
continued, either to serve our turn for some profit, or perhaps for some
delight; or, it may be, for relief of others in some extremity. I censure not
all these with a note of reproof, they may sometimes be helpefull in
compassing gainful bargains, yea, in supplying the wants of such as cannot
shift for themselves; those only I mislike which entangle men in worldly cares,
in wilful snares, and unsupportable losses; and yet serve but to the
satisfying of some foolish lust when all is done.

These voluntary debts are either casual and transient, or permanent and
standing. It is a casual debt which any man may incur, Ex re nata; out of
some present sudden occasion. David is commanded by God to offer a Sacrifice to
the Lord, in the Threshing-floare of Arauna the Iebusite. David will not offer
of that which shall cost him naught, he therefore 1. Chro. 21. 25. 2. Sam. 24.
24.
buys the Threshing floare at a price by it self for 600 sickles of gold, and
the Oxen for 50 sickles of silver: after this bargain made, it was a casual
Debt of David till the money was paid, which I know was done speedily: yet in
every bargain of sale accomplished, as the buyer has a property in the thing
sold, so owes he a debt till payment be made, be it sooner, or later. Without
these casual debts, the life of man does not consist, and in these, as a man
needs not to be scrupulous in making use of a friend for a short time, so
must he be exact and punctual in keeping day; not keeping time makes a iar in
payments, as well as in music. He must also be cheereful in doing the like
courtesy again, whether it be lending or forbearance. That which I call a
transient debt, is always like, often the same with this; when a man owes
somewhat to a workman, or a Tradesman, for a short time, or to a Servant for
his wages, till a set day, it is a transient debt, daily running and passing
among men, and not settled or permanent in respect of time. In these we must be
honest, and real, and trusty, and speedy. For as the Grasshopper is a burden to
the aged: so a little thing detained, or not duly performed, may be a
troublesome disappointment to the poor (and the greatest part are poor) and
may afflict them by tedious delays, when money hangs too long in the hands of
ill paymasters.

As for permanent and standing debts, these are indeed, fundi calamitas; these
break down as it were the blade of corn in the field; these, like worms and
moaths, fret out a man's estate, be it never so firm and sound at the first.
This comes, when men able to give security, borrow great sums of money or
wares, without either purpose or possibility of payment, within any competent
measure of time; and it is commonly procured, either out of a covetous desire
of purchasing whatsoever lies conveniently; or out of a prodigal and riotous
humor of ouer-spending upon lusts and curiosities; or by giving more for a
casual preferment then a man is worth; or by some other gross failing in
judgment; or indiscretion about the dispensation of our estate.

These are the lamentable consuming debts, with which, when a man's credit is
rent and torn, as it will be very quickly, then must the ancient inheritance
be morgaged, then must their best and dearest friends be engaged, then
Servants and Tenants must be brought to the stake, and bound for more then they
are worth; then must depopulations and racking of rents, and defrauding of
Ministers be put in practice, and yet all too little, because Amalecke, the
licking people, I mean the nation of Usurers and their Factors, as Cormorants
fall upon the borrower. Then the debt is multiplied when the reuennues are
diminished, and the Usurer consumes all a man's increase. Let no man continue in
the Usurers book for one and twenty years (as some are never out while they
live) for, a hundred pound, paying interest upon interest, after ten pound in
the hundred, (suppose nothing given to Scriueners and Broakers, yet for his
hundred pound) he shall pay in that time six hundred and sorty pound, besides
the principal, as appears by calculation; which makes me wonder why any man
should open his mouth for usury, which thus opens her mouth, and enlarges her
bowels like hell, to swallow the poor Borrower.

Let those who plead this cause consider, that God dispenses with no usury,
when Neshek the biting, and Tarbith, which they call the toothlesse Usury are
both condemned, Ezech. 18. 8. 13. that the lender, for eight or five in the
hundred, deals not as he would be dealt withal, for he himself would neither
give eight, nor five, nor two, if he could borrow freely; and the rule of love
is, To do to all men as we would they should do to us, Mat. 7. 12. Let them
consider, how Usury is cried down, among other oppressions, Nehem. 5. and
Psalm. 15. 5. How it is condemned by the Council of Nice Council. tom. 1.
Council. Nic. Cap. 18. secundum Ruffin. can. 17.
in Clergymen, as matter of filthy lucre, (if filthy lucre in Ministers, then
no righteous dealing in others.) How it has been the utter ruin of many
thousands in our Nation; how in the Church of Rome at this day, all Usurers are
excommunicated monthly; how no man of note in all antiquity (Jews and
Manichees excepted) none I say of honesty and learning, for fifteen hundred
years after Christ has ever undertaken the defense hereof: wherefore as Ioash
sometimes said Judge. 6. 30, 31.
to the men of Hophra, when they stood for Baal against Gideon, Will you
contend for Baal? let him plead his own cause: so say I to the patrons of
Usury; Will you contend for Mammon? let him plead his own cause. Shall Tirus
and Zidon rise Mat. 11. 21.
up in judgment against Corazin and Bethsaida, for not bringing fruit
answerable to their means? And shall not the Romanists rise up in judgment
against us for practicing that oppression, which they, who walk not by so
clear a light, condemn? Let the Borrower himself also consider the
insatiable Daughters of the Prou. 30. 15
Horsleech, that suck him, and devour the sweat of his face, the fruit of his
labor, industry, and skill. If the King should take out of the poor man's
ground three of his best Kine yearly, or so many horses out of his Teame, would
he not cry, that he must needs give over housekeeping, and husbandry? Yet,
the Borrower of 100 pound from year to year, suffers, in effect, all this
which I say, at the hands of the Usurer, and dare not speak a word against his
consumer; but only suffers and gives thanks. If one word of coffeehouse
fall from him, then must the stock be sold, that satisfaction may be made,
lest any advantage of forfeiture be taken. If an usurious contract for so small
a sum, make such a breach into a man's estate, what will the borrowing of
thousands do for many years together? When I see any man of eminent place and
worth, cast upon the Usurer (whose mercies are cruel) for greater matters then
he is able to weild, I cannot but interpret it as a dismal sign of some
fatal ruin to the family: or, at least of some notable defalcation of estate,
for causes best known to God, and sometimes apparent to the eyes of the world.

Moreover, this soaking and standing debt, does so exercise and afflict some
men deeply engaged, that it takes up better studies and meditations, it spends
much precious time in solicitation of Broaker, Lender, and Suerties; it leaves
no free time for prayer and repentance; it drownes the comforts which men
otherwise might enjoy, when they see how debt consumes them day and night; yea,
and continues still, without any diminution of the sum. Much perhaps some
borrowers have in lands, and in revennues, in possession and expectation, but
as Alexander the great sometimes said: Quid refert si multa habeam Plutarch in
Alex.
and nihil agam, what matters it if I have much and do nothing? So say I, what
is one the better for a great estate; if debt bind his hands, from doing good
to the poor answerably, from providing for younger children, from restoring
the Ministers right?

If a man out of debt will do more good with a hundredth, then a man under the
Usurers chain with a thousand pound a year, yea and much more chearefully. Let
us then be thus far indulgent to our selves, as to shake off the deadly yoke
of Bills and Obligations, which mancipate the most free and ingenuous spirit,
and dry up the very fountains of liberality. Yea, they so put a man out of
aim, that he cannot set his state in order, but lives and dies entangled and
pusled with cares and snares; and after a tedious and laborious life passed in
a circle of fretting thoughts, he leaves, at last, instead of better patrimony
a world of intricate troubles to his posterity, and to his sureties, which
cannot be managed by those who understand them not but to great disadvantage.

When Acts and Momuments, Vol. 2. p. 1692. col. 2.
Archbishop Cranmer (as is recorded in his life, by reverend M. Fox)
discerned the storm which after fell upon him in Queen Mary's days, he took
express order for the payment of all his his debts; which when it was done a
most ioifull man was he, that having set his affairs in order with men, he
might consecrate himself more freely to God. This should teach us all in this
tumultuous and raging world, to free our selves so much as is possible, from
the bonds of debt to men, that we may more freely and constantly perform our
duties and vows to God, which will otherwise be interrupted, if not utterly
abolished by wordly cares and molestations; if we give them intertainment, as
we cannot choose but do, so long as we are in debt.

CHAP. 9. A confutation of such Apologies as men plead for their continuing in
debt.
THat the Apostles counsel of owing nothing to any man may the better be
followed: three things remain to be added to this discourse. First, I would
show the vanity of those Apologies, which men have devised for continuing in
debt. Secondly, how to avoid it that we come not into it. Thirdly, how to get
out of the snare if we be entangled.

That debt is a consumer of credit and state, of goods and good name; howeuer
some men think the contrary, yet there is no question to be made. How ofter
do we see, that as after the biting of an Aspe, the man smitten falls asleep,
but the poison dispearseth it self through every member till the whole body
be poisoned: So after debt contracted, specially upon the hard terms of
usury, or ill conditions the debtor is lulled a sleep by the sweetness of the
present supply, but the debt passes as a poison through every part of a man's
substance, donec totum conuertatur in debitum, till all be turned into debt, it
is Chrysostomes comparison. Yet In Matthew. 5
for all that; as the dropsie-man delights in abundance of drink, though most
hurtful in that disease, because it satisfies the present appetite: so men in
debt already are willing to continue, yea to multiply the same, (because
thereby their present need is served) though it be never so pernicious in the
conclusion. Let us see their allegations and accordingly determine.

First they hold it lawful without all they are deceived. For, though the case
may so be put, that a man may borrow, and ought to borrow, even upon usury, if
there be no other remedy; as, when money is payable upon forfeiture of a
Lease, or of a Bond, or of a man's living; and the party that owes it, is
utterly and suddenly disappointed by another; then is he, by the reason of the
hardness of men's hearts, who will not help him at such a need, ineuitably
cast upon the Usurer, as choosing of two evils of loss the less: Yet, to
stick and to continue in the Usurers furnace, which will leave a man at last
neither mettle nor matter, I hold it to be utterly against prudent frugality,
which is a duty of the eight Commandment, most requisite for the discreet
dispensing both of plentiful and poor Estates, and necessary to be observed
by such as intend an entire obedience unto God, as well in one thing as in
another; without which the royalty of Solomon, could not have consisted for all
his riches.

I know that as in full bodies euacuations may be not hurtful: yet, if a man
should be purged and let blood every six months, without fail, for many
years together, it would not only weaken, but at last consume him: So in
plentiful estates to be sometimes straightened and put upon difficulties, may be
of use to make the rich more cautelous for themselves, and more sensible of
poor men's wants. Yet if the richest should be put to do his homage to the
Usurer every six months after eight or ten in the hundredth, per annum, for
many years together, and for great sums, without failing or excuse, it would
wast by degrees the greatest wealth that is, till it were exhausted and utterly
brought to naught.

Reges Parthos non potest quisquam salutare Sen. Epist. 17.
sine munere; No man might salute the Parthian Kings without a present. A man
may not salute an Usurer gratis, nor look him in the face (which yet must be
done at times prefixed) without the tribute of interest in his hand. Yet is he
not mollified at all by this: but, as the Philistimes, when they had put out
Samsons eyes, Judge. 16. 21
made him grind in the Mil: so, when borrowers are blinded with a thick mist
of probabilities to instifie their own particular case, then the Usurer makes
them grind in his Mill. All the profit they can make by industry or skill,
perhaps by racking Tenants, and robbing the Church, is added to his heap: and
when they have compassed the circle from year to year; they are just where
they were at first. Notwithstanding the yielding of the interest all the while,
yet the debt remains entire. In payment whereof, if any default be made, then
forfeitures and suites at law, and costs and damages; then executions upon
body, goods, lands, and imprisonments, till the utmost farthing be paid, do
ensue.

Thus the Borrowers thrift is spent, their substance is dilapidated, their
wives and children are impouerished, and themselves wearied with laboring for
the wind; which how it stands with that discreet frugality which God requires
in his most righteous Law, and without which no State can steadfastly hold out:
let them whom it concerns examine, for satisfying their own consciences, and
not go on with security where there is certainty of danger.

This foundation being now laid, that the borrower is not always so innocent
as is supposed, let us hear what men indebted, and not resolved to seek their
freedom, will say further for themselves.

Debt is chiefly by borrowing or buying Torua leaena Lupum Virg. Ecl. 2.
sequitur, lupus ipse capellam; Thou art as a ravening Wolf to the wanton
unthrift, til the grimme Usurer devour you both. But was this well done of
thee to work upon the ignorance, or necessity, or wilfulness, of a raw and
unexperienced Waster, and to build thy rising upon his ruin? Shall any man be
established Prou. 12. 3.
by wickedness? Was it well done, by crafty insinuation to circumvent thy
brother? Is not God an auenger of all such? 1. These. 4. 6.
What else is this, but, Crimen stellionatus; the very sin of cousenage? Yet
for all thy cunning, and buying at an undervalue, do but add to the price, that
which is paid for the loan, and in seven years it will prove very dear,
unless thou help thy self in making the poor a prey; and so, Lucrum tuum,
shall be, damnum publicum; Thy private gain shall be a public loss: as
Ambrose observes; Officiorum, Lib. 3. And indeed in most cases it so falls out
to be, even in those which seem most tolerable. A skillful Tradesman (for
example) lackes a stock; another that wants skill has money lying by him,
to no use nor profit; here, by the passage of an usurious contract, the money
of the wealthy is accommodated to the industry of the skillful, and so both
become gayners. And may they not both become loosers, God denying his blessing
to unsanctified means? Is not every unjust gain a true loss? Though gain in
the Coffer, yet wrack in the Conscience: But of this they are willing not to be
sensible. Admit them both gainers in sundry returns, yet may not the poor
Buyer, (honester then them both) be compelled by this occasion, to pay a higher
rate for commodities, without which man's life is not sustained. And where this
practice is general, (Usury being the bewitching sin of the age as Poligamie
sometimes was) may it not turn to the public detriment of Buyers and
Borrowers, when the Seller must proportion the price, as well to the advantage
of the Usurer, as to the industry of such as are employed, and the worth of the
thing? May not this raise just cries and complaints against them both in the
Court of heaven? Why does Ierem. 15 10.
Jeremy clear himself both of lending upon usury, and of borrowing upon
usury, if there may not in some cases be matter of exception against them both?

Another alleges for his continuance Augustus, that he could say of Rome;
Accepi lateritiam, reliqui marmoream; I received it of Brick, I left it of
Marble. But, as it is better in a Gangrene to cut off one member, then by
suffering it to fret from part to part, to lose the whole: so, when great and
grievous debts consume a man's reuennues, it is better by selling part of an
inheritance, though ancient, to clear the State, then by suffering this
Gangrene to ouerspread the whole, at last to lose all. Antiquity will not pay
the rent of Usury: And a debt continued til it be ancient, will consume the most
ancient both inheritance and reputation.

I continue in debt, will another say, Lucrum est esca, sed fraus est laqueus,
sic attend escam, vt videas and laqueum; Gain is the bayte, deceit is the
snare; so look at the bait, that thou discern also the snare. But commonly
in trading men light upon the snare, committing fraud industriously with both
their hands, who yet could never catch the bait, the gain which did allure
them. Nor is it any marvel, for in debt continued, there is certainty of
loss, but in great trading, above a man's ability, no certainty of gain, nor
assurance of Gods blessing, when men take too much upon them, and will be rich
in all haste, against the rule of Prou. 20. 21*
Solomon, who teaches; that, An inheritance hastily gotten, shall not prove
happy in the latter end.

Another imputes his debt unto great Esaias 22. 12 13, 14.
the Jews, that when he called to lamentation and mourning, to baldness and
sackcloth; behold joy and gladness, slaying of Oxen and killing of Sheep,
eating of flesh and drinking of wine; As I live, says the Lord, this iniquity
shall not be purged till ye die. When God, by impouerishing a man's house,
calls from superfluity, to a moderate stint, and a strickter course, shall we
go on in lauishing and in spending excessiuely above our means? And shall not
God abridge us and daily cut us short, till he have cast us upon extreamities?
Qui unjust se ordinat August. Honor epist. 120.
in peccatis, just ordinatur in paenis; He that carries himself unjustly in
sinning, shall be ordered justly in the punishment of sin.

Others lay their debt upon magnificence Haec sunt quae faciunt inuitos mori;
These are the things which make men unwilling to die; which should make us,
whose life ought to be a meditation of death, less willing to set our hearts
upon them, or to cast our selves for them upon the miseries of debt. For mine
own part, I see no warrant for undoing our selves upon any appetite or humor
of this kind. If a man will be sumptuous in the satisfying of any lust
whatsoever, the reuennues of an Empire will not keep him out of debt.

Others lay their debt upon preferment

It is lastly pleaded that the very procurement all the rest are to be pitied
and excused; for vltra posse non est esse, men cannot do more then they can. If
those men pay their debts so far as they are able, and keep out of debt so
far as to them is possible, and crave not only patience and forbearance till
they can make satisfaction, but remission of the debt if their ability fail
them utterly; then they observe the precept of owing no man any thing, so far
as in them lies. Which that we may do, it remains in the next place for
eschewing the inconveniences incident to a state clogged with debt, to show by
what means and courses debt may and ought to be avoided.

CHAP. 10. Directions for avoiding of Debt that it break not upon our estate.
AS it is easier to keep out then to cast out an enemy, so it is easier to keep
debt out of our state, then to remove it having entered. The first and fairest
way to avoid debt that it break not in upon us, (...) and poverty is not
sought unto; it is the Lord that makes poor and that makes rich, 1. Sam. 2.
7. There is a curse upon idleness though men be rich, as in Sodom; upon
negligence and security, as in the men of Laish, Judges 18, 27. A curse upon
unlawful practices though men be industrious, as in Iehoiachim, whom God would
not bless though he used all endeavor of heart and hand to get riches, Ierem.
22. Yea, there may be a curse upon the laborious, even in lawful things, if
God be not first and chiefly sought and served by such as profess religion, as
Haggay 1. upon the children of the Captivity, for building their own houses at
their return to Jerusalem, and neglecting the Lords house; for this cause they
sowed much, but reaped little; they did eat, and were not satisfied; they did
drink, and were not filled; they were clothed, but not warmed; they earned
wages, but were not enriched. Yet at last, when they fell seriously to the
work of God, then he returned graciously with his blessing upon them. Hag. 2.
19. The way then to avoid both debt, and other consuming miseries, is faithful
industry in a lawful calling, which God vouchsafes to crown with his
blessing, where the service is chiefly intended and done unto him.

Men of great estate and means are often indebted, Vsque ad stuporem, even unto
astonishment; for, where should there be water, if not in the rivers? will you
seek it in ditches, which have no spring to feed them? Where should there be
plenty, if not among men of great possessions and reuennues? will you seek it
among those who have no such standing helps to yield them supply? Yet,
sometimes these men of great possessions, are full of nothing else but debt;
and why so? Gods judgment is upon them, either for an idle, or an unprofitable
life; or, for actiuity and forwardness in vanities and voluptuousness; or,
for a heavy and dismal hand in sacrilege and oppressions; or, for neglecting
the work and service of God, when they will not miss a minute in advancing
their own. But this they will not see, lest they should turn to him that
strikes: Esaias 42. 25
God powered upon Israel the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, and
it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him up, yet
he considered not: That is, he took no notice that this was Gods judgment, and
that his sin had deserved it: so is it with these men, they see themselves
consumed, but will not be brought to lay those sins distinctly to heart, for
which they suffer and are consumed.

A second way for the avoiding of debt is, discreet and honest thriftinesse:
Vectigal magnum parsimonia; Frugality is a great reuennue: the great saueurs
are the rich men: he that having gotten great abundance of wealth, by industry
or patrimony, will spend excessiuely and ryotusly above his means, though he
be rich, will quickly come to poverty; and thereupon Prodigalls are commonly
termed, Decoctores, Heluones, Gurgites, Speadthrifts, insatiable wasters, and
deuourers; such men will never keep out of debt. It is noted of the Roman
Commonwealth, that it perished and flourished by thriftinesse and
unthriftiness: under the Bruti, the Fabritij, the Cincinnati, the Scipioes,
frugall and moderate men, contemners of voluptuousness, it was most
flourishing; but, Abundantes voluptates dissiderium Liuius lib. 1
per luxum and libidinem, pereundi perdendique omnia invexere; Superfluities of
pleasures brought in a desire of spilling and spoiling all by luxury and
wantonness, and then the State declined from the former eminency of
brightness; Prou. 21. 27
He that loves pastime shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine and
oil shall not be rich: Voluptuousness and unthriftiness will make a rich man
poor, and a poor man penurious.

This makes the Prodigal hang in the Mercers book for his clothes, in the
Tailors note for making, in the Butchers score for his meat, and in his
servants debt for wages; and when thus many hands come to rifle one, they will
quickly make an empty purse. Yet let all these Prou. 27. 22.
hands bray the unthrift as wheat is braied in a mortar with a pestill, and his
folly will not depart from him till it be too late to spare when all is spent.
As Adams Genesis 23. 24*
intemperance in not abstaining from the forbidden fruit did cast him out of
Paradise into a vale of tears, so riotous wastfulnes in any kind, be it in
meat, drink, apparel, building, gaming or any other course of voluptuousnes,
is able to cast a man out of plenty into penury, and out of a free and
comfortable estate into debt and danger.

A third way to avoid debt, is a severe watch over our word and promise.
Promise is debt, and must be performed though to our hindrance. Faithfulness
in promises is the bond of humane contracts; Fides inde dicta, quia fit quod
dicitur; So called Fidelity, because that which is said is fulfilled.
Circumspect promises are of use I know to assure true men's words, to secure
good men's hopes, to encourage industry, and make it lively in well-doing; but
then we must beware we be not like Antigonus, (...) That will give;
ignominiously so called, because forward in promising, but slack in
performing. Promises are as vows, much better never made, then not made good:
Facile ex amico inimicum facies cui promissa Hier. ad Celantiam.
non reddas; One may easily make of a friend a foe, to whom he keeps not
promises: yet what man almost is there of any competent state, so cautelous and
wary that is not sometimes snared in his words, and overtaken with unadvised
suretishippe. Yet Solomon tells us; that, He Prou. 11 15
is utterly quasht in pieces that is surety for a Stranger: It is the rock on
which many make shipwreck of credit and: Sponsioni non deest iactura;
Stipulation is not without loss accompanying: it was the Symbolum, or
memorable word of Chilo the Lacedemonian; Sponde, noxa prasto est: Pass thy
promise, and forthwith ensues some hurt, said a greater then he. I know we
should Gal. 6. 2.
bear one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ, even of charity;
but to bear another burden till I sink under mine own, is no charity but
folly; and to pull another out till my self stick fast, is no discretion but
destruction both to me and mine: now, he that promises for himself more
then he can perform, or becomes suerty for another in more then he makes
account to pay (if the principal debtor fail) he is snared in his words, he
Prou. 6. 1, 2
is taken in the words of his own mouth, nor dare I in all cases excuse his
conscience.

Fourthly, he that will avoid the troubles of debt, must reserve something in
store against casual events; I speak not of public judgments, as war or
famine, wherewith God visits a Nation in his anger, which are much more
prevented or mitigated by repentance and prayer, then by any civil policy, but
of private casualties, daily incident upon the persons or states of men; in
regard whereof, a man desirous to live out of debt, must resolve to spend
within his compass, that he may have somewhat more in readiness then from
hand to mouth. What if sickness come, and make one the Lords prisoner, and
bind his hands from dispensing his own affairs? What is more ordinary? Da
mihi corpus quod nunquam languerit, Hieron aduer. Pelagianos lib 3.
aut quod post languorem perpetua sanitate securum sit; Show me the body that
never languished, or that is secure after sickness recovered. So long as
corporal diseases are spiritual remedies, God will hereby draw us to the
Physician of our souls. Suppose losses come in the house or in the field, Spem
mentita seges, bos est Horat. epist. lib. 1. epist. 7
enectus arando; The crop answers not the cost, or the expectation, the cattle
are killed with working, or the like, no man has a perpetual gale of
prosperity. Deus faelicitatibus August. in Mat. Sermon. 29.
terrenis amaritudines miscet, vt alia quaeratur faelicitas, cuius dulcedo non
est fallax; God mingleth bitterness with earthly prosperity, that another
happiness may be sought, whose sweetness is not fallacious.

Suppose Suites at Law come, which to some are inevitable, for necessary
defense of innocence and patrimony, and yet are always costly, whether one
win or lose the thing in question; and dangerous for breeding anger, Aug. ep.
87.
which corrupts the heart as vinegar does the vessel wherein it does continue.
Suppose a man's charge be multiplied and increased by number of children, poor,
friends, strangers, by frequent pensions and services to the Church or
Commonwealth; suppose any of these, or many of these do fall upon a man that
is not provided before hand for them, he cannot choose but run in debt, he
must borrow where he can; and lending upon any tolerable terms is in a manner
out of date. Let every man therefore so husband the opportunity of thriuing and
plenty, as wisemen do of Vintage and Harvest against harder times ensuing,
lest the storm arising from the mutability and vicissitude of earthly
transitory things, ouerwhelm him with debt, as the whirle-winde does the unwary
Traveler upon the Alps with snow.

Lastly, there are baits to catch the most thriuing and circumspect men in the
snares of debt; Ouer-purchasing, and ouertrading: and, which is a consequence
of these, usurious contracts. Ouer-purchasing, and Ouer-trading are delightful
burdens, if a man can bear them without straining conscience or credit, or,
without hazarding the principal, to compass the ouerplusse; yet, because the
aiming at superfluities and excesses, is but the fruit of an inordinate
appetite, it were better to restrain both our actions and affections, to that
which we are able to wield, then to run so greedily upon the world: Qui
periculosior est blandus, quam Aust. Epist. 144.
molestus; Which is more dangerous, when it flatters us, then when it afflicts
us? When it allures us to love it, then when it compells us to despise it: He
that 1 Ioh. 2. 15.
loves the world, and the things of the world, the love of the father is not
in him. Why then should we so wilfully and so eagerly embrace the world? the
moderate love whereof, as it is an alienation from God, and from the
comfortable refreshings by the light of his countenance: so, instead thereof,
it casts us upon the mercies of the cruel, the Usurer I mean; Qui alienas
negotiatur miserias, and lucrum suum alterius aduersitatem facit; The Usurer, I
say, whose traffic and trade it is to make men miserable, and to raise his
gain out of other men's adversity, he is says Chrysostom, Quasi manum
suscipiens Hom. 6. in Matthew.
and in naufragium impellens; As a man taking one by the hand to pull out of
the water, but kicking him back again to the shipwreck of his substance, and
of himself, which is a rude and a barbarous part in any, to hurt infallibly,
whom he pretends to help. This is one of the bitter potions which the world
reaches forth to Ouer-purchasers, and Ouer-traders, which they are forced to
drink to the very dregs, when they cannot be content to walk within their
compass. As a man cannot touch pitch but be defiled therewith: so he cannot
deal with Usury without detriment, ipso facto, the first moment.

CHAP. 10. Directions how to get out of Debt, if we be already entangled.
IT may be these directions, for avoiding Debt, come too late for many men, who
have hitherto erred, not considering the danger; and have run constantly in a
course of multiplying Debts, ever since they were of age and discretion to
procure credit by giving security. So that they may say of Debt, as the
Strumpet Quartilla did of her virginity; Iunone^ Petron. Satyr.
meam iratam habeam, si vnquam me miminerim virginem fuisse; So let me have the
displeasure of my Juno, if ever I can remember my self a Virgin; The like may
many a man say of this; Mammona meum iratum habeam; So let me have the
displeasure of my Mammon, if ever I can remember my self out of debt; but I
was always a borrower of little sums, when I could not speed in greater.

To these now I say, that if they be so hardened with custom of owing, that
they have settled a resolution to live and dye in debt: then indeed my counsel
either of eschewing debt, that they come not in, or of quitting themselves,
being in already, can do them little good. They will despise it as a barren and
naked contemplation of a man without experience, who makes no difference
between a mere Scholar, and a man wholly exercised in worldly affairs. Well,
let them hold their course, if it will be no better, I leave them to the Usurer
to be braied in his mortar; or to the office of Insurance, to be stripped of
thousands by the lump, while they are catching after scraps by the morsel.

There are others also, whose case falls not within the compass of my advise,
such I mean, as are either desperate Bankrupts professedly; or, indeed and in
truth, being indebted for great sums, are little worth, and have no
possibility to pay. For, as the Psylli of Lybia, who had power to cure the
biting of Serpents, by sucking the venom out of the wounds, could not help
Di^^ Romans Hist. lib. 51
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, smitten with Aspes, or with a poisoned Needle, or
Crisping-pin, because the poison was dispersed through all the veins, and had
damped the vital spirits, before they came: And, as Physicians undertake not
to work a cure where the principal parts of the body are wasted away: so,
where Debt has run through every part, and has searched every vein of a man's
substance, and as a poison has fretted in true calculation both goods and
lands, it is past my skill to prescribe any remedy, to get out, where there is
no matter to work upon. I can only leave such to the mercy of God and men, as
Physicians do their Patients in desperate diseases. I address my self to
those, who having something left, are willing to improoue the remainder of their
time and state, in getting and keeping themselves out of debt.

The first direction for coming out of Debt, is that which Solomon gives for
getting out of suertiship, Prou. 6. 3, 4, 5. Submit thy self, and entreat thy
neighbor, solicit the Creditour, vt diem ampliet, to have patience with thee,
and to grant some respit: solicit the Debtor, for which thou art engaged, Vt
fidem liberet, to clear his fidelity by keeping promise: solicit thy friends
to enterpose themselves, to mediate for thee, to put to their helping hand.
Give thy self no rest, nor sleep to thine eyes, till thou be delivered as a
Roe from the hand of the Hunter, or as a Bird from the Snare of the Fowler.
Delay breeds danger, put it not off. If we must do thus when we are engaged
for others, how much more when the debt is our own?

All means must be used instantly, importunately, not to renew the bond from
six months to six months, till many years be expired, that is a meditated
continuance in the snare, and an addition to the debt: as if a man in fetters
and chains, should entreat that one ten pound more, one todd more, one
hundredth weight more might be added to his Shackles, and laid upon him. But
all means must be used by submission, by composition, by help of friends,
satisfaction must be given to the uttermost that the state will bear, before
it be clean wasted, that it may manifestly appear, that we are truly
willing not to delude the world, nor to raise our selves a fortune by
defrauding others; but so far as we are able to give contentment, and where
power fails, to crave remission or respit, without further aggravating the
burden by interest. Nor must these serious endeauours be deferred, but as the
Esaias 51. 14
captive hasteneth to be loosed, that he dye not in the pit, and that his
bread fail not, so must we quit our selves, that debt pine us not in the pit.
Say not; He is my friend, he will spare me, I need not fear, he will use no
extremity; for, if he be a free lender, he will not be a long lender, he
deserves current and speedy payment. If the Creditour be an Usurer, then the
debt is nothing mittigated, but doubled by continuance, though thou sleep thus
indebted, yet thy consuming disease sleeps not: this worm dies not till the
debt be paid.

Qui non est hodie: cras minus aptus erit; The longer in debt, the less able
to discharge it: the burden will increase howerly, and thy ability will be
deminished by the very edacity of debt. Follow then the Prophets counsel; Give
no sleep to Prou. 6. 4.
thine eyes, nor to thine eyelids any slumber, till thou be delivered as a
Dear out of the snare. I cannot but interpret the counsel of Solomon, as an
intimation of deliverance, if it be followed. I take it for a rule, that
obedience to holy authentical counsels and precepts, is always an assurance
of good success to him that practices the same, which has made me
importunate in urging expedition. All things I know must have a time, and
inueterate diseases are not cured in a moment, only be impatient till thou
find the means, and restless in the way of getting out of debt: which way I
will ^eat out as a second remedy.

That contraries are cured by contraries is often true, and certainly in this:
Egressus malitiae, virtutis operatur ingressum, Ambrose; The out going of
wickedness works an entrance unto goodness. If a man came in debt by
intemperance, he must come out by sobriety; if by riot and voluptuousness, he
must bind himself to a stricter and seuerer course. Legimus quosdam (says
Hierome) morbo articulari and podagrae humoribus laborantes, proscriptione
bonorum ad simplicem mensam and pauperes cibos redactos conualuisse: We have
read of some, who being sick of the Gout through abundance of humors, did
recover their health, being forced to a poor and slender diet by confiscation
of their goods. As extrauagant humors are cured by a sparing diet, which came
by ryotousness; so all other superfluities are tempered by moderation. He
therefore that ran in debt by any excess, must come out by order, and a
discreet method of circumspect mediocrity. If a man came in debt by
ouer-purchasing, he must be content to sell; if by ouer-trading, he must not
ouerlay himself with that burden, under which he has sunk already; if by
sumptuousness in apparel, if by curiosities in building: these superfluous
expenses upon our lusts must be cut off, Men must not imitate Athenaeus lib. 6.
ca. 8.
the magnificence of Lucullus without the wealth of Lucullus; no, nor yet of
Solomon, he lived in a golden, we in an iron age. Finally, if a man came in
debt by idleness, and sloth, and unprofitableness; he must struggle out by
a contrary course of diligence and industry, and employment in well doing. A
necessity lies upon him so to do: for every man is bound to eat his own
bread which he can never do, that paies not his debts truly, but lives and
spends upon another man's stock and substance, taking the injury upon himself,
but leaving the justice and mercy to another.

But alas, may some man say (in prejudice of this advice) how little can one
man's industry and frugality avail, in the removing and ouercomming of great
and consuming debts? these are above the power and reach of a man already
sunk and decayed in his estate. To this I answer; First, that the diligence
and forecast of some one man may be of great efficacy in it self, for the
accomplishment of great matters, if God be with him; Genesis 30. 27. 30.
as of Jacob in the service of Laban, whom God blessed for his sake, and
increased his little into a multitude. So Genesis 40. to Chap. 48.
of Joseph in Pharaohs. Also the diligence and prudent frugality of one may be
of consequence in the example to many; as Ruth chap. 2. and 3.
Booz may be a pattern in this kind to all posterity: how did he follow the
business himself? How were his eyes on the Servants, on the Reapers? even on
the gleaners? he does even lodge in the midest of his husbandry.

Secondly I answer, that diligence, thriftinesse, temperance after a rude and
unruly course, are not so much to be considered in themselves, as in the
blessing of God annexed unto them, which can as well draw men out of debt, as
adorn them with riches. If Luke 15. 22.
the prodigal be never so needy, yet if the father will receive him upon his
submission, the rags will quickly be changed into roabes. This changing also
of the former misdemeanors into a state of reformation; of dissoluteness and
luxury, into diligence and sobriety, is an evidence and an exercise of true
repentance; without which, no release nor deliverance from the judgments of
God, which have ceazed upon us, can be expected. Whereas upon repentance and
amendment, which implies an entire change of the mind, and of the manners, and
a lively accommodating of our will to the work, and of our best endeauours to
the accomplishment of our just desires: deliverance in due time may be
expected, as well from this of debt, as from any other judgment of God. His
hand that laid it on, can take it off again, if he be sought unto by fervent
prayer and supplication, which I willingly propound as the next remedy and
special help against debt.

In those things which are merely civil, and are transacted by dexterity in
mannaging worldly affairs, it is a hard thing to make men believe (so that
industry and skill be used) that prayer is of any great consequence for good or
bad events. This makes the Day-labourer, the Artificer, the Husbandman (for
most part) fall downright to his work, without any set* invocation of God,
more then perhaps a Pater noster inhast, or some other word of course, without
in tention of the spirit. As they deal in other things, so likewise in this of
debt; they are sensible of the burden, and capable of all politic directions,
tending to their ease; but how prayer and debt should have any relation, or the
one give furtherance to the removing of the other, they are not willing to
conceive. And hence it is, that being perplexed in this labyrinth of debt, they
cast away their confidence, nor seeking any issue or help by prayer; yet Phil.
4. 6.
Paul has taught in all things to make our requests known to God by prayer
and supplication. If in all things, why not in debt? 2. Chro. 6. 29. 30.
Solomon has taught us; that, When a man shall see his own plague, and his
own disease, and shall make his moan accordingly, God shall hear him in
heaven. Now they, who are for other things in a kind of stupidity, yet
acknowledge debt to be their plague and undoing: Why then use they not the
remedy prescribed by the wisest? Psalm. 50. 15.
God himself encouraging to call upon him in the day of trouble, and they
esteeming this to be the ulcer of all their trouble? If the house cannot be
builded, if the City cannot be guarded without the Lord; if nothing can be
done by early rising and late resting, but only so far as God puts to his
helping hand, working in us and for us: why then is not he entreated for his
assistance, in this difficulty of debt, as well as in other things? When
Amaziah 2. Chr. 25. 9
asked the man of God, who forbad him to take the Ephraimits into the battle
against the Edomits, because God was not with them, what then should become of
the hundredth talents, which he had given them for their help? cannot God, said
the Prophet, give thee more then this? So say I to him that trembles at the
inundation of debt upon him; Cannot God, if he were sought unto, give an issue
out of this? Cannot God, if the stumbling block of thine iniquity, (which
makes the separation, and hinders good things from thee) were removed, give
even more then this? If it be replied; That God works men out of debt, by
means, which thou have neither in thy power, nor in thy view. To this I say,
that prayer it self is a means, whereby all other helps and practices receive
their force, virtue, and success, which have failed hitherto for want of this.
Faithful prayer puts a man upon the cheerful use of subordinate means, and
binds to such pertinent courses, and serious endeauours, as are most likely to
remove, or at least to mitigate this languishing consumption of our estate. All
our policies without this are but, Arena sine calce, Sand without Lime. They
will not hold together when we have most need of them, but like untempered
mortar, will fall asunder. Let earnest prayer be joined with frugality, skill,
and diligence, and payment so far as our ability will extend; and then expect
with comfort the end that God will give.

Suppose when all is done that is directed or devised, that we cannot for all
this satisfy the Creditour; yet this shows a man's repentance for his former
indiscretion, and his true desire to make satisfaction, when he seriously sets
himself to make such payment as to him is any way possible: which though it
come short of contenting the Creditour, may notwithstanding serve to pacify
the conscience of the Debtor, which will be surely clamorous where justice is
not done to a man's power, by yielding every man his own.

I know some cruel Lenders will be bitter and violent in exacting, which
makes the clamours great of oppressed Borrowers, Nehem. 5. yea, secessions of
the poor, and separations from the rich, as appears in the Liuius D^c. 1.
lib. 2.
Roman story, but no cry is so intolerable, as of a tender conscience, if
debts and duties be not faithfully performed. Let us therefore not remain
indebted any thing to any man, but pay every man his due, not out of constraint
only, but even for conscience sake.

I end with Aquinas his words upon this place, It a plene omnibus omnia debita
persoluatis, vt nihil remaneat quod soluere debeatis; Pay all your debts so
fully unto all, that (so far as is possible) nothing rest behind which ought
to be paid; the debt of love only excepted, which follows in the next place.
Hitherto of civil and mixed debts.

CHAP. 12. Of the sacred Debt of Love, that we ought to love one another, and
why?
BUT that ye love one another.] As is the Obligation, such is the Debt: civil
obligations cease when the pecuniary debt is paid, but the bond of love among
Christians is perpetual; so that as we say of thanks in case of benefits
received, Gratiae agendae and habendae; Thanks must be given and held as still
due: so of love it is; Debitum semper reddendum and semper habendum; A debt
which always is to be paid, and yet always continues payable; I am (says
Paul) a debtor, both to the Grecian Romans L 14
and Barbarian, both to the wise and to the unwise; he means the debt of love
and of service. The instruction is this; That Love and Charity is a due debt,
perpetually to be performed by one Christian to another; Let brotherly love
continue, Heb. 13. 1. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, I am the
Lord, Leuit. 19. 18. Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God, and
every one that loves is born of God and knows God. 1. Ioh. 4. 7. Ioh. 13. 34
A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another. How a new
commandent? Austine answers, quia exuto veteri induit nos nouum hominem
Because the old man being put off, it puts on us the new man. Whereunto I add
this, that when the Scribes and Pharisees by false glosses and corrupt
interpretations had put it out of date; Mat 5. 43, 44, 45, 46, etc.
Christ restored it by a true interpretation, and revived and illustrated it by
his own practice and example: as Paul also does observe, Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in
love as Christ has loved us, and Phil. 1. 9. This I pray that your love may
abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment. To walk in love
intends a proceeding and going forward till we come to an eminency, and
this we should endeavor.

Psalm. 133. 1.
that brethren, should dwell together in unity and amity. Some things are
pleasant that are not good, as unlawful gains to a covetous man. 2. Pet 2. 15.
Balaam loves the wages of iniquity to his hurt: some things are good that are
nor pleasant, as to suffer affliction, so Heb. 11. 25.
Moses did with the people of God: But the love of the brethren is both good
and pleasant: Good, because agreeable to Gods will: Pleasant, because
comfortable to the heart of man to enjoy the society and communion of Saints:
both good and pleasant, Psalm. 133. 3.
because God has commanded his blessing to rest upon the unity of brethren in
that which is good.

Secondly, Christ has loved us being his Romans 5. 2. 10.
enemies; therefore we ought to love one another: If Christ have taught us
this, not only by precept, but also by example, and by illustration of the
precept in his own person, should we not herein conform our selves unto him?
Should not every one accommodate himself to that, which is the proper end and
use of his calling? Should not the Shepherd feed his flock, the Pilot at Sea
guide his Ship, the Captain in war exercise military discipline? Should not
the watchman keep his watch? Now brotherly love is as proper and peculiar to
Christians, as any of these services to the undertaker of them. By this shall
all men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another, Ioh. 13. 35.

1. Tim. 1. 5.
the end and scope of the Law; Vt est in medicina sanitas, as health is the
end of Physic. It is the sum of the Law says Christ, Mat. 22. 40. Where
he speaks of the love of God, and of the love of man jointly: In which sense
it is noted to be a transcendent virtue required in every commandment. It is
the Col. 3. 14.
bond of perfection, quo omnia hominum inter se officia continentur and
coherent, wherein all the duties which pass between men are comprehended and
combined. As faith is the bond of our union with Christ, so is love of our
communion with our brethren, the members of Christ, in which two consists the
perfection of the mystical body. It is called here the fulfilling of the
Law, both in this verse and in the tenth, because, qui diligit, non vnum
aliquod praeceptum obijt, sed in genere praestitit quod lex iubet, he that
loves, observes not some one precept, but performs in general what the Law
inioineth, but of this in the next place.

Non euenissent Cyprian. Ep. 8.
fratribus haec mala, si in vnum fraternitas fuisset animata. Such evils had
not befallen the brethren, if the brotherhood had held together in one mind.
Let us therefore nourish this precious charity in our hearts, in obedience and
true conformity unto Christ; as also for the worthiness of the grace it self,
and for our own refreshing and consolation in our pilgrimage here on earth.

CHAP. 13. Of the diversities of love, and of the nature of Christian religious
love, toward one another.
BUT that ye love one another.] We have a rule even in moral discipline that
the praise of virtue consists in action. This is as true of love as of any
other whatsoever, 1. Cor. 13. 13.
in this preferred before faith and hope, not simply, but because it is
diffusiue of it self to the use of others, whereas these are confined to the
person of the believer. We have also another rule that whatsoever we would
that men should do unto us, even so should we do to them; for this is the Law
and the Prophets: Mat. 7. 12. But we desire that men should love us, and
accommodate themselves to our service; therefore it is a natural and a
perpetual debt to do the like unto them.

Now that love may be diffusiue of it self in precious streams, and operative
with approbation of God and of man: let us choose out among the several kinds
of love, 1. the most excellent in nature, 2. the best esteemed in quality, 3.
the most beneficial in the operations and fruits of it.

For the first, we must observe that there are diverse kinds of love; as
natural affection whereby we love our Parents, Children, and Kindred. He
that has not this is worse then brutish: even beasts cherish and suckle their
young ones. This though a Christian cannot want, yet a reprobate may have.
There is a civil love, the obligation whereof is domestical or political
society. Mere natural men yield this for mutual commodity and consolation.
There is a moral love consisting in an exact compensation of affection with
affection, of benefit with benefit, which falls short indeed of that love
which here we seek, as our Savior shows, Mat. 5. 46. 47. It may be in
unregenerate men, yet it is a great furtherance, to the producing and
preserving of the charity, whereof we speak. (...). Greg. Nazian.
Nothing so available unto love, as compensation of affection: which is
expressed by mutual offices, Vis vt ameris, ama; Will thou be beloved, then do
thou love.

Lastly, there is a christian religious love, which is a sanctified affection,
whereby our hearts are joined either to our brethren in the faith, in
contemplation of Gods image in them, shining in an eminency of Graces; or in
respect of the common hope of our calling, declared by outward profession; or
else whereby we wish and do good to our enemies, in obedience to him who has
commanded us so to do.

There is not any kind of these loves above mentioned, but it is a debt; and
so is this christian religious love also, and must be duly paid. First, in
respect of the communion of Saints: there is one body, one spirit, one hope of
our calling, one lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, Ephesians.
4. 4, 5, 6. If a Eccle. 4. 12*
threefold cord be not easily broken, how much less this of love in such a
concurrence of invincible obligations? It must also be paid as an homage to
God, who will take no notice of our love to him, unless we love our neighbor;
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, I am the Lord, Leuit. 19. 18. as
also 1 Ioh. 4. 20. He that says he loves God and hates his brother, is a
liar. Who so loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom be has not seen?

Thirdly, it must be paid, in regard of mutual offices and duties, as of
tender affections and earnest prayers for one another; the intercourse whereof
cannot be stopped among Christians. Mayor est fraternitas Christi, quam
sanguinis; Brotherhood in Christ is stronger then in blood. If kin will
creep where it cannot go, christian charity cannot choose but be diffusiue of
it self, from the highest to the lowest. Psalm. 133. 2. 3.
As the precious ointment from the head of Aaron to his beard, and to the
skirts of his garment: as the dew of Hermon upon the hill of Zion; so this love
imparts it self by a cooperation of Gods spirit, to the comfort and
refreshing of high and low, pertaining to the covenant.

Moreover, as in civil debts, so also in sacred, the payment must be current.
It is not the love of brethren in evil, be it never so strong that will serve
the turn; such concord is a conspiracy, as in Genesis 34, 25.
Simeon and Leui, in the outrage upon the Shechemites. It is not the doting of
Judge. 16. 4. etc. Number. 25. 15.
Samson upon Dalilah, or of Zimry upon Cosby, be the men never so great, that
will serve the turn; this is but carnal lust. The current love which bears
the stamp of the Sanctuary, must be derived 1. Tim. 1. 5.
from a pure heart, a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith; this is the
right mine out of which it must be taken. And in this respect the christian
love does as much surmount all carnal loves, as gold or silver does copper or
lead; which makes me wonder, why we should be so ambitious of the friendship
and countenance of men notoriously sinful, seeing how much soever they are
beloved of us, yet they can but give us dross for gold, chafe for wheat. True
christian love indeed, as it is a noble heroical grace, so can it not proceed
but from a sanctified original.

CHAP. 14. The qualities of religious Love.
AS is the nature of religious Love, so are the qualities holy and heavenly.
These are three; Patience, Constancy, and Feruency: Love is patient; Charity
suffers long, and is kind; it is not easily provoked, it bears all things,
it endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. 7. The Israelits depose Samuel from
his government, as great an indignity as could be devised; yet, God forbid
(said he) that I should cease to pray for you, or to show you the right way,
1. Sam. 12. This was the patience of his love, to recompense good for evil.
Saul persecutes David bitterly; 1. Sam. 24. 5 and 26. 11. etc.
David having his life in his power twice, takes not the opportunity of private
revenge, but dismisseth him safe; this was the patience of his love to the
Lords anointed; Greg. hom 7 in Ezech.
Patientia vera est, quae ipsum amat quem portat; It is true patience to love
him whose weight we feel. Thus the nurse bears the unquietness of her child,
that breaks her sleep: the Minister the ignorance and wilfulness of the
opposite: the husband and the wife suffer the infirmities of each other without
grudging or repyning, because there is true love in the flesh, and in the Lord.
As is the measure of Love, so of Patience: much love, much patience. Love is
strong as death, being supported with patience. Whereupon also does depend the
next property which is Constancy.

The Apostle having said, that Charity Aquin. in hunc locum
bears all, and endures all things; infers in the next words; Charity
never fails, 1. Cor. 13. 8. Charitas in diligendo non deficit, sed proficit;
Charity in loving goes not backward but forward; as appears in the
Philippians, whose love abounded more and more. The love of Ruth to Naomi,
makes her cleave unto her constantly, though she had persuasions, and example,
and discouragements to the contrary, yet the resolution was; That naught but
death should make a separation. Ruth 1. 16 17.
The like steadfastness is in the love of Paul toward the Corinthians, though
the more he loved them, the less he was beloved, Yet will I spend most
willingly (says he) and will be spent for your sakes, 2. Cor. 12. 15.

True love is not apprehensiue of offenses, nor alienated upon slight
occurrents, though the services of love be sometimes costly, as in relieuing
the poor: and the labor of love sometimes painful, as of Ierem. 38.
Ebedmelecke in drawing Jeremy out of the dungeon of Malchiah, hazarding
thereby the displeasure of Prince and State. Yet love, armed with constancy,
persisteth in good purposes; against all difficulties and oppositions
whatsoever; yea, when many other eminent gifts do cease, yet shall love
continue, 1. Cor. 13. 8. 9.

The third quality of this love is Feruency. Above all things have fervent love
among your selves, 1. Pet. 4. 8. This sets an edge on love, it keeps it from
languishing, it suffers not so gracious an affection to settle upon the lees of
sluggishnesse, but will quicken it as a taskemaster, exacting daily the service
of the day, it will make us restless til some good be done, and sensible in
case we fail: as is noted of Hieron. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 6.
Titus the Emperor, when he had not done some memorable good, he would lament
the loss of such a day. Feruency will make us sow our seed in the morning, and
not suffer our hand to Eccle. 11. 6.
cease in the evening. Want of feruency in our love, makes us unprofitable in
time of need; like the Priest and Leuite to the Luke 10. 30 31, 32, 33.
man that was wounded and half dead, they looked on, and perhaps pitied him,
but passed by the other way, without vouchsafing any relief at all: So is the
common temper of men's love, they think themselves in charity, else God forbid,
they hate no body, they hurt no body, they are no quarrellers, or otherwise
injurious; thus they make fair weather with all: but let a man fall into some
extremity; and then they will not ease his burden with the least of their
fingers. It is Feruency must make our love active and useful, and which must
make us like the good Samaritane, ministering to the distressed as we are able,
and they have need, Never turning our eyes from our own flesh, Esaias 58. 7.

CHAP. 15. The effect of love, with rules to dispense the fruits thereof, and a
complaint for the neglect of it.
THe religious love thus qualified will quickly show it self in the fruits and
effects; it will sweeten and season all our actions, making us full of mercy,
and as Romans 15. 14
Paul speaks of the Romans full of goodness. If you would know wherein this
love must and may be discerned; I answer even in all things. Let all things
be done in love, is the Apostles direction, 1. Cor. 16. 14. Because without
this, the best things degenerate and turn the edge: 1. Cor 8. 1
Knowledge without love puffs up. 1. Cor. 13. 1, 2.
The gift of tongues and prophecy, without love, is as a vanishing sound.
Alms without love is ostentation. Martyrdom without love is fruitless and
unprofitable. Let me speak it as it is; as faith without works is dead: so
works without love are counterfeit and hypocritical. Romans 12. 9.
Let love be then without aissimulation, in all our doing, which will make them
pass more sweetly then all the springs of Lebanon. ^f we further inquire when
and to whom this love must be showed, that also is set down, Gal. 6. 10. While
we have time let us do good unto all: (...), Theophilact
the time of working is the time of living; and though there may be difference
in the opportunities: yet shall we never want such as will want us. Which
burden for all that, where love is, will not seem tedious. Charitas facit
iugum leave: Love makes the yoke easy. Genesis 29. 20
Jacob endured a hard service under Laban, of seven years for his daughter
Rachel, yet they seemed in his eyes but a very few days, because be loved her.

If yet we further ask in what manner this love must be declared: That also is
set down, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. Little Children, let us not love in word and in
tongue: he means, not in bare verbal complement only, (for words otherwise
must be the Interpreters of the heart) but in deed and in truth; our love must
be real and beneficial; if it be barren, it is certainly counterfeit. If this
precious treasure be in our hearts, we ought not to hide it; concealed love is
like concealed learning, unprofitable. We must profess it then to the comfort
of our brethren, as Ruth 2. 13.
Booz spoke to the heart of Ruth, yea and express it too as he did: Ruth 3.
18.
he rested not till he had done her good in the highest degree. Thus Mordocai
procured the wealth of his people, and spoke peaceably to all his seed, Esther
10. 3. He was beneficial in word and in work.

Besides these general directions, for the better dispensing the fruits of
our love there are certain special rules to be observed. First we must
consider our own ability, and our brethrens necessity, accommodating the one
to the relief of the other, as the plaster to the sore.

If our ability be great, then 2. Cor. 9. 6.
by sowing plentifully we shall reap plentifully, and 1. Tim. 6. 17.
lay up a good foundation against the time to come. This shows want of love
in those who having great ability, do little or no good therewith; like Nabal
and the rich Glutton, who had great abundance, even a Prou. 17. 16
price in the hand, but wanted a heart to use it. They feared to lose their
wealth by giving, but feared not to lose themselves by keeping it. If on the
other side, our wealth be small, yet if our good will be great, it is
accepted, as were the Widows two mites, Luke 21. 3. He that is faithful in a
little enters into his Masters joy Mat. 25. 23. God crowns the inward will,
where he finds not the outward wealth, says Austin. If 2. Cor. 8. 12
there be a willing mind, it is accepted by him who judges not after the
outward appearance, but beholds the heart. Yea though some must say with Job.
42. 8, 9.
Peter, Silver Acts 3. 6.
and gold have I none; yet love is as effectual, in dispensing the spiritual
talent as the temporal. Those who have not the worldly goods, may be helpful
and beneficial, by pouring out faithful prayers, as Job did for his three
friends: or by ministering a word of counsel, admonition, or exhortation at
our need. He that does so, may turn a sinner from going astray, he may save a
soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins. Iam. 5. 20. Ability must
be improued according to the condition of it: which that it may be with
success, we must also consider the necessities of those with whom we have to
deal. Love travails in pain with some, till Christ be formed in them, as
Paul did Gal. 4. 19.
with the Galathians; with others it is weak; to some it stoops; it raises it
self to others: August. de catechiz. rudib. cap. 15.
alijs blanda, alijs seuera, nulli inimica, omnibus matter: gentle to some,
severe to others, an enemy to none, a mother to all. Some have more need of our
prayers then of our purse, of our counsel then of our commodities, of our
good example then of our goods. Paul Act. 20 33.
craves neither silver nor gold, nor raiment, but Ephesians. 6. 19 Col. 4. 3. 2.
These. 3. 1.
prayers often and with importunity. David on the other side craves not Nabals
counsel, 1. Sam. 25. 8.
but a supply of things necessary, when he might have spared it. As one
member serves another according to the necessity of it, so should we. Because
by how much more fitly we apply our selves to one another: by so much more
feelingly is God glorified by the party that is succored, Job. 31. 20.

After ability in the author, and necessity in the object of benevolence
observed, the next rule pertains unto order. All things are comely in their
order, and love is orderly and discreet, non agit indecore, it deals not
unseemly, 1. Cor. 13. 5. The orderly course in disposing the fruits of love
is, that (where present occasion imposes not a necessity) the special duties
of love should be conferred, where there are the principal bonds of nature or
grace, or other respects of society or vicinitie: specially where there is an
eminency of desert at our hands. The case may so be put that a beast must be
relieved before a man: yet other things being like, we must specially do good
to Gal. 6. 10.
the household of faith.

A cup of cold water thus bestowed is not forgotten, Mat. 10. 42. but shall be
remembered in the day of accounts, Matthew. 25. 40. Even among these, love ordered
by discretion leads to our special charge. Integer rerum aestimator est, qui
Aug. de doc. Chr. lib. 1. cap. 27, 28.
ordinatam habet dilectionem: nam quum omnibus prodesse non possis, his
potissimum consulendum est; qui constrictius tibi quasi quadam sort
coniunguntur. He is an upright esteemer of things that has an orderly
charity: for seeing thou can not do all men good, provision must chiefly be
made for those, who are as it were, by a certain lot, most nearely joined unto
us.

David prouides for his Parents in the midst of his persecution: Our Savior
for 1. Sam. 22. 3.
his Ioh. 19. 26, 27.
mother in the midst of his passion. But the bowels of compassion are for the
most part chiefly moved, when the state of the Church is under the eye of
tenderhearted men, as Psalm. 122. Amos 7. 2. 5. Jeremy 9. 1, 2, etc. But such
men are very rare, the most even of professors, pleasing themselves abundantly,
if their personal state be good, and if there be plenty within their private
walls, never look further at the distressed abroad: nor at well deserving men
of Church and Commonwealth: thinking because charity begins at home, they
need not strain themselves with supporting such as fall not within the
domestical verge. But these men are much deceived; For though it be true, that
charity begins at home; Yet it must not also end at home, and never go
further. For as parents and children claim their portion in us, so does the
Church and Commonwealth also: specially such as have deserved our love, to
whom, perhaps we owe even our selves Phil. ver. 19
as Philemon did to Paul.

Can that love be religious, which is so straightened in the bowels of compassion,
as that it will not enlarge it self to the afflicted? Or is that love
religious, which can be unthankful to men of special merit, for temporal or
spiritual service? Let charity begin where it ought, but let it not both
begin and end in one Period. If it be naturally diffusiue, confine it not to
one point or center, which ought to live and move, and work in the
circumference round about.

The third rule in the exercise of love concerns those who are without, or at
least farther off. Romans 12.
We must have peace and concord with all, so far as is possible: our God is
the God of peace, not of dissension 1. Cor. 14. 33.
or confusion; and when he exhibited himself to Eliah, he was not in the 1.
King. 19. 11.
mighty wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still and
quiet voice: to show that he is not among tumults and quarrels, but where
peace, and unity, and amity is embraced. Yet he that must endeavor to have
peace with all is not bound to have society, nor ordinary intercourse of
consultations and familiarity with all, nor peace neither, further then may
stand with holiness and godly wisdom. For what if there be inevitable
occasion of a breach? What if a man will needs become an enemy? and provoke us
with heavy injuries? Here now is love put to the greatest trial, yet will it
be fruitful, and that in season. For Christian love may as truly be exercised
to an enemy as to a friend: and in forgiving injuries, as in giving gifts. Did
not Steuens charity shine as clearly, Acts 7. 60. Acts 6. 6
in praying for the forgiveness of his persecutors, when he suffered as a
Martyr, as in ministering to the necessities of the Saints as a Deacon?
Forgiveness is like a blossom in March, that shrinkes not at a nipping blast,
this will prove the forwardest and goodliest fruit in Autumn. But what if
forgiveness be not sought by him that does the wrong? yet must thou daily ask
forgiveness at Gods hands under condition of forgiving. What if the injury be
daily multiplied and renewed? Heaven is open to thy complaints, and the Law is
open to restrain intolerable persons, only in suits at Law, when they are
inevitable. Love first retains an unfeigned desire of peace, though it be
provoked. Secondly, it abstaineth from private revenge, though it have
opportunity. Thirdly, true love prays for the enemies conversion, though
continuing refractary.

But here may I justly take up a complaint; Charitatem in terris peregrinam
agere. As one speaks of Truth: so may I of Charity, that it lives as a
stranger here on earth; little religious love is to be found in the world.
Some men love no body but for some carnal respects. Others can love any, but
the servants of God; as Achab could like well of all Prophets, but of Michaiah
and Eliah, and 1 King. 22. 68. 1 King. 21. 20.
them he hated, and counted them as enemies. Others that can find no fault in
Gods children, yet hold off their love in suspense; and they must know them
better, before they will join with them in amity and society, and so perhaps
they never meet. Others confine their love to society in reuelling and
lasciviousness, or some other rudeness in which there is at last but a bond
of iniquity. So little entertainment finds love upon earth: yet it is the
bond of perfection, both in heaven and in earth, and has the most noble
testimony and style to be called in this place, the fulfilling of the Law.

CHAP. 16. That love is a fulfilling of the Law according to the measure of it,
and that yet hence it does not follow: either that the perfect fulfilling of
the Law is possible in this life: or that any can be justified by the works of
the Law, in this state of corruption.
FOr he that loves another has fulfilled the Law.] These words are a reason
of the former exhortation. The argument is thus. The mutual love of Christians
is the fulfilling of the Law, therefore we ought to love one another. When
love is said, Cantic. 8. 6. to be strong as death: non potuit (says Austin)
Charitatis fortitudo magnificentius exprimi, quam quod morti comparatur: The
strength of love could not be more magnifically expressed, then when it is
compared unto death. As he says of the strength of love, that it could not be
expressed in more lofty terms: so may I say of the supereminent excellency
of love, it could not be set down in higher terms, then in calling it the
fulfilling of the Law. Concerning which words sundry things may be enquired,
both for the meaning and certainty of them. As first, the thing in hand being
mutual charity and brotherly love which is limited and confined to the second
table of the Law, and is no further extended; how the performance of it can be
said to fulfill the Law? seeing in this duty (supposed as good as can be in
this life) a man only fulfilleth the second table of the Law.

The answer herein is this: that though he that loves his neighbor entirely,
do but fulfill the second table expressly, yet he performs the first also by
necessary consequence. For all religious love to men flows originally from
our love to God: and our love to God depends wholly on his love to us. 1 Ioh.
4. 19
We love him because he loved us first. As therefore a great brightness of the
air at midnight, argues the shining of the Moon, and that presumes an
illumination from the Sun, because these depend one on another: so the
diffusing of our charity on our neighbors proves our love to God, and our
love to God presumes his love to us first, for the inseparable dependence
which they have on each other. We may also briefly answer, that our brotherly
love fulfilleth the Law, that is, that part of the Law which does punctually
require it.

The other questions arise from the ambiguitie of the speech, Has fulfilled
the Law. Out of which our adversaries draw two conclusions. First, that the
fulfilling of the Law is possible in this life. Secondly, that a Christian may
be justified by the works of the Law.

For the first, the Rhemists in their marginall notes upon these words say
this. Here we learn that the Law may be, and is fulfilled by love in this
life, against our adversaries, who say, it is impossible to keep the
Commandments. The argument may thus be framed. He that loves another, or that
loves his neighbor fulfilleth the Law. But every true Christian can, and
must, and does love his neighbor; therefore every true Christian can, and must
fulfill the Law. First, to the proposition I say, that he that loves another
fulfilleth the Law, according to the quality and measure of his love. Qualis
and quanta dilectio, talis and tanta est legis impletio: so far as he loves,
so far he fulfilleth the Law. But say they, in the assumption; every good
Christian can, and may, and does love his neighbor. To this I answer, that
love is either perfect and full in the affections and offices of it, without
any error or defect at all: this is that which fulfilleth the Law, according
to the severity of it to the uttermost, but it is impossible in this life
through the weakness of the flesh. There is another love which is true,
sincere, and hearty, yet not without imperfection, for in many things we all
fall short in affections, in actions, Gal 5. 17
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
that we cannot do as we would. Phil. 3. 12* 13.
I have not (says Paul) attained unto perfection. This love is possible, but
not perfect, the other is perfect, but not possible to us compassed as we are
with imperfections; and consequently the perfect impletion of the Law in this
life is not possible.

The second argument depends on this, framed by those, who by building
justification upon the works of the Law, put themselves upon the hazard of
falling from grace. The argument is thus. He that fulfilleth the Law is
justified thereby; according to that word, Gal. 3. 12.
He that does these things shall live by them. But every true Christian
fulfilleth the Law by love; therefore every true Christian is justified by the
Law. Stapleton propounds it thus Stapleton Antidot.
in sense, and triumphs like a conqueror against Calvin and Beza. His
argument is thus. The fulfilling of the Law is true righteousness; but he that
loves his neighbor fulfilleth the Law; therefore he that loves his neighbor
obtains true righteousness, or true justification thereby.

The strength of these arguments is in the ambiguitie of the phrase: for true
it is; He that fulfilleth the Law shall be justified thereby, if he fulfill it
in all points perfectly; otherwise not justification, but malediction is of the
Law. But he that loves his neighbor fulfilleth the Law. That I grant is true,
he that loves perfectly without any defect fulfilleth the Law perfectly; but
where is that man, that ever so loved, or observed the Law without error or
imperfection?

Was there ever Patriarch, Prophet, or Apostle without sin?

Does not David the man after Gods own heart confess this sin with much
contrition against himself, Psalm. 32. 5. and Psalm. 51.

Does not Dan. 9.
Daniel the like against himself and all the people?

Does not Romans 7.
Paul after his conversion yet lament his unwilling subjection unto sin? When
the best of men condemn themselves, is it not impudent pride in any to
justify himself by the works of the Law? Can any be so partial in his own
cause, or so senseless of his own estate, as not to tremble at his daily
transgressions, arising from the sink of original corruption?

I know for the opening of this speech in hand, the learned bring this
distinction. There is, impletio legis quoad parts, or quoad gradus; We fulfill
the Law say they, according to the parts, or according to the degrees.
According to the parts, when we have respect to all the commandments, as well
in one thing as in another, not allowing our selves in the neglect or breach of
any; thus far say they we attain. But according to the degrees or perfection
required in the strict letter of the Law, (for which cause it is called the
killing letter,) so we do not fulfill the Law.

In this distinction some satisfy themselves, but for mine own part I am of
opinion, that the best men fail, not only in the degrees, but even in the
parts of the Law, omitting at some time the very duties of love by infirmity,
ignorance, negligence, or temptation, so that our best fulfilling of the Law
is, when that which is not fulfilled is forgiven: according to that of Austin,
Omnia mandata Dei tunc implentur, quando quod non fit, ignoscitur; All the
commandments of God are then fulfilled, when that is forgiven which is not
fulfilled. And our best justification is; Quando fides impetrat, quod Lex
imperat: When faith obtains in Jesus Christ that perfect righteousness,
which the Law enioyneth by a lively application of the same to the conscience.
As our love is not perfect in regard of our defects in matter, measure, and
circumstance: so it cannot be meritorious, because it is a debt, and such a
debt as is never fully paid, but still remains due. No debt is merit; Est ae
natura meriti, vt sit opus indebitum, pramium ex indebito faciens debitu^: It
is of the nature of merit, that it be a work not due, and which makes the
reward being nor due of it self, due to the doer.

Is all our labor of love then lost, because it is imperfect? and because our
fulfilling of the Law is imperfect? or because when we have done our best, yet
our love is not meritorious? or because our best fulfilling of the Law, is but
only a true and sincere observation of the Commandments, but not a full
obedience of the Law (...), in exactnes? Is all our labor I say then lost? God
forbid: for though we cannot attain unto perfection in this life, it is
reserved for the next: our righteousness being here eclipsed with manifold
defects: yet the nearer we come unto it, the more conformable we are to God,
and to his Law, then which nothing is more beautiful, or more blessed.

Paul professes that though he had Phil. 3. 12. 14.
not as yet attained, yet he aspired with great endeavor, and pressed toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in CHRIST JESUS: even so
should we do also, who come much shorter of perfection then he did: the
remainders of sin continuing more, and the Image of Christ being less renewed
and restored in us then in him. We should, I say with all our strength and
intention of spirit, strive to be advanced to a higher pitch and measure of
grace, of goodness, of love with the fruits thereof; knowing that love is the
John 13. 35.
mark of Gods children: the proof of 1 John 47.
our regeneration: the seal of our translation 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
from death to life: yea such an evidence hereof as will show it self and
stand upon record in the effects, when other signs may fail in the day of
temptation: knowing also that hatred, which is contrary hereunto, is the devils
1 Ioh. 3. 10. Ioh. 2. 11.
brand on the vessels of wrath; he that hates his brother walks in
darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because darkness has blinded his
eyes, even his judgment, the eye of the inner man. For Austin and glossa ordin.
Ira est festuca, odium est trabs in oculo; anger is a moate, but hatred is a
beam in the eye.

The sum is this. Debts must be paid to whom they are due. Love is a Debt;
therefore it must be paid to all, as time, and place, and power do permit:
that by yielding hereof in obedience to the Commandment, our love to God
himself may appear, John 14, 15.
who measures our love by our obedience. Who if he discerns the readiness of
the spirit, though the flesh be weak: if a promising and cheerful heart,
though ability be not great, he will draw us on to further proof.

John 15. 2.
Every branch that bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit, to the honor and glory of his own name, and to the benefit of his
Elect.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 15. for took read take. p. 12. l. 12. for haereditale r.
haereditate* p. 35. l. 2. for silences r. silence. p. 43. l. 16. for ever r,
ends p. 47. l. 16. for founders r foundress. p. 56. l. 23. for mutant. r
mutent. p. 61. l. 11. for no, r. a. p. 67. l. 13. for ofter, r. often p 92. l
14. for saueurs r. sauers p. 95. l. 7. add to the end of the l. substance. p.
99 for moderate r immoderate. p 103. l. 9. for which r. whom. p 125. l. 1. for
doing r. doings. in the Marg, for Theophilact, 1. Theophylact. p. 139. l. 16.
for this, r. his.


