A PAIR OF SERMONS SVCCESSIVELY PREACHED to a pair of Peereles and succeeding
PRINCES.

THE FORMER AS AN ANTEFVNERALL TO THE LATE PRINCE HENRY, Anno Dom. 1612.
October 25. The first day of his last and fatal sickness.

THE LATTER PREACHED THIS present year 1614. Ianuar. 16. To the now living
Prince CHARLES, as a preserver of his life, and life to his Soul.

DEVT. 30.15. Behold I have set before you life and death. AT LONDON Imprinted
by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William Aspley. 1614.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, the happy reviving of our former
hopes.
TO you (Most excellent) and to no other so properly belongs the patronage of
this fatal pair, whereof the latter was directly for you, former before you,
yea they were both preached in your hearing, both fitted for your meditation,
and now both published at your appointment.

J confess my self for late favors exceedingly bound unto your Highness;
whereupon bethinking by what means J might best either express or deserve
thanks, me thought a tender of these Sermons published might serve to do it,
but when J remembered that saying, Does he thank that servant, because he did
what was commanded him, etc. J found that J had lost my thanks, because your
Highness had so commanded it; yea and J find this beside, that as he who
coming to discharge his debt, and finding the gold in his purse to be copper,
does not only not pay it, but is less able to make payment then before, so
find J it with my self, that either J must say with the poor debtor in the
Gospel, Have patience with me: or with the woman in the law, not able to
bring a Lamb, J must offer a pair of Turtles: And though a pair of Turtles
be not a Lamb, nor any action of necessary duty may go for testimony of
thanks, yet J am sure it may be so, if your Highness shall so esteem it, for
God has made you a Prince, and Princes are Gods, and it is a part of Gods good
nature, To call things which are not, as if they were.

Concerning the funeral part of this pair, J have been questioned with by
others, and have a little studied in my self, why in such variety as the
Scripture yields, J made such a choice, as to speak of a Text before a
living, yea a flourishing Prince, which the Minister by order reads before a
dead corpse: but J have been better able to make use of it since, then to give a
reason of it before; for now J find, that even those actions of ours, wherein
we least deliberate, yet are directed by God to a special purpose: and J find
that God had in this an use of me, which J knew not, as the colt carried
Christ, and yet knew not whether: Jndeed J might well be questioned with, for
bringing Death into the Court, which is welcome no where; but least of al
there; where though every day bring forth a new fashion, yet the Mourning
garment is so out of fashion, as Mordecai for his garment sake, might not come
within the Kings gate; but yet Solomon the most magnificall of the Kings, and
the flower of all Courtiers said, It is better to go into the house of
mourning, etc. Jnto that house does the former of these meditations lead you,
there to see and consider, how not only inferior persons, but also Kings and
Emperors have lain down in the dust, and they which have taxed the whole
world have at last paid tribute themselves, and done their due to nature: Every
man tells you, that what soever was your Brothers, is now by deuolution yours:
give me leave also to tell you, that as his fortunes, so his fate also shall one
day be yours; and that you are not so sure to succeed your Fathers in their
Thrones, as in their Sepulchers: Jf this pill be too bitter, the latter part
will make amends: for it is A preservative to your life, a receipt against
death, and Physic to your soul, which if your Highness shall receive, and
digest with that mind wherewith it was administered, it shall make you as sound
and immortal, as be the Angels and Saints in heaven: And if from my store
there has come any dram or scruple to further that, Oh how happy shall I be!
yea how happy shall J be, to add but the least drop of lifeblood to him, for
whose life, length of days, and eternal happiness, so many souls and
assemblies of men, yea so many kingdoms make daily suite upon their knees:
Then shall J style my self a new, like Saint Luke, an Evangelist and a
Physician, and shall write, not only, His Majesty's ever devoted, and now of
late more deuinct and obliged Chaplain, but also

One of your Highness Soule-Physicians. Robert Wilkinson.

A MEDITATION OF MORTALITY PREACHED TO THE LATE PRINCE HENRY, some few days
before his death.
JOB. 14.1. Man that is borne of a Woman, Short in continuance, And full of
trouble.
THese words of the Text, though few in number, yet comprehend in a manner
half the body of Divinity, for the whole consisting upon the knowledge of
God and man, here is in three words so much delivered concerning man, as
threeskore and ten years, the age of man can express, Man borne of a
Woman, Man short in continuance, and Man full of trouble. So Man (...) Totum
in toto, the life of the text, the general subject of the whole text, and
diffused into every part of it: and indeed what should Man study so much to
know as man? He which found fault with Man's creation, for that God had made him
two eyes looking outward, but had not made him one eye to look into himself,
he did lay an unjust blame on God, but did justly tax the curiosity of man:
Saint Austin says, it is a fault in men, Eunt homines mirari alt a montium,
etc. Men run out a gadding, or (as we call it) a traveling, to behold the
height and vastness of the hills, the immeasurable bounds and limits of the
Seas, the customs and strange fashions of all people and Countries, and yet no
man truly looks into himself, like Solomon which wrote of Birds, Beasts, and
Fishes, yea of trees and plants, from the Cedar to the Hyssop, and yet in the
mean time fowly forgot himself: It is strange to see, what man by his wit
has devised for the world, and yet witless to discern what he is himself;
in the first beginning when the world as yet was naked of invention, Jabal
found out a way to herd and bring up cattle; but no man's policy yet has
found how to govern and order man: and Jabal devised by art the musical
consent of harpes and organs, and to produce true unity from variety; but no
man knows or cares how to accord the iarres and discords of reason and
affection in himself: The Artificer by true art has invented all things, both
for necessity and for conuenience, which to find, he has not left so much as
the bowels of the earth, or the bottomes of the sea unsearched; but no man yet
has searched or sees sufficiently into himself; yea look into the schools,
where men should be wiseft. The Logician rifleth into matter, form, efficient,
all the causes, yet lackes true Logique to define himself: the Orator like
Orpheus makes stocks and stones to move, but no man is eloquent enough to
persuade himself to the true obedience and fear of God: The Astronomer by art
has gone about, yea and above the Sun, and the Moon; his speculations are
transcendent to the first and highest moveable, that if ye will believe him,
there is scarce a paper wall betwixt him and the Angels, he knows each star
in his bigness, influence, motion and ecclipses, yet senseless to understand
the the ecclipses of his own understanding, the out-runnings and extrauagancies
of his unruly affections, the short and flying periods of this fugitive and
transitory life. Nay look into the schools of the Divines, and as S. Paul
says, 1. Co. ^.
we have all knowledge; One prieth into, and describes (as he thinks) the
unsearchable mystery of the Trinity, and that with as good warra^r, as the me^
of Bethshemesh, when they looked into the Arc: another as if he had peeped in
at heaven doors, takes upon him to set down the Hierarchy of heaven, with all
the several orders and offices of the Angels, which he tells as distinctly
and soberly, as if he knew what he said: another is much troubled about hell
fire, as whether it be a material torment, or a spiritual torment, in which
doing (as the devils said to Christ) they torment themselves before the time;
and thus we know what God is, and what the Angels are, and we know al things
from heaven to hell, and yet we know not our selves, that we had need of S.
Paul still to ring in our ears, Let a man examine himself, or the text to be
written in great letters before us, Man that is borne of a woman, etc.

In which text it is generally first to be considered, that Job speaks not of
man, as he was in Paradise, the bright image of God, the commander of sea and
land, the wonder of the world: Not as he was when God first made him, the
creatures in their kind obeyed him, yea when sorrow, death and sickness were
afraid to touch him; but Job speaks here of man as lapped up in figtree leaves,
hidden among the bushes, thrown out of Paradise, made a slave to misery and
mortality, a scandal to the Angels, and a pray to the devil: Thus in this
place does Job speak of man.

Again, it is spoken generally, by man understanding all mankind, even so
many as were begot and borne of Adam and Eve; It mattereth not for your life,
how good or evil you be; it mattereth not for your condition, how high or low
you be, nor yet for your estate how rich or poor you be; here is nothing
respected in man, but only that he be man; and then let him be what he
will, even from the King to the beggar, from the Prince to the prisoner, from
him that sits upon a throne, to him that hanges upon a tree, yea from the first
man Adam, to the babe last borne, all is true of him which here is said, Man
borne of a woman, etc. Therefore is any man yet proud of himself? that is,
does any man yet not know himself? then let him come hither, and here he shall
learn. And here he shall learn three points of true humiliation, the first
his lamentable, entrance or coming into the world, Borne of a woman; the next
his swift and speedy passage out of the world, short in continuance: the last
his woeful pilgrimage and miserable endurance in the world, full of trouble.

For the first; it may be said to mankind, as the King said to his evil guest,
Quomodo huc intrasti? How came you in hither, By what means or passage gat you
into the world? you will answer out of the text, Natus de muliere, I was borne
of a woman: Well, be it so, yet have you therein confessed two things against
your self; first that you were borne, and then that you were borne of a woman:
Were you borne? Exore tuo conuincam: You have told a tale against your self;
for whatsoever was borne, had once a beginning, and whatsoever had beginning,
there was once a time wherein it had no being in the world; and what were you,
or where were you, when you had as yet no being in the world? Here is much ado
amongst us about eldership and antiquity, for every man will be like God: Dan.
7. Esa 19. Mat. 3.
Antiquus dierum: The ancient of days; and Pharaoh was the son of ancient
Kings: and the Jews had Abraham to their father, and he is no man now that is
not a kin to so many Kings, and came not in before the Conquest; and he is
much better borne then he; and she is of an elder house then she; O vanity of
vanities; is not this a mere (...), a field picht of frogs and mise, when
vanity has such place in haroldrie, and we which were borne but yesterday, yet
go to law for eldership? The Jews had Abraham, to their father: Abraham was
but late and low, they might have gone far higher, they might have fetched
themselves from Adam, if they would; but yet still remembering, that the beasts
of the field, even horse and hogs were made before their father Adam. And if it
should now be asked of one of us, as sometimes it was of Job, Job 38.
Where wast thou when God laid the foundations of the earth? He would think
himself mocked, because he was not borne as yet: Or if he should be asked
yet lower; Where wast mould thou when Noah and his company were floating in the
Arc? Or if yet lower, where wast thou when God gave the Law to Moses on the
Mount? he would answer straight, Nondum natus, he was not yet borne: yea
examine him yet lower; Where wast thou, when Christ and his twelve Apostles
walked upon the earth? yea ask him but of four score years ago, or but of
threescore and ten, and he (alas) was not yet borne; now sure this is late and
young indeed.

Well, yet at last this Mirror of antiquity is borne; but what has he to
boast of by his birth? You will say, you were borne; I could answer again,
Poteras and non nasci: you might have died unborn, you might have died in the
birth, or you might have died so soon as you were borne: for so says Job in
the pangs of his impatience, Job 3.
Why have thou brought me out of the womb, or wherefore died J not in the
birth? Many are the perils which yet unborn, and in our birth we pass, in
which notwithstanding we are not only helpless, but also senseless of the
per ill; this is all we can do; as he that has passed over a dangerous
bridge, turns back and quakes to look upon the danger; so we when we look
back to our birth, and think on the dangers in it, only we can say with
David, Thou O God (and not our selves) thou art he that took me out of my
mothers womb. Psalm. 22.
When we are borne, what then? we fall, (if not hand hold us) to the feet of
her that bare us, that is, we fall from the womb to the ground, from one
earth to another; So naturally at the first, do we find the way to o r last
home, even as God said to Adam at the first, Out of earth wast thou taken, and
to earth thou shall return. Genesis 3.
And oh that we might see, or could we but remember with what pomp and glory
we are borne into the world, Naked as worms, crawling like snakes, that there
is not amongst the creatures so weak and helpless a creature as man: the
mother (a misery to think) the mother that has newly borne us, lies by us
indeed, but half slain by our birth, and least able to help us; so we are
borne like Benjamin, with hazard of her life that gave us life, and we seem
half murderers so soon as we are borne; when we are taken up, what then? we
fall a crying, as either repenting of our change, or wishing our selves unborn
again; or as if we did foresee the sequel of the text, the troubles which
ensue. In the midst of this our moaning, we are, as Ezechiel speaks, chap.
16. of his prophecy, we are washed, and bathed, and swadled in clouts; No doubt
goodly gallants, and great cause to be proud, if we thought of our selves in
our first pollution; when we are thus swadle and prankt up like puppets, a
dainty lump of living earth: What pleasure feel we? nay what feel we? what
sense or feeling have we, save now and then of weakness and sickness, the
pangs and smart of the parents sin: We are then brought to the mother, to
look upon, and she, as a thief when he is pardoned looks back to the
gallows, or to the halter that had like to hanged him, so looks she on her
son; on her son, as on her death, if God in great mercy had not prevented it:
when the mother has looked and kissed, we are brought to the father too, and to
look upon too; and while the father looks, every one cries out, Behold the
father, look upon the child, see see, and behold, how like they look, while
indeed they look more like then they should, and it were well for the child,
if it were not so father-like, or mother-like as it is: and what get both
father and mother by looking, but to look; as Solomon says of the rich man
and his money, Eccles. 5.
What good comes to the owners thereof, but the beholding of it with their
eyes? So look the careful parents on a woeful child, sometime laughing with
hope of that it may be, sometime distressed with fear of that it may be,
watching in the day, wakeing in the night, sometime merry, sometime sorry,
sometime angry, that it were not possible for them to pass through so much
patience, if God had not infused animpregnable affection of love to overcome
it; thus are we borne in tears and sorrow to our selves, in peril and sorrow
to her that bears us, in nakedness and shame to all that look upon us: here is
nothing yet to boast on.

But is our case amended, or is our birth magnified by her that bare us? Man
that is borne, of what? of a woman, as much as to say, like nest, like bird;
like mother, like child; but why not as well, Man begot of a man, as Man borne
of a woman? perhaps, because the woman is the weaker vessel, and the meaning
chiefly was, to abase man in his own might; or perhaps because sin was first
invested in the woman, and since we stand so much upon our antiquity, we are
only sinners by antiquity, rebels by prescription, and rebellion rooted in our
first blood; sinners by the father, but first by the mother, as by the surer
side; or perhaps it is because sin has more universally prevailed over
women, Eccles. 7.
for Solomon counting a thousand women one by one, by that account to find one
good one, found one good man indeed, but that man was Christ, but not one good
woman among them all. And whether by the woman we understand the first woman,
the mother of mankind, or else the mother of every several man, it comes all
to one end, Job 25.
for how can he be clean (says Bildad) which is borne of a woman? If we
look to Eve, our great grandmother, what have we to plead for her? Adam was
called Pater viuentium, the father of al men living, and Abraham was called
Pater credentium, the father of the faithful, or of all the believing, but Eve
might as well be called Matter peccantium, the mother of all sinners, and what
receive we by right of such a mother, but blushing at her pride, and fear of
her confusion? If we look back to her that last bare us, the rock whereout
we are hewn, oh how little are we amended by her? for Jn iniquity was J
borne (says David) and in sin has my mother conceived me. Psalm. 51.
Sin came from Eve, A long, the date is so old, as we have forgot how we
came by it; but the mother that last bare us, she has stamped it anew with her
own hands, she has powered it out into us more naturally then milk out of
her paps, yea even as a poison new tapt and fresh out of the vessel; so by our
grandmother we have sin translated, and given as at the second hand, but by
our mother we have sin revived and newly incarnate in us; and have we not
great cause then to be proud of her that bare us: every man thinks deeply
what good he has received by his parents, what inheritance, what countenance,
what blood he has by them, yea the very name of our ancestors seems
precious to us, but yet no man considers that all this is poisoned with
sin, and that the whole sum of the good does not counteruaile the least
part of the evil which comes by them. You will say, you were borne of a
woman, but what had you by her? you received life by her; true, a temporal
life, but you received withal the reward of sin, eternal death; and it were
better never to be borne, then to be borne to such a death; you sucked and
received your food from her, so did you your poison too: you received your
wrapping, your clothes, and raiment by her; so did you your nakedness, your
shame, and sin too: sum up your gettings with your loss, and see upon the
account what clearly you have gained: therefore vainly said the Jews, we
have Abraham to our father: and idly say you, you have a princess, a
Countess, or a Lady to your mother: Sons of men in Scripture are never
spoken of but with reproach, The sons of men are vanity, the chief of men are
liers, Psalm. 62. and the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do
evil, Eccles. 8. Thus we glory in our shame; yea if we consider well, what
sinners our parents were, we shall be as much ashamed of them, as Adam and Eve
were a shamed of themselves: we have nothing to boast of, but the grace of
God, By the grace of God (says Saint Paul) J am that J am, 1. Cor. 15. though
otherwise of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, etc Though he
had fought with beasts at Ephesus, and was rapt up into the third heavens, yet
he was nothing of himself, but all by the grace of God: yea as he that finds
a young Serpent, killes it for his very kind, though it have done yet no harm,
so may we fear damnation even by our parents, though we had done yet no
actual sin of our own, even as the sons of the wicked Saul were hanged
for the cruelty of their father upon the Gibeonites, 2. Sam. 21.
albeit they were not guilty of it,

Well, here is our sickness, that we are borne of a woman: what is the
remedy? that we be borne anew by Christ; for as the woman with the bloody
issue, being ill handled by her Physicians, came unto Christ to be physiqued
anew, so we who be ill borne, and base borne at the first, must come unto
Christ to be borne anew. Naturally says Saint John, we are borne of blood,
supernaturally therefore we must be borne of water; ordinarily we are borne
of flesh, extraordinarily therefore we must be borne of the spirit; John 3.
for except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Where by new birth, we must not grossly fancy a retiring
into our mothers womb again, as Nicodemus did: our mothers womb gave the
matter of our first impurity, but we must become new men, Ephesians. 4. that is,
we must have new affections, another spirit, a better will, a loathing of the
world, and a love to God; but this we have only by the work of God, and
nothing at all from our mothers womb.

After our lamentable entrance and coming into the world, the next thing
noted, is our speedy passage and going out, Short in continuance, or as it is
originally, Short in days: In which three words four things are to be
considered; first that the days of our life are short: secondly how they come
to be so short: thirdly, how being short, yet they seem by error to be so
long; and fourthly what use is to be made of the shortness of our days. The
life of man is short, whether by the life of man we mean he life of nature, the
age of every particular man, or whether we mean the life of fame, that life
whereby we live, even when we are dead; or whether else we mean the life of
all mankind, which is the age of the world: If we speak of the life of
nature, it is not here measured out unto us by years, nor by months, nor yet
by weeks or Sabbaths, but only by days, Short in days: lest with the rich
man Luke 12. we take our measure too long, and make account to live out many
years, when the reckoning is, Hac nocte, no longer to live, but to make an end
at night. Every man can tell, how many months go to a year, how many weeks
to a month, and how many days to a week, but no man knows justly, how few
or how many be the dates of his life; My days are but a span (says David) yea
my days are nothing in respect of thee: Psalm. 39.
yet let us go to it by years, and imagine from God a lease of the longest
date, and see how we are deceived in that; Psalm. 90.
The time of our life is threescore years and ten (says Moses) or set it upon
the tenters, and rack it to fourscore, though not one in every fourscore
ariue to that account, yet can we not be said to live so long: for take out
first ten years for infancy and childhood, which Solomon calls the time of
wantonness and vanity, Eccles. 11. wherein we scarce remember what we did, or
whether we lived or no, and how short is it then? Take out of the remainder a
third part for sleep, short in days, says Job, he speaks not of the night,
the time of sleep, wherein not like beasts, but like blocks, we lie
senseless, if not liuelesse, and how short is it then? Take out yet besides
the time of our carking and worldly care, wherein we seem both dead and buried
in the affairs of the world, and how short is it then? And take out yet
besides, which must not have the least allowance, our times of wilful sinning
and rebellion, for while we sin, we live not, but we are dead in sin,
Ephesians. 2.
and what remains of that? yea how short is it then? so short is that life
which nature allows, and yet we sleep away part, and play away part, and the
cares of the world have a great part, and sin the greatest part, that the
true spiritual, and Christian life has a thing of nothing in the end.

If we speak of the life of fame, the Memorial life, whereby even dead men
are said to live, fame has her wings, not only to fly about the world, but
suddenly to vanish and fly clean away: for how many have there been of
wonderful note in their times, yet now not remembered so much as by name? that
no man now can say, here was their trace, here have they trod, or set a foot.
Where are they now that led the world in a string, they at whose beck both men
and beasts, both sea and land did bow? they that subdued kingdom after
kingdom, and set one crown upon another: they that pitched up their Pyramyds
and Images of fame upon the earth, and set up for perpetual memory their
brazen pillars in the sea: they who while they lived were adored as God, and
thought when they were dead, to be Calendred among the Gods, yet time and
envy has eaten out their very names, and where are they now? This is it we
call eternal, and everliving honor, yet how soon does it die, and we are
gone: nay let worldly fame go, and let us be sought but in the mouths and
thoughts of our best, and dearest seeming friends, and (good God) how soon
are we forgotten, when we are once gone, that even they who seemed while we
lived to love and honor us, yet now have buried their love with our bodies:
while you live, oh how wise, how worthy, how wonderful are you! yea it is your
matchless wisdom, your incomparable valor, your equity, piety, and
Princely Majesty, your excellence and immortal honor; but when the Lion once
is dead, then every Hare dare dance upon his carkase, and dogs dare bark, and
Poets then dare rail and rhyme with pen and tongue, and then this immortal
honor dies, and is as mortal as your selves.

But come we to the life of mankind, the age of the world: Indeed of all the
rest, that may seem the longest; but as to the longest day at last comes
night, so is the world bounded within the terms of Creation and dissolution;
it had a beginning, though we began not with it, and it shall have an end,
though we live not to see it; and all time is short, when it comes to his
end. We are borne into the world, as some come to a play, yea rather as many
come to a Sermon, which came not to the beginning, and happily stayed not the
end, yet had it both beginning and end, and so has the world to us: yea the
world it self is but A sea of glass: Revel. 4.
and glass is no metal of long endurance; but a time shall come, when the
Almighty shall but blow upon it, and it shall break in pieces and as Saint Peter
says, it self and all therein shall be consumed with fire 2. Pet.

Now if any man ask the causes of this short life, sure it is that life and
death are in the hands of God, and have their date and destiny set by him, yet
instrumentally this vanity and shortness of our days proceeds from our
selves, our life being not only short in nature, but also shortened by our
selves. Indeed we are not made of the lasting metals, there is found in our
mixture no ingredience of iron, brass, or steel, but we are made of flesh,
which is as grass, and all the glory of it as the flower of grass; so soon
it fades, and we are gone: but as if nature of it self were not frail
enough, we post on to death by disorder of our life; for sometime wrath and
envy fret and gnawes us, that while we seek to kill other men, we kill our
selves: sometime drunkenness and gluttony consume and devour us body and
goods, yea our very meats eat up our strength, as we our selves eat up our
meats; and sometime incontinence and fleshly lusts do wast and rot the bodies
of men, that as Martha said of Lazarus, Lord he stinkes, Ioh. 1 ^.
for he has been four days dead: so it may be said of some, that they
stink and putrify half their days, and yet they live not half their days:
And thus as Babylon made her self a lease of eternity, A Lady sure for ever,
Esa. 47.7. and did eat and drink in the cups of the Temple, and with her
concubines, even to the night of their destruction, Dan. 5.^.30. So do we
glory in vanity, and triumph in intemperance, and do not only suffer mortality,
but also hasten it upon us by our sin.

Now, for the causes of this error: How comes it to pass, that our days being
so short and so few, yet they seem to us to be so many? much like to him who
standing in his gallery, takes a perspectiue glass, and looks down into his
garden, and there sees alleyes and walks, which seem so many miles in length,
as they are scarce discerned at their length, and yet when he comes down to
walk, those many seeming miles make but short turns, and are measured by a
few paces. Sure the causes of this error in the computation of our life are
chiefly two: first for that we never think how the time goes, till we see it
be gone; but as the Sun, though it move most swiftly, yet because we see
not how it moves, it seems to stand still; so our days though they pass
away speedily, yet because we mark them not in the passage, they seem to
continue still: therefore happy is that man which every night can say to
himself, A day is gone, a part is cut off, so much less have I left of a
short and miserable life; we are in the world as Merchants in a ship, who
whether they stand, or sit, or lie, or sleep, yet are carried on by the motion
of the ship; so we, whether we eat or drink, or wake or sleep, yet grow on
in age and wax old before we be aware, and when our time is once gone, then
every man can say to himself, oh how short is this life, how soon is it
gone? and then it is all one to him who has lived out his full fourscore, as
to him who has lived but fourteen; only this is the odds, as Saint Hierome
says, Quod senior peccatis onustior decedat, That the elder man, and the
longer liver has still more sins to answer to God. The other cause of this
error is, for that men consider the time only in it self, and not compared
with eternity, which the devil himself is not so foolish to do, for the
devil knows says Saint John, that he has but a short time, Revel. 12.12.
A strange point of wisdom in the devil, and of folly in us: sixteen
hundred years ago, the devil thought that he had but a short time, and we
think a lease of three lives to be a matter of eternity. Now what is the
reason of this? because we think of no other life, then that which is present,
whereas the devil has an eye to the world to come, the life that shall be, in
respect whereof a thousand years is as nothing, yea what is ten thousand to
eternity? The world passes away says Saint John, and the lusts thereof, 1.
John 2.17. The world it self passes, the very frame of heaven and earth shall
turn to vanity, and therefore the lust of it, that is, whatsoever is desired,
admired, or loved in it, shall pass away with it, and happy is he that has
not perished in these vain desires.

Now as the perfection of wisdom is to draw good out of evil, so shall we
come at last to be immortal, if we can make true use of our mortality. We see
here a short time limited, and yet we have a long way to go, even as far as
it is from earth to heaven, and had we not then need to pray, to have our life
in some measure prolonged? It is an old and a true saying, Vita breuis, ars
longa: we have a short time to live, and a long Art to learn, even the Art of
repentance, and a few days wherein to learn it. The basest Art has full
seven years, the tithe or tenth part of our life allowed to learn it, wherein
the Master takes great pains to teach, the Apprentice takes great pains to
learn, and yet happily after much instructing, often beating, early rising,
and late down lying, he proves a Non proficient too; and are not we ashamed to
think that where seven years are devoted to a mechanical craft or trade, we
of all our life time put together, can scarce account of so many days to
learn Repentance, which is of such necessity, of so much difficulty and so
much better? or do we think repentance to be but the work of an hour,
faith but a fancy, and all religion to be of no art or labor? even Paul
himself who so many years had labored himself to God, yet complains and
cries out, as if he had done nothing, VVretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
and yet we who have done nothing, make our selves secure against sin and
Satan, as if one hour were enough to conquer all: unto this had the righteous
respect, when they complained of the shortness of their lives, and prayed to
have their days prolonged, not for that they feared to die, or loved this
frail life for it self, wherein they saw nothing but misery and vanity, but
because they feared lest death should prevent them before they were prepared,
as thinking all their days too few, to learn repentance in perfection. Unto
this had S. Paul respect, when he exhorted the Corinthians not to drown
themselves too deep in the affairs of this life; this I say, because the time
is short 1. Cor. 7.
that they which have wives be as if they had none, and they which buy as if
they possessed not, and they which use the world, as if they used it not, and
all this he exhorted, because the time is short. It is a wonder to see, how men
plant and build, and buy and sell, as if there were no other life but here. It
is fearful to consider how prodigal men are of the time, and lose these
golden days, which they ought to redeem, while in the mean time heaven flies
away, and hell hastens on them. Sed sicut capillus de capite, sic nec momentum
peribit de tempore, says Bernard, God is so merciful to us, as to keep us to
a hair of our heads, he shall also be so just with us, as to press our
account to a moment of time, misimployed by us.

The last point general of the text is our miserable pilgrimage and endurance
in the world, we come in poorly, we go out quickly, and while we continue,
we continue carefully: it is not short and sweet, neither only short and
swift, but it is short and sharp: Full of trouble. Some translate and carry it
thus, Satur ira, Man short in days, full of wrath or anger, which may be meant
either passiuely, by reason of the wrath of God upon us for our sins: for as
it is Psalm. 90. We are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath we are
troubled: and what are all the plagues of this life, but the execution of Gods
wrath upon us for our sins? or or else it may be understood more actiuely by
reason of the troubles which man himself, being a turbulent creature, moves
in the world, for we rage at God himself, when he does but a little punish
us, we are still at wars and at law one with another, and as Balaams Ass
could tell, the very beasts are not free from our madness and cruelty; and
therefore Tremellius translateth it, Satur commotione, Man borne of a woman,
short in days, and full of commotion, as if all mankind were in a tumult and
up in arms: and so we are indeed, at wars with God, Esa. 9.
and at wars with one another, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim, and both against Judah. We are not quiet in the womb, but as Jacob
and Esau, we spurn and kick at one another: we are not borne into the world,
but with a cry and exclamation, and when we come into it, we stamp and stare
like Furies on the stage, and with the King of Babylon, we make the earth to
tremble, Esa. 14.16. and if there were no outward thing to trouble us, yet we
have a pitched field in our selves, still vexed and pained with our own unruly
passions.

Look into the several sexes of men and women, and see if either of them be
free from trouble. Jn sorrow shall thou bring firth, in subjection shall thou
live, and thy husband shall rude oner thee, says God to the woman; and then he
turns to the man, Because thou have eaten where J forbad thee, Jn sorrow
shall thoa eat thy bread, the earth is accursed, thorns and thistles are
multiplied, etc. He must labor in weariness, both he and she must die at
last, and have their fill of sorrows in the mean time; she to sorrow at home,
and in the house, he to sorrow abroad, and in the furrows of the field; she
to sorrow in bringing forth of children, he to sorrow in bringing up of
children; she to sorrow in her subjection to him, and he to sorrow, yea a
great deal of sorrow, in passing his time with her, that lest they should
lack trouble, they should be a cause of mutual trouble to themselves, and
sorrow in their very comforts, as Lot was plagued in Sodom, which he chose
out for his pleasure.

Again, is there any time or age free from trouble? surely none, for in sorrow
shall thou eat thy bread (says God) All the dates of thy life, Genesis 3.17.
Begin with childhood, and can any misery or trouble be there? yes sure, the
things which are most necessary, are miserable to a child; the mastering and
breaking of his will seems oppression to him, but the shaking of the rod is
flat persecution: light sorrows (you will say) in respect of the greater
troubles which ensue: It is true, they are so; yet a little trouble is great,
where there is neither reason to conceive the necessity, nor patience at all to
bear it. But then comes on youth, headdy, aduenturous, voluptuous, passionate,
and prodigal youth, wherein al our actions and courses, whether good or evil,
yet minister matter of vexation to us; For, labor we? indeed our youth is the
time of our labor; yet our very labors spend up our strength, that had we
not a seventh day to rest from the sorrows of the sixth, we should faint and
die. Again, study we? an easy trade, an idle kind of life: The world says
to us, Exodus 5.
as Pharaoh to the Jsraelites, Ye are too much idle; yet Solomon said, that
Much reading was a weariness to the flesh, Eccles. 12. Again, resist we (as
young men ought to do) our evil lusts and desires? 1. Ioh. 2.14. Oh how sweet
are the lusts of youth? how strong are the temptations, and what a pain it is
to resist the things which are pleasing to us? But play we, or follow we our
pleasures? indeed that is the natural trade of youth, as Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice
O young man in thy youth, etc. yet are we no way more vexed and plagued then
by our pleasures: for as a thief robbes in fear, and an adulterer (though the
doors be fast locked) yet is afraid still; so is there a check of conscience
which bites the most riotous in the midst of their riot. Again, if our
pleasure be in prodigality, our end must be beggary, that sin being
peculiarely a scourge to it self; and many times before the Prodigal can
spend up all, the prison, the press, or the halter do spend up him, and
miserable is the end of a voluptuous life at last; which made Solomon to say, J
have said of laughter, thou art mad, and of joy, that is, of wanton joy, Oh
what is it that thou do, Eccles. 2.

But live we to be aged? then live we to be diseased, the^ live we to be
despised, the^ live we to blindness, lamenes, deafnes, to palsies, aches, agues,
all that ever Christ came to cure; we are never thoroughly troubled till then.
The fore part of our life had yet some show of pleasure, but these are (says
Solomon) the evil days, the dates wherein thou shall say, J have no pleasure
in them. Eccles. 12. These are the days wherein Barzillai eats, and knows not
what he eats; his taste is gone: these are the days wherein old Jsaac gropes
and feels who art thou? come near me, let me feel thee: his sight is gone:
these are the days wherein Jacob halts and limps, and must have a staff to
lean on; his strength is gone; and David must have Abishag to warm his blood,
and to cherish him, because his natural heat is gone; so as now we are not
only miserable men, but we are scarce men, for we have (like images) eyes
and see not, ears and hear not, we have hands and feel not, feet and go
not, and scarce make we any sound in our throats; that it may truly be said
of us, that in our youth we sin, but in age we receive the punishment of our
sin, and the nearer our end, the more is still our trouble and misery.

But look again; Is there any state or condition free from trouble? surely
none; for is a man poor, God send him patience, he shall never need to pray
for trouble to exercise it; he shall have trouble enough; hunger, cold, and
nakedness in his body, and in his mind such discontent, as few of that
condition have wisdom to moderate: he sees himself forsaken of his
friends, scorned of his enemies, and neglected of all: he railes on him that
gives him not, he grudgeth and enuieth at him which has to give him, yea and
he is angry even at God himself, because he did not equally divide the things
of the world. But is any man rich? rich men have sure no trouble at all; yes
they have labor and trouble to get, and care and trouble to keep, and fear
and trouble to lose; which S. Gregory well describes, Sipotentiorem videt timet
raptorem; si inferiorem, suspicatur furem, etc. If he see a mightier man then
himself, he thinks he comes to oppress him; if he spy a poorer man, he is
presently in doubt that he comes to steal from him; and every little noise is
the breaking of his doors, every mouse is a man, every man is a thief, and
every thief points at him, Et tanta patitur infoelix quanta patit timet; It
comes with a fear, he dreams it, and he feels it; besides, he often times
gets it sinfully, and spendes it sinfully, and sometimes keeps it sinfully,
that Christ says such men can hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven:
besides, whereas there is almost no sin, but a man has some pleasure in the
execution of it; for stolen bread is sweet to the thief, and stolen waters are
pleasant to the adulterer: Prou. 9.17
many rich men are miserable not only in the getting, but even in the abundance
of their riches; for though they have much, yet they cannot find in their
hearts to use it, but as Solomon says, they defraud their souls of pleasure,
Eccles. 4.8. for they neither fare daintily, nor are clothed softly, but live
and die and do all things miserably, and yet go to the devil when they have
done.

Again, if a man live in the state of a servant, that state is his trouble;
for if thou may be free (says S. Paul) use it rather, Exodus 20.
1. Cor. 7.21. God in the law did yoke and put close together, His man
servant, and his maid servant, his ox, and his ass: as if a servant for his
stripes and labor were next in degree to an ox and an ass; yea and the more
faithful and the better a servant is, the worse many times he fares, for even
his virtue, which should be a crown of reward unto him, it proves but a
chain of bondage, more inseparably to fetter him to his master; so as that
which was first but observed in the Court, is now an observation even in the
country too, Fidelis seruus perpetuus asinus, that a faithful servant is an
everlasting ass. Yea and though a man live in state of a master, yet he has
Miseriam in imperio, he has command, and authority, and sovereignty, and
trouble enough too; for if he be meek and gentle, familiarity breeds him
contempt, and he is despised; but if he be strict and severe, he is hated: and
as the master enricheth himself by the bondage of his servant; so the servant
sometime pays himself with the goods of his master.

But we have clean forgot one thing, and what is that? 2. Sam. 15.
Oh (says Absolon) that J were King in the land: and what of that? why,
wheresoever a King is, there is peace, and ease, and honor, there is no
trouble there. A King wears a Crown; a Crown is set with pearls, and
pearls are exceeding precious: A King has a Scepter which commands all; and
is commanded by none: A King has a royal Throne, he may sit when other men
stand, and if sitting be not ease enough, he may lean, or lie down to
sleep, where other wake; he may eat and drink, and dice and card, and worse
then all that, and yet when he has done his worst, it is well done, and who
dare say, why have thou done it? Such is the error of men, to impute least
trouble there, where God has placed most. But is not for Kings O Lemuel, Prou.
31.
it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, Yea rather
the vine must leave his wine, the Olive his fatness, and the figtree his
sweetness, if they went to advance themselves above the trees, Judge. 9. and
why is it, that none of these said unto the trees, Come, make me king, but the
trees went a begging to them and said, Come and be thou King over us? but to
show that if men respected only quietness and worldly ease, a kingdom were not
worth the asking. Valerius reports of a heathen King, who when the Crown was
offered him, stood first and looked upon it, and talked to it, before he would
accept and take it, Oh if men knew the misery that comes with thee, there is no
man would stoop to the ground to take thee up. For Ex quo regnare cepi,
nunquam pauere destiti, says the Tragical King, he was ever in fear, and
never at rest, since first he took the regiment upon him. For when a King
looks up to God, he thinks first of the account which he must make to him,
because all the sins of the people lie upon the King, Rex non modo peccat,
sed and peccare facit, a King does not only sin himself, but also makes the
people to sin, either by sufferance, as Aaron did, or by example, as Solomon
did, or by tyrannous compulsion, as Jeroboam did, of whom it is said seventeen
times in the books of the Kings, that he sinned and made Jsrael to sin: and
how then? why then, as when the people first began the making of the golden
Calfe, yet Aaron was first called in question about it, Exodus 32.21. Why have
thou brought so great a sin upon the people? so Kings and Princes must
account to God, not only for their own sins, but also for the sins of the
people: and were there no other trouble then this, yet this very point of
accounting to God is a troublesome and fearful thing to think of.

Besides, what art and great labor have Kings in the very act of government:
It is an art of all arts (says Gregory Nazianzen) to govern man, who is so
wild a beast, and untamed of himself. Exodus 18.
Moses sat from morning to evening, to hear and determine causes, that Jethro
pitied much to see him so weary and so tired: and it was truly said of
Maximinus, one of the Roman Emperors, Quo mayor fuero, eo magis laborabo: The
greater I am the greater labors, I see, will still befall and lie upon me; and
the Lion, which is king of the beasts, is said to sleep with his eyes open, to
show that it is no sleepie life to be a king. Besides, what perturbations of
fear are in the minds of Kings, more then of other men, who may fear every
cup, and every bit, and every gift; who fear their enemies, and fear their
friends, because they know not their enemies from their friends; for neither
the habit, be it never so religious, nor behavior of men, be it never so
humble, can promise security to Princes, witness the last but one of France,
Henry 3.
slain by a Friar Iacobine, even crouching and kneeling on his knee: yea, are
not Kings more subject to violent death then the common sort of men? Of the
Kings of Judah, from Rehoboam down to Zedekiah, there were in number twenty,
and six of them, that is, almost a third part slain. Again, of the Kings of
Israel, from Jeroboam down to Oshea, there were also in number twenty, and
ten of them, that is, a just half slain: Yea look into our own stories,
and our English Chronicles are all bloody; from the Conquest downward (which
is better known) of three and twenty deceased Princes, eight, that is, more
then a third part slain, besides the Tragical reports of France and other
countries. Now sure it were a most fearful thing amongst the common sort of
men, if one in every three were subject to violent death. And whether shall a
man turn, but the higher, still the more troublesome. and more unfortunate. Oh
therefore value nothing too high which death does abolish: dote not too much on
death, and troubles, and golden misery. Let not men set their hearts on that
which cannot profit them; or if it please a little, yet it will not long stand
by them. If here we seek for peace, it will be answered, as the Angels said of
Christ, Resurrexit, non est hic. Indeed it is often promised here, the world
and the flesh make promise of it, and we like false Prophets cry Peace, peace,
and promise it to our selves, but the true peace is gone up with Christ, and is
not here: Mat. 28.
and Saint John was commanded to write it for assurance, Written from hence
forth blessed are the dead, for they rest from their labors, Revel. 14.13.
they rest hence forth, but they rest not here; and therefore since we have no
rest, but sorrows, and wars, and troubles here, let us not seek our rest
here, lest if we spend our time in seeking where it is not, we fail to find
it where it is. God of his mercy draw our minds from the deceit of this vain,
miserable, and sinful world, and lift up both our hearts unto the hope, and
our endeauours unto the pursuit of eternity, even for Jesus Christ his sake: To
whom with the father, etc.

THE KINGS HIGH WAY TO Immortality.
A SERMON PREACHED this present year, Ann. Do. 1614. Ian. 16.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince CHARLES, at his house and Chapel of S. James.
PRO. 4.3.4. For I was my fathers son,
Tender and dear in the sight of my mother.
When he taught me, and said unto me,
Let thy heart hold fast my words,
Keep my Commandments, and live.

MOst renowned and excellent; But that sorrows make short times seem long, it
is not long, since at unawares, and not knowing what I did, I made unto your
deceased and now immortal brother a Sermon of Mortality or of death: It is now
fallen out by Gods providence, and which (God himself being witness) I did
not think of, when I chose the text, that I must make unto your Highness a
Sermon of life: but as I had then no special illumination or prophecy, that
death was so near to him, so have I now no absolute promise of life to you,
but upon the conditions here annexed, Let thy heart hold fast my words, Keep
my Commandments, and thou shall lieu, which are the words of David, the speech
of a King, and therefore of weight and moment; and it is a speech made to
Solomon, the son of a King, and therefore pertinent; and it is a speech taken
from the mouth of the King the father, by the pen of the King his son, and
therefore not lost, or let fall to the ground, (as good counsel often times is)
but recorded as a thing for ever permanent. And we may distinguish in it two
things, which divide it into two parts; for first Solomon shows, what tender
love his parents bare unto him, He was his fathers son, Tender and dear in the
sight of his mother, and then he shows next by what testimony they
expressed their love unto him, They taught him and said unto him, Let thy heart
hold fast, etc.

For the first, that Solomon was to his father thus, and to his mother thus and
thus, it is a tale undoubtedly true; but how agrees it with Salomons wisdom
to tell it? They say, a chief point of wisdom is to keep counsel,
especialiy to conceal the secrets of a King, but most especially to keep
secret what Kings and Queens do in their chambers, and among their children.
It may be that David loved Solomon exceeding much, how then? It may be
likewise that his mother loved him exceedingly more; and what of that? perhaps
when he was swadled in clouts, and lapt up in a mantle, she might take him in
her arms, and talk like a mother to him; perhaps when he was able to go upon
his feet, yet she might set him on her knee and dance him, yea and it may be
too, that when he was able to dance and leap about him self, yet she, as her
own pretty, apt, and active child, might take him to her, and kiss him; and
what of all this? was there no other way, but to take a pen and write a book
of these things? To which I answer with the Apostle generally, that whatsoever
things are written, they are written for our instruction, Romans 15.4. And that
as the things which the holy Ghost has concealed, are therefore not fit to be
known; so the most secret things (as the drunkenness, yea the nakedness of
Noah) when they any way make for public edification, they are justly published,
and needfully made known.

The occasion of this report, I take to be thus: Solomon would persuade
children, or young men to learn, what is the true wisdom or understanding;
for so it appears, verse. 1. of the chapter: Hear O ye children the
instruction of a father, and give ear to learn understanding. And to persuade
that, he brings in himself for an instance, For J was my fathers son, etc.
As much as to say, Thus was I taught, thus did I learn when I was a child; the
tenderness of my years did not excuse me, neither the love of my parents, nor
yet my royal birth did privilege me to neglect these things; therefore Hear
ye children also, and give ear to learn understanding: That other men's
children should learn by example of the Kings: the consequence is very
reasonable: If the Kings son did learn and study these things, then much
more the sons of meaner men; but the Antecedent, that the Kings son did
learn these things, it is the very point of the text, and it is a point of
Princely consideration. The strength of the reason lies in Salomons own
person, For J was; Hear ye, and learn ye, For J was thus, and yet learned
thus. Solomon here speaks like a King, and teaches Kings likewise how to
speak: that is, if they will persuade the people any thing, to show the
experience of it first in themselves; or if they will command the people any
thing, to show the same thing first done by themselves, For J was thus, and yet
learned thus, that is to say, he lays no other burden on the people, then
he had first borne himself. Kings and Priests in a common sense are both said
to be shepherds, but the good shepherd goes before (says Christ) and then
the sheep follow after, John 10. It is said in the praise of Moses, that he
was a man mighty both in word and deed, Acts 7. Mighty in word, as many
governors are, to command strongly, but mighty also in deed to do it
accordingly. Tully reports of Julius Caesar, that he was never heard saying to
his soldiers, Jteilluc, Go ye thither, as if they should go forth upon
service and he to tarry behind in his tent, but Venite huc, Come ye hither,
as if he had said, Come on my hearts, let us give the adventure, and adventure
our selves together, for Participatus cum duce labor persuadetur militibus
minor, it shall be an easy thing for the common soldiers to follow, when
they see the Captain go before; but if a Magistrate shall exact of the people
one thing, and do himself another, they will say he is like a water-man which
rows one way, and looks another. Philip King of Macedon was very curious and
inquisitiue about the agreement of the Grecians among themselves, and yet
living in an horible division with his own wife: such a man, though never so
high, yet is looked at, like one upon a stage; yea how can a King or Magistrate
punish sin in another man, when he is noted to be guilty, yea and notorious in
the same sin himself? Alexander the great conqueror took one Dyonides a
Pyrate upon the sea, and asked of him, Quid sibi videretur, vt mare infestum
faceret, what he meant in that manner to trouble the sea? the Pyrate answers
him boldly and truly again, yea rather, what mean you thus to trouble the
whole world? but because I rob and steal in a poor pinnace, which you do
in a great and royal Navy, I go for a Pyrate, and you go for an Emperor:
and when it is thus with the Magistrates in a kingdom, though no man dare
speak, yet every man will mutter, and Socrates will laugh, Quia video magnes
latrones ducentes paruum latronem ad suspendium, because he saw the great
thieves leading the little thieves to hanging. And so much for the personal
point, For J was.

Well, what was he? J was my fathers son, Tender and dear in the sight of my
mother: that is to say, he was his fathers, and he was his mothers, begotten of
the one, and born of the other; and as the male and female of the doves do
hatch and feed their young by course, even so was he divided to them both.
But first, Altera pars patri, one piece goes to the father; He was his fathers
son: his fathers son? that must needs be true in reason, and yet it seems
triuial to write, for every child in Logique knows the Relative predication,
Filius est patris filius, and how can a man but be his fathers son? yet the
Scripture uses this phrase of speech, either when the child does much resemble
the father, as Ezech. 16. Thou art thy mothers daughter, that is, like mother,
like daughter, an ill whelpe of an ill store; and in that sense Christ denies
the jews to be the sons, because they did not the works of Abraham, Ioh.
8.39. Or else the son is said to be the fathers, when he is so respected, and
so accounted of the father, and that is the meaning or Solomon here, J was my
fathers son, that is, my father begat me, and owned me, and loved me, and
saw himself in me. It is said of the Ostrich, that she is cruel to her young,
as if the were not hers, Job 39. Such an Ostrich was Athaliah, 2. King. 11.
that caught up her grandchildren, and killed them as she caught them, as if
they had not been the sons of her son. And Augustus Caesar said of Herod,
that he had rather be Herod's swine, then his son, for that being in part a
lew, he forbear to kill swine, and yet upon a bare conceit he killed two of
his own sons: But Solomon was his fathers son, and David was to Solomon a
kind and loving father, and yet not taxed here with indulgence neither; nor
do we any where teach, that natural love is a sin, or that religion does
forbid it, but only bridle and govern it: yea it came first from the Trinity,
and with a voice from heaven, for the father to love his son, This is my
beloved son, says God the father of Christ his son, Mat. 3. And the best
men were thus affected to their sons. Take now thy son, thy son whom thou
love, says God to Abraham, Genesis 22. And so were the worst men affected to
their sons, for even they which were evil, yet gave good gifts unto their
children, Mat. 7. Yea the cruel beasts do love their own, The Dragons draw
out their breasts and give suck to their young, Lament. 4. and 2. Tim. 3. It
is reckoned for one of the signs of the latter day, that men shall be without
natural affection. Now the reason why men do naturally love their children, is
not, because they be witty, or fair, or forward, (though these things may
increase their love) but because they be theirs. The reason why good men love
their children is, not only because they be theirs, but because (as they
think) they be heirs begotten unto God. But the reasons why Kings do love
their children are many more, and more peculiar. First because they see all the
people love them, which Saul saw in Jonathan, when they reskewed him out of his
fathers hands, and delivered him from death, 1. Sam. 14. Secondly, because the
royal seed and name is preserved in them, which was promised to David in this
Solomon, 2. Sam. 7. Thirdly, because Kings of all men being subject to plots
and practices while they live, and also to ill fame and censure when they are
gone: their sons stand up, not only as heirs to inherit their crowns and
kingdoms, but as Champions to maintain their honors, and to avenge their
quarrels, whereof the former was performed by Jotham the son of Gideon: Judge.
9.17. The latter by Amaziah the son of Joash, 2. King. 14.5. Fourthly, the
King loves his son the more for a divine mystery hi him; for as Kings
themselves are Gods, so is the son of the King as the son of God: God
rules he world by Christ his son. John 3.35. So did David yet living set
Solomon upon his own Mule, yea upon his own Throne, 1. Kin. 1. God
pronounces his son the only mediator to himself, 1. Tim. 2.5. He in whom
he is well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. So did David work himself peace with Saul a
while, by the mediation of Jonathan his son. 1. Sam. 19. 6. and as the son of
God is the wisdom of the father, 1. Cor. 1.24. So says Solomon here, that
his father taught him, that is, put wisdom to him, and he did not only teach
him, but also prayed for him in that behalf, Give thy judgments to the king,
O God, and thy righteousness to the kings son, Psalm. 72. and thus was Solomon
his fathers son.

But to his mother, what? Tender and dear, or as some translate it, Tender and
only in the sight of his mother. To his father a son, barely and without
addition, His fathers son, but to his mother her tender son, her dear, her
only son: So the father sets down the Substantive, but Tender and only,
the Adjectives or Epithetes come from the mother: and why so? because Solomon
should show that his father loved him, but his mother loved him more; even as
commonly we say, that men abound in reason, but women in affection: Thy love
to me was wonderful, passing the love of women: said David to Jonathan, 2.
Sam. 1. A wonderful love, (no doubt) which passes the love of women. Or else
Solomon would show, that his fathers love was in discretion hid, as in the text
it is but understood; but his mothers love was Tender, and dear, and only,
flaming out like fire, which has no power to hide it self: for Can a mother
forget her child (says Esaias) yea can a mother hide her affection from her
child? yes, just as Salomons mother hides hers; What my son, and what the
son of my womb, and what O son of my desires, Prou. 31. See, how she hides
her love, Her son, and the son of her womb, and the son of her desires,
as if she had said, O thou my son, whom once I bare in my womb, and whom I
ever bear in my heart, borne of my body by course of nature, but still unborn
by strength of love, the father says, Son, thou art ever with me, Luke 15.
The mother says Son, thou art ever within me; and so is it here, Tender and
only in the sight of his mother. Tender in respect of his age, as Chron. 1.29.
Salomen my son, young and tender, but more in respect of her affection, as
mothers are ever tender, that is, fearful and careful of their children.
Samuel was not in his mothers keeping, but in the custody of the high Priest,
much better sure then in his mothers keeping: yet see how mothers nature
works; for though he wanted neither meat nor clothes, yet she makes him,
and brings him every year a little coat, 1. Sam. 2.19. lest too much wind
should blow upon him: and when the Shunamites son was sick, she set him on
her knees till he died, 2. King. 4.20. but when Jeroboams son was sick, the
Queen her self runs out to the Prophet for him, 1. King. 14.4. Again,
Solomon was his mothers Only son: not only begotten, for she had three
sons, beside, 1. Chron. 3.5. but only beloved: or if not the only beloved,
yet the only beloved in that degree; for though she loved them all well, yet
she wished and procured the kingdom to him; and when she heard that Adonijah
was usurping it, she steps in to David, 1. King. 1.
and makes sure work for him. And all this Jn her sight, or before her. Tender
and only in her sight: for Vbi amor, ibi oculus, Love is ever looking, Samuels
mother went up every year to Shiloh, 1. Sam. 2. Yea true, she did so, but
that was to offer sacrifice, yea and withal to sacrifice a little to her eyes,
that is, to see Samuel too: for if the son be but a little missing, or out of
sight, Siseraes mother looks, and looks out at a window, and why tarry the
wheels of his Chariots, and why is his Chariot so long a coming? Iud. 5. But
if the son be dead or gone, A voice is heard in Ramah, Rachel weeping for her
children, and will not be comforted, Ier. 31. Now Lord that we were but half
so tender of our souls, as our mothers are of our bodies. But Salomons mother
was tender of his soul too; for she was a Prophet to teach him, for so is the
chapter 31. styled, The prophecy which his mother taught him. She tells him
what a King should do, To judge righteously, to judge the afflicted and the
poor: and she tells him what a King should not do, Not give his strength to
women, not give himself to wine: even as Monica the mother of Austin, Toties
parturiens filios, etc. So often as she saw her son to do amiss, so often she was
in pains of travel with them. And thus to love, is the tender, dear, and
only love.

But this appears better in the next part of the text. He taught me and said
unto me, etc. Which follows out of the former, not (as often in this book of
Proverbs) after a loose and independent manner, but it follows with a special
force, as if he had said, Though I was my fathers son, tender and dear unto
my mother, yet they did not coker me, but taught me, and said unto me. There
is a love in parents, a doting love which teaches nothing; and there is a
government in parents which looseneth all the raines, and suffers to riot,
and for bids nothing; and there is a pity in parents, a foolish pity,
which pardons all, and punishes nothing, till God come with the sword, as
he did to the sons of Eli, and kill where the father leaves uncorrected: a
strange love in parents, to kill their children with too much kindness: but
Salomons father loved him, and to prove his love, he taught him, as thinking
him much better unborn then untaught. If it be demanded here, how David
taught his son, the text it self shows, that sometime he spoke unto him
himself, He taught me and said unto me: he taught him by word of mouth, as
the Eagle teaches her young to fly, Deuteronomy. 32.10.11. And as Plutarch says,
the Nightingale teaches her young to sing: and God knew that Abraham would
teach his sons, Genes.18. And careful parents are ever whetting the law upon
their children. Beside, it is also like that David taught him by an instructor,
by Abiathar, by Zadok, by Nathan, or some other; and it is a chief prerogative
of Kings, that they may choose their Tutors and instructours throughout their
kingdoms. The father of the great Alexander professed, that he was not more
glad, that he had a son, then that he had such a schoolmaster, as Aristotle,
to teach him. And Alexander himself confessed, that he had his natural life
from his father; but to live well and virtuously, he had it from his master
And it is strange to tell, what honor Theodosius the Emperor gave to Arsenius
his sons schoolmaster: And thus did David teach.

And consider on the passive part, that as none is so careful to teach the
son, as the father, so has none of the sons so much need of teaching, as
he who succecdeth in the kingdom of the father: Be wise ye Kings (says
David) and be learnedye that be Judges of the earth, Psalm. 2. It is true that
Kings are Gods anointed, yet not anointed only with oil, but with special
graces; but what grace before wisdom and learning, which leads the way to all
other grace, as Kings are leaders to all other men. Let the Lord appoint a man
over the congregation, who may lead them out and in (says Moses) Numb. 27.
But it was never intended by God, that they should be blind and ignorant
themselves, who were appointed as leaders and lights to other men. And what was
Solomon admired for, but chiefly for his learning, and for his wisdom? The
Queen of Sheba came of purpose to hear and prove his wisdom. And 1. King.
4.34. There came of all people to hear his wisdom: as commonly when the
people enquire after the King, they do not listen so much whether he be
rich, for they think he may be too rich, as Julian the Emperor said, that a
covetous king was like the Splen in a man's body, which when it swells and
grows great, all the rest of the members are in a consumption by it. Nor do
they listen so much if he be a man of war; they like it well, that he be
martially minded, and ready to encounter when the enemy gives cause; but they
like it not, that he have Animum auersum a pace* A mind hating peace, or
delighting in war; Psalm ^8 30
yea cursed are the people which delight in war, says David himself, even
one of the greatest soldiers that ever was in the world: but the chief thing
enquired of the subjects is, if the King be learned or wise, for then they
know that he will carry himself and the state well: in war, in peace, in
want, in abundance, in all conditions safely and well.

And that Solomon was thus wise, it was not only his fathers teaching, for men
can but plant and water, but first he had helps from nature, which had
exceedingly fitted him: besides, he was studious and industrious of himself:
for as it is Eccles. 1. He gave his heart to search out wisdom: and which is
more then all humane helps, when God appeared unto him, and gave him leave to
ask what he would, 1. King. 3.
he asked not riches, long life, nor honor, but he asked wisdom, and God
gave it him in great abundance; for he was seen in all wisdom, yea he had
considered all the works that were done under the sun, Eccles. 1. even as
Moses the governor of Israel was seen in all he wisdom of the Egyptians:
Act. 7.
He spoke three thousand Sentences or Proverbs; his Ethikes or moral
Philosophy: he wrote Songs, Psalms, or Poems; a Poet among other learning: He
spoke of trees and plants even from the Cedar to the Hysop; his Physiques or
natural Phylosophie; yea he spoke even of the beasts and creeping things; A
wonder to see a King come from his Throne, an Iuorie Throne, ouerlaid with
gold, mounted upon steps for Majesty, and every step with Lions on each side, a
wonder (I say) to see a King to come from thence, to look into the bowels and
veins of a beast, yea of a vermin, the lowest steps of natural learning:
what thought he of learning which sought it thus? And therefore they are
deceived which think, learning to be but a mere ornament to a King: It is
true, there is faculty of ornament, as playing, singing, dancing; for as this
learned Solomon says, There is a time to dance, Eccles 3. and there is faculty
of good use, as tilting, running, riding, promised to the Kings of Judah,
Ierem. 22. If ye do these things, ye shall ride upon Chariots and horses: but
learning and wisdom are essential to government: he was no mere scholar, nor
vulgar man, but he was a King which said it, that Rex illiteratus est asinus
coronatus; Henry 1. King of England.
that a King without learning was an ass with a Crown; for to what end sits
he upon the judgment seat, which when he comes there, may sit, and see, and
hear, but has no wit to judge? This Solomon himself sat in judgment upon
the two harlots. 1. King. 3. and gave such a sentence, as all the kingdom
applauded to hear it: besides, for knowledge of religion, he was Ecclesiastes,
a professed Preacher, as Eccl. 1. J the Preacher have bin King over Jsrael,
etc. and that knowledge is also needful for a King: for if a schism or
schismatic fellow arise in the Church, he is a kind of persecutor, that
only punishes him, it is more kind and kingly, first, by learning to
control him. Constantine sat often himself in judgment, and gave sentence in
causes Ecclesiastical, especially in the faction and quarrels of the Donatists.
And I could speak of a King now upon the stage, which speaks, and disputes, and
writes, that Rome it self is enraged to read it: for the Roman Clergy do
with their kings, as the late Queen mother of France did with Henry 3. her
unlucky son; she bids him play, and follow his pleasure, and not trouble
himself with the stirs in the Church, that she and her Holy league in the
mean time might set both Church and kingdom on fire. In like manner do they
mufle their kings in blindness, and suffer them not to look into the causes
of religion, that themselves in the mean time might frame a religion to their
own lust: But when God laid it upon the King, that he should write himself
the copy of the Law in a book, that it should be with him, and that he
should read in it all the days of his life, Deuteronomy 17.18.19. his meaning was
sure, that Kings should be understanding men, able to judge and discern of
the law themselves, and not altogether to go on trust for their religion.

It follows in the text. Let thy heart holdfast my words, keep my
Commandments and thou shall live: whereby it appears that David did not only
teach his son, but also catechize him, and teach him religion; for he taught
him to hold fast his words, and his words were the words of life. Just as Deuteronomy.
8. the Commandments which if a man do, he shall live in them: and there is no
learning but religion which brings eternal life. And David does here two
things; first he gives his son a charge, that he do thus and thus; and
then if he do these things, he makes him a promise, that he shall live. He
charge him most strongly, for first he speaks to his hear tor inward man,
Let thy heart hold fast, etc. and then he frames his conversation or outward
man, that he keep his Commandments. The matter which he commits to him is
Words, and words howsoever they are but wind in the ears of the scorners,
yet the words of the wise are like goades and like nails, Eccles. 12. like
goades to prick forward, and like nails to hold fast. And Christ says, Ioh.
6. The words which J speak are spirit and life. And Ioh. 12. The word which J
have spoken shall judge you at the last. Again he is commanded, not to
attain them, for that he did by his fathers teaching, but when he was taught
to retain, or hold them fast; and all this said to his heart, Let thy heart
hold fast, etc. For though it be said universally to all, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6. yet it belongs especially to
Kings; and God upon this very occasion of anointing David to the kingome,
said, The Lord respects the heart, 1. Sam. 16. So David's own heart made him
fit for a kingdom; and therefore now he calls for the heart of his son,
whom he knew God had destinate to be King. Let thy heart hold fast, etc.

Now of an instructed heart there be three testimonies: First, sincerity, that
what a man see me to do, he do it indeed and truly, against the fashion of
hypocrites: Secondly zeal, that what he does, he do it fervently, against the
fashion of cold professors: and thirdly perseverance, that what he begin to
do, he do it to the end and constantly, against the custom of backsliders.
The first thing is sincerity, which still draws in the heart; as Saint Paul
said of servants, Not with eye scruice, but as the servants of Christ from the
heart, Ephesians. 6. David does not teach his son, as Machiauell taught Kings:
Regi ante omnia optandum, vt pius videatur, etiamsino^sit: that a king above
all things must seem religious, though indeed he be not: even as Saul which
set up an altar, consulted with the Priests, offered sacrifice, killed the
enemies of God, and at every word had God in his mouth, when all was but a
flash: But Ablolon was more devout then he, for he must go to Hebron, and
there pay his vows, and offer peace offerings to God, for bringing him back
to Jerusalem, and reconciling him to his father again; a mere Machiauellian
practice; for at the very same time he plotted how to win the peoples hearts,
and to depose his father* 2. Sam. 15. But Herod more devout then he: Go,
search for the the babe, and when ye have found him, bring me word again,
that J also may come and worship him, Matthew. 2.8. May come and worship him,
when he went to destroy him: Monster of mankind: did Adoro signify to kill;
or Occido to worship? Is it not enough to murder, and do mischief, but to
make religion the cloak? And thus did Julian the Apostata, though he hated the
Christians, and their religion deadly, yet he comes at times into their
Churches, and falls down on his knees, and prays devoutly with them, but all
for a further purpose. But as it never goes well with the government, where the
governors are mere Politicians: so is it worst with themselves; for where God
has lift up to the highest, he looks for the best, and if men serve him
only with a hood, where he requires the heart, is not this to mock God; but
God is not mocked, witness that Saul, and Absolon, Herod, and Julian, whom we
named before. Again, the heart imports a zeal to that we are taught, as
Ierem. 20.9. His word was in my heart like a burning fire. And as a man cannot
sit still which carries fire in his bosom, so he which is inwardly taught, is
inwardly touched, and cannot keep silence, nor cannot forbear, but is driven
with a spirit, and marches like Jehu the son of Nimshi, suriously: And it
was spoken of that Jehu kingly, 2 King. 9.
if it had been spoken perfectly, Come, see the zeal that J have for the Lord
of hosts, 2. King. 10. For he put down the idolatrous king; he killed his
mother, he killed his children, his kin dred, confederates, and familiars; and
when he had trained the Priests of Baal into the temple of Baal, he burnt up
temple, Priests, and Idol, and made one bonefire of them all. Not like
Rehoboam which suffered sin to grow, even to the male stews in Judah, 1.
King. 14.24. and made the holy land like Sodom: Nor like King Ahab, which
suffered the enemy of God to escape out of his hands, and showed him mercy,
even to his own confusion, 1. King. 20. Judah the kingly tribe had his
blessing from Jacob, to be like a Lion, Genesis 49.9. Not like a sheep, to walk
up and down in a warm fleece, and eat, and drink, and sleep, and sit, and
see, and do nothing; but like a Lion, and like a Lions whelpe, which carries
fire in his heart, and a flame in his eyes, and a scepter in one hand, and a
sword in another, to forbid sin, and to punish sin, and to punish it in the
proudest: and he that does not thus, he is like the Church at Laodicea, Revel.
3. Neither hot, nor cold, and the Lord shall spew him out of his mouth. The
third testimony of the heart is Perseverance, to begin well, and to continue in
it; for what a man does from the heart, he is never weary of doing it, but
goes on with Saint Paul, Through honor and dishonor, through good report and
ill report, etc. Yea with Christ, through anguish of mind, and tortures of
body, through spitting, whipping, scoffing, and says not Consummatumest, till
he bow his head, and give up the Ghost. Saint Paul said to al men, It is good
to love earnestly in a good thing, Gal. 4.
but especially should such a man as Nehemtah fly? Neh. 6.11. No says King
David, J have not swarued from thy law, Psalm. 119. He had not yet; no nor ever
meant to swerve hereafter, but J will praise the Lord, while J have any being,
Psalm. 146. It is no wonder to see the continual waxing and waining of the
Moon, nor yet the ebbes and flowings of the sea; but it is wonderful to see
how men, made in the image of the unchangeable God, yet change with the times,
that where we see the best beginnings and hope of goodness, yet no man can tell
what the end will be. King Joash at seven years old did what was good in the
sight of the Lord: 1. King. 12.
but at forty years old, he did what was hateful to God and man. And it is
said of Nero, in the beginning of his reign, that he was so soft and tender
hearted, as when he should set his hand to sign bills and sentences of
death, he wished to God he had not so much learning, as to write his name: but
he fell from that apace; for afterward he killed men, as men kill dogs in a
plague; he killed men for sport, as children kill frogs and flies; yea he
killed without cause or color his familiar friends, his master, and his own
mother. But let this Solomon (whose heart is here stirred up to hold fast) let
him be to all men a fearful pattern of Apostasy or back sliding: but as
himself let slip what he was commanded to hold, so God sent him a fool to
his son, by whom he lost, what he desired to hold; the kingdom being brought
from twelve tribes to two.

Now the reasons why men are thus weak in their retentiue faculties, that they
cannot hold fast, they are in the parable of the sower revealed to be three:
for sometime the seed falls into stony ground, where is no depth of earth,
and how can the heart hold that fast which takes no root at the heart? Such a
scholar was King Herod to John Baptist, who knew him to be a holy man,
referenced him, heard him, and did many things at his admonition, and yet
killed him at the last; for his conscience was but an upper skin, his heart
still hardened underneath, whereby for lack of moystening with the heavenly
grace, all withered when the temptation came. Sometime the seed falls by the
high way side, and that the fowls pick up, and those fowls are either idle
and wandering thoughts, stirred up in the heart when the seed is a sowing, or ill
companions in men's cares, which do more hurt in Princes Courts, then the
Caterpillars did in the land of Egypt: And such were in the days of Jeroboam,
which did all they could to make the King merry, Osea. 7.3. and as if they
feared his heart should hold too fast, prevented him happily with vanity, and
bawdrie, and unsavory mirth, and made him to laugh when it was more fit to
weep: and such were the young Counselors and companions of Rehoboam,
gallants, and whot spurs indeed, but men that had more spirit then wit, more
fit to ride a horse, then to to rule a kingdom, and the King by listening to
them, brought (clean a cross to his own account) his fathers loins to a
little finger. Sometimes again the seed is choakt with thorns, which are
expounded the tentations of riches and a voluptuous life; for as fire cannot
burn in water, no more can the heart take hold of repentance, which wallowes
in wealth and ease: and this was thought the cause why Salomons heart took no
better hold, for he had gold and silver like stones, and all the delights of
the sons of men, Eccles. 2. Et ideo forsitan corruit (says Bernard) whereupon
many men have doubted of his salvation; and therefore because the hearts of all
men, especially Corregis in manu dei, The heart of the King is in the hand of
God, both Prince and people must pray devoutly, that God would prepare and
direct their hearts.

But every man has a heart to goodness; or if any man have not, yet every man
thinks he has this privilege, that none can challenge his heart, but God
who is the searcher of hearts; and therefore to prove the affection of the
heart, there is required the obedience of the outward man, Let thy heart hold
fast my words, and then it follows, Keep my Commandments, etc. the same in
effect with Saint James, Show me your heart by your works, and with Christ,
John 14. Jf ye love me keep my Commandments. Wherein Solomon is given thus
much to understand, that though he was borne the son of a King, and by God
himself pointed out to a kingdom, yet he is at command. And as David who
commanded him, was to him a father, a king, and a figure of Christ, so is he
here commanded three ways: first as by a father, Keep my Commandments; and
if so, the command of the father binds the son strongly: Honor thy father
and mother says the Law; but what honor without obedience? yea how shall he
keep subjects in due obedience, who has not first learned the obedience of a
son? It was a worthy saying of Decius the son of Decius the Emperor, when
his father yet living would have set the imperial Crown upon his head; No
(saich he refusing it) vereor ne si fiam Jmperator, dediscam esse filius: He
feared that it he took upon himself the dignity of an Emperor, he should
soon forget the duty of a son: clean contrary to the course of the world,
for men commonly covet to take honor, but he thought it more honorable to give
honor, where it was by nature due. And what means that Jch dien, the word or
Imprease of the English Prince, but I serve, A Prince, and yet serves; yea and
he shakes up his feathers, and flourishes when he speaks it, as if it were
his glory as yet to serve. Again, if David spoke this, Keep my Commandments,
in the person of a King, that command is so much heavier, as the power of a
King exceeds the authority of a father. Fear God and the king (says
Solomon) Prou. 24. God and the King are yoaked in our fear together: yea and
Saint Paul required obedience to Kings, even when Kings were enemies to
religion, and separate from God. But if David spoke this in the person of
Christ, or in the name of God, it is that which binds heaven, and binds
earth, and binds even Kings as with cords, and Nobles as with linkes of iron;
for as it is true, that Kings are Gods, so is it as true, that God is a King:
The Lord reigns, Psalm. 97. and Omne sub regno grauiore regnum est: All
kingdoms are but provinces, and Kings but deputies to do justice for God; and
without justice, Quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia, says Austin, when
Kings shall do what they list, and shake of their subjection to God; what are
Kings but great thieves, as great thieves in their kind are said to be little
kings; yea and this is sure, that the errors and irregularities of great men
are extended and grow great by their greatness: for, it is an abomination to
Kings to commit wickedness, Prou. 16. That which is but sin in another man
is abomination in a King: and why so? first because Kings in sinning abuse the
sword of God, which was put into their hands to cut down sin: secondly,
because they defile the very place, the seat of God, which is maintained by
justice, and overthrown by sin: and thirdly, because their actions being for
the most part exemplare, they seduce the people of God, and do more hurt by
their ill example, then by their own sin. And be it true, that Kings here may
sin without impunity, as being subject to no correction of man, but only to
the hand of God, yet they are subject to God, and must account to him for the
keeping of his Commandments, and must fall into his hands at last, where to
fall (as the Apostle says) it is a fearful thing, Hebr. 10.31. And in the
mean time they shall be sure of this, that though they escape open outcry, yet
here shall resound from every hill, and every wall a murmr of ill fame, which
shall answer instantly, as Echoes to their evil, yet they know not whence.
For though no man dare say, To a King, thou art wicked, or to Princes ye are
ungodly, Job 34. yet reeds will whisper, and owls will cry in the night, and
the sons of darkness will rail, and write in corners, and then what they
think they have done in secret (as David is adultery) it shall be painted
like Belshazzars destiny upon the walls. And which is yet a more singular
punishment upon the faults of Kings and Princes, that whereas while they live,
they find flatterers which sooth them in their sin, and tell them they do
well, when they do exceeding ill, yet when they are once dead and gone, then
every Chronicler, (which passes over the faults of meaner men) yet when he
comes to write of Kings, he reports freely how one was prodigal, another was
covetous, one was an adulterer, another a coward and basely timorous; and
writes it up as boldly, as every year Prognosticators write the ecclipses of
the Sun, and the Moon; so as where meaner men do often amiss, and carry it
away in silence with them, yet their offenses shall stand upon record; that if
a man would not forbear to break the Commandments of a conscience to God,
yet fear of perpetual infamy should be a bridle to him.

But what is the conclusion of all? David concludes with reward: Keep my
Commandments, and thou shall. live. The greatest blessing which the father can
give, the greatest reward which the son can receive? And indeed to what do
parents beget their children, but to live? to live by union of soul and body,
which is by natural generation, but chiefly to live by union of the soul with
God, which is by spiritual regeneration: in which sense S. Paul said to the
Corinthians, J have begotten you in Christ: 1. Cor. 4.
and what do parents for their children, if they do not this? The life which
is by nature, it is conceived in sin, borne in sin, and proceeds in sin;
and the reward of sin is death: so nature promises life to her children, and
performs death: Is not this a mockery to mankind? and are not natural
fathers mere mockers to their children, if they be no more then merely
natural? But keep my Commandments, and thou shall live, says the law; And
this is life eternal, that they know thee, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 17.3. the life of the Gospel; and thus is life proposed to all:
But to David and to Solomon, that is, to the King, and to the Kings son, it
was a popular and peculiar acclamation as they passed by the streets, Viuat
Rex, God save the King, or life be to the King: Now under life which is the
ground of all our good, the Jews do commonly wish and pray for all other
happiness, health, and prosperity.

And we may here first understand the life that is by nature; Keep my
Commandments, and live: that is, live here: for though the natural life be
not the height of our hope, yet the honor of a King depends much upon the
present life, for while he lives sin is punished, religion is promoted, Gods
Church is built, and God himself is glorified by him; but when he has served
his time, these services also are ended with him. Again, while he lives,
every man praises him, and admires, and adores him; and he is the light of
Israel, and my Lord the King is as an Angel of God: but when he is once dead,
his honor often dies with him, and his light put out in darkness, so Kings are
Kings but for term of life; that as this Solomon said It is better to be a
live dog, then a dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4.

Or it may be that life is promised here respectively, against hazard of
death; not that Solomon should not die, but that he should not die a violent
death. Amongst the Kings of Israel and ludah how many perished, some by
conspiracy at home, and some by the sword of the enemy? And S. Austin
observes, that of all the Roman Kings, two only, that is, Numa Pompilius,
and Ancus Martius, came to their graves in peace; yea Kings are maliced whether
they do well, or do ill; if not for their vices, yet for their places, for
envy shoots always at the fairest mark; especially where a quarrel grows
for right of a kingdom, who knows not that such trials are made with hazard
of life? But Thou thou shall live says David to Solomon, and Solomon found it
true; for when Adonijah his elder brother rose up to usurp the kingdom, the
usurper soon miscarried, but Solomon escaped, and reigned, and lived: and so
shall it be with all them which extend their authority, to maintain the
honor of God: They shall flourish but their enemies shall perish: Moses shall
march through the sea, as on the land, when Pharaoh and his host shall sink to
the bottom, as a stone: and as our eyes have seen the great Armadoes, and
invincible fleets, part flying home with shame, and part or them drowned in the
depth of the sea, so let your heart hold fast the words, etc. and your
Highness shall live, and feel the power of God in your preservation, when all
Machiuellian, Italian, Spanish, and Popish conspirators shall fall before you
in the field, or die by the sword of justice, and when they are dead, shall
leave nothing to hurt, but their heads upon poles, and their rotten bones for
relics.

Or it may be that David in promising life to Solomon, did intend him life in
his posterity, for men which are dead, yet are said to live in their posterity;
and when God was well pleased with the Kings of Israel, his promise was still,
that he would build them a sure house, and that they should not want a man to
sit upon the throne; but when he was offended with them, he would bring evil
upon that house, and cut off every one that made water against a wall; and he
would sweep away the remnant as filth, and one should die in the city, and
another in the fields, and one the dogs should eat, and another the fowls:
And as it is said of all the wicked in general, that their names shall rot:
Job 20.
so is it especially the curse of a tyrant, that he shall write himself the
last of his name: as for example, In the degenerate kingdom of Israel, in a
succession of twenty Kings, the line ten times broken and interrupted; to show
that all tyranny is of short endurance. But thou shall live, says David to
Solomon: and from Solomon to Jehoahaz, (which is seldom found in course of
history) the son for seventeen generations still succeeding the father: so
immortal is not only the righteous, but also his seed and propagation.

Or it may be that the life here promised to Solomon was meant of a
spiritual life, opposed to that, 1. Tim. 5.6. She that lives in pleasure is
dead: for a man may be said so long to live, as he has lived to glorify God:
vixit dum vixit been; but all the rest of his life is a mere trance or image
of death, as Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead:
and when the prodigal child ran riot and spent his fathers goods with
harlots, Filius meus mortuus est, Luke 15. the father pronounced, that his
son was dead, but especially he that shall riot in the government, that
shall suppress religion, oppress the innocent, and rage and revel in the
kingdom, Mortuus est, he is dead to God, though otherwise alive in the world.
And it is worthy observation, that whereas all the Kings of Israel had both
their ages and years of their reign recorded. Saul the first King, because he
seasoned the kingdom with tyranny and impiety, had no such computation made
for for him; for God knows not the way of the wicked, but the short reign of
the righteous is upon record with God, and the one and thirty of Josiah is of
longer account with him, then the five and fifty of Manasses, for of a good
King it is said, that his years shall be as many ages. Psalm. 61.6.

And lastly in this promise of life here is meant to Solomon the mystery of
eternal life: 1. King. 1.
as when David was ready to die, Bathsheba bowed her self and said, Let my
Lord King David live for ever: Now the life which is for ever, must needs be
meant of eternal life; and this is indeed the very edge and point of David's
promise: for what is this mortal life with all her pomp and pride, were it
not a passage to immortal? yea and what is a kingdom here, where all
kingdoms were shown in the twinkling of an eye, were there not in hope a
better kingdom? a better kingdom where all shall be Kings, and reign with
Christ eternally. And they which here have reigned as Kings upon the earth,
shall loose nothing, but gain immeasurably by the change: yea kings and
Queens when they come thither, shall cast away their crowns, as Elias when
he went to heaven, let his cloak fall from him, and they shall repent nothing
there, save that they came no sooner thither: and when they shall compare their
earthly and their heavenly kingdoms together, they shall say, as S. Peter said
of the mount, Bonum est esse hic, It is good to be in heaven, but for the
earth, they shall be as loath to look back to it, as Moses to go back into
the land of Egypt; for their Palaces shall then seem prisons, their golden
chains but golden fetters, their Crowns shall be but crosses, and all their
honors, but burdens and vexations: but when they shall look into the face of
God, they shall say to him with triumph, With thee is the well of life, in thy
presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

FJNJS.

