A Confutation OF CERTAIN ARTICLES delivered unto the Familye of Love, with
the exposition of Theophilus, a supposed Elder in the said Familye upon the
same Articles.

By William Wilkinson Master of Arts and student of Diuinitye.

Hereunto are prefixed

By the right reverend Father in God I. Y. Bishop of Rochester, certain notes
collected out of their Gospel, and answered by the Fam.

By the Author, a description of the time, places, Authors, and manner of
spreading the same: of their lives, and wrestyng of Scriptures: with Notes in
the end how to know an Heretic.

Prou. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness. AT LONDON Printed by John Day
dwelling over Aldersgate. An. 1579.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

PErusing over this little treatise of M. Wilkinsons, I could not but allow his
diligence and painful travel in this heretical, and schismatic world,
and I would heartily wish of God, that our Church of England might be well
weeded from to to gross errors, for it is high time.

Richard Ely.

To the right Reverend Father in Christ, and his very good Lord, Richard by the
providence of God Bishop of Ely: W.W. wishes all joy and peace, both in body
and soul, with happynes in the Lord everlasting.
WIse Solomon the son of holy David a prudent king; and a peaceable Prince,
Reverend father in Christ: very fittely in his sweet songs resembled the
Church of God unto a Vine, Cantic. 2.15. Ezech. 13.4. Esaias. 5.1.
and the enemies thereof unto ravenous and greedy Foxes. For that the Vine
being a spreadyng plant diligently trimmed and paynfully attended unto,
stretches abroad his sappy branches and broad leaves, for a succor and
harbor in a storm and is a comfortable and gladsome fruit to him that eats
it or tastes the liquor of the same. Jonas. 4.7.
Which Vine the Foxes sometimes spoil and endamage by robbyng the fruit,
sometime by bruysing the young and tender branches thereof, before they be able
by their grouth: to succor themselves, from so many sorts of assaults most
dangerous. And not less aptely our Savior Christ, the Son of God in his
holy and divine Sermons likeneth it unto a field, Math. 13.24.25.
wherein good seed is sown by the paynefull husbandman, and corrupt seed
scattered by the hand of the enemies. Of both which similitudes albeit many and
excellent notes may be gathered, yet the whole scope of them both in my
judgment is this: to show that shootyngs up and increase of Gods Church being
but from a feeble and weak beginning, is continually by Satan and his
mischievous ministers not a little disquieted, that thereby the gladsome
fruit, and looked for increase thereof is much let and hindered.

What the remedy and redress thereof is, I leave to your Lordshyp to consider,
whom (with the rest of your godly and learned brethren and Reverend Fathers,)
Gods divine providence has placed over us (as in a high watchtower) to foresee
and discry the subtle assaults of so slye and cruel enemies. Act. 20.28. Heb.
13.17.


And I hartly wish that it might not justly be affirmed, (or being justly
affirmed I would that the loss of the souls of many poor Christians did not
avouch the truth of the assertion) that even from the time, wherein the first
scourge (wherewith the Lord afflicted his Church in the bloody days of Queen
Mary) began: neither in, and from that time alone, but even long sithe^ce also,
to the great hurt of Christ's church, and hinderaunce of his chosen, Math.
24.24. Math. 13.25. Math. 7.15.
many false Christ's arose, and while the watchmen slept, many lying seers, and
seducyng Prophets, under Lambs skins, craftily crept into the sheepfold,
privily whisperyng perverse things, to seduce and beguile the simple. And
though the word of God (his name be praised) have a clear and free passage
amongst us, and the bloody bandoges of the Romish Sinagogue be tied up, that
by the^ the sheep of Christ, are in less danger to be worryed: yet is not
the increase of that heavenly seed so great, (with grief be that hard, which
is spoken with sorrow) as many as do ween and most men do wish for.

For the roaryng Lion daily runs about, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and his ministers are not idle: zeal in hearing and charity in practicing
waxes cold: but specially the continual labor of Gods husbandmen begins
to fainte, thorns and briars grow up in the Lords field, 2. Cor. 11.14. The
cause of heresy is want of preaching. Math. 22.29. Romans 10.14. Esaias. 29.9.
Ierem. 23.2. Zach. 11.17. Ierem. 50.6. Esaias. 56.10. Math. 15.14.
and the devil transformyng him self into an Angel of light deceives many.
The reason is (as I take it) that those which ought to be breakers of Gods
bread to satisfy and relieve the hungry souls of his Saints cannot break
that, which they have not: neither are able many of them being unarmed to
withstand the enemy: or those which are able, either can and will not, because
they are sleepy: or being both able and willing having a watchful eye upon the
Lords inheritance, they dare not adventure being diverse ways discouraged
with the sundry and manifold fetches of Heretics: especially not being
acquainted with the danger (of that poison which daily flows from our Lovely
Family) to be sure of their own safety keep them selves out of gunshote.

Of the Heresy it self in one word to utter the truth of that, which almost
by the experience and practice of three whole years I have proved to be true,
it is the most pestiferous, and deadly Heresy of all others, because there is
not almost any one particular erroneous and Schismatic fantasy, HN. his
heresy mingled of all heresies.
whereof the Family of Love has not borrowed one branch or other thereof,
to piece unto themselves this their broken Religion.

The increase of this Family is great, and that daily, because the
withstanders are not many: the defenders are wily as Serpents and would feign
in life seem innocent and unblameable: In profession of the one they boast
very much: of the other they walkyng very closely do justify them selves,
because few have to find fault with them, yet have they their loathsome
spots and ougly deformities, as in this book to the diligent reader plainly
may appear.

Their books are many disorderly and confusedly written both for matter, and
manner of things delivered in them, their phrases are such as the Scripture
speaks of clouds with out water, 2. Pet. 2.1.2. Jude. 12.
and lightenyng without rain, their blossoms are as dust and their fruit as
rottenness.

The proof hereof I refer to the sequel of the Treatise which ensues, the
which I desire your Lordshyp the rather to accept, because that within this
Isle of Ely, and other where, within your Lordshyps Dioces, diverse do suspect
that to be true, which common fame reports, that daily those swarms
increase, which in the end (I fear me) will wonderfully disquiet, (as it has
already begone in diverse places) and molest the Church of God. The Lord
vouchsafe when his pleasure is somewhat to cut them shorter: and grant to
those unto whom the care of his Church and oversight of his flock belongs,
vigilant and watchful eyes, careful hearts, willing minds, and strong and
hable bodies to find out, and to root out being found, whatsoever does
disquiet the buildyng up of Sion, that we may keep the spirit of unity in
the bond of peace, and be but one fold under the shepherd Jesus Christ our
Lord, who bless your Lordshyp with the fulness of all spiritual blessings, to
the honor of his name and profit of his Church. Amen.

Cambridge September. 30. Anno. 1579. Your Lordshyps most humbly bounden.
William Wilkinson.

To the godly and Christian Reader Peace from God the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ.
THat which ancient writers and learned men report to be the singular
commendation and especial praise of a good Historiographer (gentle Reader,) to
co^ceale nothing of the truth for fear, or to utter any untruth for for evil
will, neither yet to flatter or claw for favor: that same me thinks is
necessarily to be required of all those which take in hand to testify of any
matter whatsoever. For else how should we possibly look for truth of those men
whose minds are wedded to affections, whose hands and pens are let out for
lucre, and toungues let loose to testify an untruth, who are wholly blinded
with disdain, and being egged on with evil will, have set them selves to
sale, committyng whatsoever is dishonest with insatiable greadines. Concerning
my self, in simplicity of heart I testify, and sole^nely protest before the
whole world, calling God to witness (whom I know to be a sharp revenger and
severe judge against those which abuse his blessed name to any untruth) against
mine own soul, if in this treatise I have uttered ought for envy or malice
of those people, against whose opinions my whole style and writing is
especially directed. I have truly quoted, rightly alleged, and faithfully as
I am hable reported, whatsoever I have either heard by word, or read by writing
concerning the error of those men who term themselves to be of the Family of
Love. Which I have the rather done being thereto required by that duty that I
owe unto the Church of Christ, which is the fellowship of the faithful and
society of the Saints of God* as also being by a Christian Magistrate
thereunto commanded I could not choose (I say) but I needs must testify the
truth of that which both I have heard and seen: which also I am ready at any
time to avouch before any person being called thereunto either privately or
openly. Wherein also I have not said so much as I might truly, and could
justly, having refrayned for their sakes especially, which are my very friends
being somewhat overtaken with the lime of that sect, and are bewitched with
the blyndnesse of those unsavory opinions.

Concerning my further knowledge in that Heresy, I refer thee (good reader)
unto that which ensues, most humbly beseeching thee to bless and further me
with thy most fervent prayers, as I hartly desire the promotion and
furtheraunce of Gods true Religion, the increase of a true faith in the fear
of God, the quietness of our English Church, and the utter ruin and
abolishyng of all Papistry, Atheism, and Heretical sects, and Schisms
whatsoever.

Cambridge September. 30.

Readyng certain books of H.N. and conferring with certain of that Lovely
Fam. I was by them requested to set down unto them in writing for my further
instruction those doubts which (either by means of the vnusualnesse of their
Method in writing, the novelty of their far fetched phrases, there wrong
and wrested Allegories, there Divinity not heard of, or their rough ^ottyng
style) I did not understand, I delivered unto them in the month of August.
1578. those Articles which follow hereafter in this book, and desiryng
earnestly to be fully satisfied in that behalf, I received the answer
delivered to the common carrier in London, which being intercepted by my
worshypfull friend, came not into my hands until the third of April last past
Anno. 1579. The answer which I shall set down if first I shall give you to
understand what I can testify concerning them and their Fathers of their
monstrous Heretical opinions.

A brief view of the heresies and errors of HN. contained and confuted in this
treatise by page as herein they are to be found.
1. Article. HN. says we have no Church. 2. 2. Article. HN. says we have no
truth. 5. 3. Article. HN. says we have no Baptism. 11. 4. Article. HN. says
we have no forgeuenes of sins. 12. 5. Article. HN. says we have no Ministry.
13. 6. Article. Of being united and Godded with God. 15. 7. Article. What HN.
says of him self and his extraordinary calling. Wherein is declared against
the Family that first he was D. George, his Scholar, secondly he is one of the
heretics whereof Christ and his Apostles did foretell, thirdly HN. agrees
with the old heretics in sundry their heresies and opinions. 20. 8. Article.
What is necessarily required in HN. his Disciple. 34. 9. Article. Of HN. his
Revelations. 44. 10. Artic. Of shrift used in HN. his Family. 49. 11. Artic.
HN. misliketh the Preaching of the word, and what he terms it. 51. 12. Artic.
HN. his Judgment of Preachers not admitted by his Family. 56. 13. Artic. HN.
says it is lawful for one of his Family to dissemble. 61. 14. Artic. HN.
makes God the Author of sin and the sinner guiltes. 63. 22. Articles of the
Libertines. 66. Theophilus. Proofs confuted. whereby he proves HN. his
doctrine is the truth. 67.
With a brief token how to know an Anabaptist, gathered out of Zuinglius,
Bullinger, and Calvin, which declare the opinions and behavior of Heretics
from time to time.

A very brief and true description of the first springing up of the Heresy
termed, The Family of Love, which contains the places where, and the parties
by whom the said Heresy was broached.
WHo^ as long time the singular mercy and leuitie of the Lord (in the happy
days of good king Edward the vj. a Prince of blessed remembrance) was by the
carnal profession of many and loo^e life of the greatest part abused: in the
end by Gods ^^st scourge over England it came to pass (which always ensues
the contempt of so precious pearls) that Amos long before Prophesied of the
Epicures of Israel: Amos. 8.11.12.
there followed a grievous famine not only of bread for the comfortyng and
susteinyng of the outward man, but also the food of the soul, whereby our
life to Godward is prolonged was taken away. Math. 4.4. Prou. 29.18.
And it was a very dangerous thing to confess Christ openly not only for
fear of Excommunication, but for danger of the loss of life also. And so
far had the Prince of darkness confirmed his kingdom of ignorance in this
worthy Iseland, that the worshyppers (which worshypped in spirit and truth)
durst not openly assemble themselves for fear of the Tyra^nous hatred of the
Scribes and Pharisees and the rest of the oiled brood of the Popish
Sinagogue. They were compelled secretly to meet in private houses, so
fearful a thing was it for flesh and blood to abide the extreme fury of the
Romish Baalamites which waxed so heat, and such daily danger honge over their
heads that professed the sincerity of the Gospel, So scorchyng was the flame
of those most bloody times that those men who^ the world was not worthy of,
some of them were tried by bonds and Imprisomnentes, some of them by most
bitter torments of Fire and Faggot, such imminent and present peril abode
those who professed them selves to be favorers of Christ's truth. Which great
distress and calamity drove diverse of the Children of God to wander from
place to place, not having where they durst at any time rest long together. In
the which time of their continual tossing, sometimes they had ease and comfort
by their fervent Prayers, and by the participation of the blessed word and
Sacraments, they got some space to breath them against that fiery trial,
which hourly they looked for. Neither had this affliction (albeit it was
mighty) been so grievous if Satan there had stayed his rage, but his private
hatred long concealed, brake forth into open enmity: who being an old Dragon
and subtle Serpent daily raised up some, which privily spoke perverse things,
entanglyng the simple sort, and drawyng such weakelynges after them as they
daily met withal to be their Disciples.

The ancient and famous Town of Colchester was in the troublesome time of
Queen Mary's persecution a sweet and and comfortable mother of the bodies,
and a tender nourse of the souls of Gods children: which town was the rather
at that time frequented, because it aforded many godly and zealous Martyrs,
which continually with their blood watered those seeds, which by the
preaching of the word had been sown most plentifully in the hearts of
Christians in the days of good King Edward. This town for the earnest
profession of the Gospel became like unto a City upon an hill, and as a
candle upon a candlestick gave great light to all those who for the comfort of
their conscience came to confer there from diverse places of the Realm, and
repairing to common Innes had by night their Christian exercises, which in
other places could not be gotten. For proof whereof I refer the Reader unto
that which is truly reported by M. Fox in his book of Acts and Monumentes:
First Edition, page 606. A.
that at the kings head in Colchester and at other Innes in the said Town,
the afflicted Christians had set places appointed for the^ selves to meet at,
where (least Satan should be thought to be idle or his venomous or deadly
hatred against Christ's poor afflicted members should seem to be less then
his open professed enmity) he styrred up diverse Schismatic spirits,
which even in that great trouble of the Church sought to be teachers of that
whereof they had no understanding, and thereby turned the knowledge of Gods
testimonies (which in many of them though it was small yet somewhat) to vain
and contentious ^anglyng, whereby the dear Saints of God were not a little
disquieted: at such time especially as some of them being condemned to death
looked to taste of the same cup, which had been in full measure powered out unto
their brethren. For not only in the private assemblies of the godly did these
spider catchers swarm together to pervert the right ways of the Lord: but
also in diverse prisons in London they kept a continual haunt, where they
scattered their deuilish cocle of abominable Heresy among such as were
committed for the love of the Gospel. For the testimony of the truth hereof
vouchsafe good reader to read the book of M. Fox before alleged, where he
reports the letter of a wicked Promoter named Thom. Tie the Popish Priest of
Muchebently, Page 1605.
and Steven Norish a false Judas and betrayer of Gods Saints in the time of
their trouble, where he uses these words. There is (says this popish priest,
This Kempe is now living and is preacher in the Isle of wight, and is by this
popish priest slau^dered, the said Kemp being a very Godly man, read M. Fox his
last book. page 1976. Where he rehearses Kemps story at large.
one John Kempe, and Henry Heart who is the principal of all those that are
called Frewil me^ (for so they are termed of the Predestinators) and ye said
Heart has drawn out xiij. Articles to be observed among his company, and as
far as I do believe there comes none in their brotherhode except he be sworn.
The other John Kempe is a great trauailer abroad in Kent and what his doctrine
is I am not hable to say. M. Fox reports his most godly and Christian
doctrine. Page 1976. a. Page 1530.
Hitherto M. Fox. And that thou may know the better what this Henry Heart
was consider I pray thee, what is reported of him. Where that zealous and
faithful servant of God John Careless in his examination by Doctor Martin
verifieth that to be true, which in the former place those two were burdened
withal by Steven Norish.

H. Heart a perverse heretic.
Of this Henry Heart says John Careless, it had been good for him if he had
never been borne: for many a simple foul has he shamefully seduced, beguiled
and deceived with his soul Pelagian opinion both in the days of king Edward
and since his departure.

This Heart write a Confutation of certain Articles of Christian Religion
writ by John Careless, and sent unto William Tyms prisoner in the Kings
Benche. The companions also of the same Henry was one M. Gibson who sought to
pervert and turn from the truth xij. godly Christians which were Martyred. M.
Fox. page 1531.
Of this ungracious company also was one True of Kente, who albeit before for
the truths sake he lost his cares (for perswadyng the people from going to
Mass,) yet afterward happenyng into the company of Pelagians he became deadly
enemy to good John Careless, as appears by Careless his examination, which he
with his own hand penned before he dyed in prison as in this book of Martyrs
is to be seen at large, Now if any man will demand, what is this to the
Family against whom ye purposely mind to deal. I answer that from this
present year, in the which this happened the doctrine of HN. began to pepe
out, and although it have a more lovely name then the Heresies of the
Libertines, Anabaptists and Pellagians had: yet it is to him that is disposed
to see very certain by that comparison which in this book follows of all ye
sects, that the ground of all these Heresies were brought into England by
Christopher Vitels and his accomplices out of Delph in Dutchland, where it had
been happy for our English Church if with the first Brokers thereof they had
been buried and forgotten. Their doctrine was then.

1. The godly have in them selves free will to do good.

2. They could not away with Predestination.

Neither ca^ this Lovely Family abide the most blessed and comfortable doctrine
of Predestination: as is apparauntly to be seen in their first Epistle to M.
Rogers, where they utter this deuilish and blasphemous speech: Your brethren in
Christ (for their good faythes cause they have in your licentious doctrine of
Predestination and free election) fill all the prisons almost in England.

But to add somewhat which is hable by the mouth of a living witness to be
justified, who in Q. Mary's time was present at the brochyng of this doctrine
by Vitels the Ioygner his testimony of this Family and their doctrine
subscribed with his own hand is this.

About the third year of Q. Mary's reign. Predestination blasphemed by the
Fam.
An. 1555. at Michaelmas or not much after, I Henry Crinell of Willingham in
the County of Ca^bridge came to the town of Colchester where I happened into a
common Inn. The cause of my repair thither at that time was: that I was
desirous to provide, that my conscience should not be entangled with the Popish
pitch: And being then there, I met with diverse of mine acquaintance as also
with strangers, who came thither to confer concerning the safety of their
conscience, where William Raven of S. Iues who came thither at that time with
me and was my bedfellow having likewise fled being in danger for Religion.

There we found at our coming thither one Christopher Vitels a Ioigner, who
so far as I could at that time learn held many strange opinions, and also
taught diverse points of doctrine scarce sound and to me before unheard of. The
which Ioigner (as he the^ privily dissembled so since he has been noted openly
for his runnyng wit and curious fantasies) being as it seemed weary of his
occupation, left his craft of Ioigning and took unto him a new trade of life:
so that of a simple scholar he became a great and learned Scholemaister of the
doctrine of a man, who lived as he said beyond the seas an holy life and an
upright conversation. This man he praised very much, and reported many
wonderful things of his Angellike behavior, whom afterward I understood to
be one Henry Nicholas a Mercer of Delph in Holland.

The especial points of Heretical doctrine that the said Ioigner did then
and there teach, were these.

Vitels doctrine in Queen Mary's time at Colchester. 1. Infantes not to be
Baptized. 2. King Edwardes book not Gods service. 3. Christ not God. 4. The
godly sin not. 5. The Pope no Antichrist.

1. Children ought not to be Baptized, until they come to years of discretion.

2. He found fault with the Letany in the book of Common prayer set forth in
King Edwardes time, affirming that it was not the right service of God.

1. Because it was said, God the Son redeemer of the world: for (says he)
Christ is not God.

2. Because it was said, Have mercy upon us miserable sinners, for the godly
sin not (says he) and therefore, need they not to use that prayer.

He affirmed also that the Pope was not Antichrist, but he which does not that
which Gods law commands, neither fulfilleth the requiring thereof he is
Antichrist, and so are there many Antichrists.

Furthermore at the same time one John Barry servant to M. Laurence of
Barnehall in Essex came to the same Inn, to reason with the Ioigner about the
Divinity of Christ, Vitels denied that Christ is God.
whom Vitels denied to be God. After they had entered conference John Barry
alleged out of the 2. chap. 5. verse of S. Paul to the Phillipia^s. Let the
same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God
thought it no robbery to be equal with God etc.

Yea quoth Vitels the same mind must be in you which was in Christ, the same
mind must be in you which was in Christ, and that there he stopped him: which
words so often he repeated, that thereby he put Barry to silence and blankt
him so that he had not a word to say: to the great offense of diverse, but
especially of ij. women Gospellers, which came with Barry to hear him and
Vitels confer about that matter. And to say the truth, Vitels babbling did so
astonish diverse there present and my self also, that I was fully minded to go
to Oxford to ask counsel of Bishop Ridley and M. Latimer concerning that
matter, had I not met with some man, to satisfy my conscience in the mean
season.

The truth of the report of this conference I refer unto the remembrance of
the said John Barry him self if he be alive as to others also, who were
present at that conflict. The which Ioigner since that time wandryng up and
down the Country (to visit his Disciples) came to the Town of Willingham
where I dwell, and sent form to come and speak with him at an Alehouse, but I
sent him word that I would not come at him nor have to do with him. This is
very true and so I testify with mine own hand.

By me Henry Orinell of Willingham.


Thus see thou (gentle Reader) so much as yet has come to my hands
concerning this matter simply set down: to the which if the Family shall
reply, Objection of the Family. Answer.
First that this belongs nothing unto them: I answer: This chiefly does
concern Vitels their Elder and chief Patriarch, who is a great Doctor of
their Lovely sect, and such Doctor such doctrine, such tree such fruit. etc.
Secondly if they shall reply that this doctrine was taught by Vitels long
since, and since by him recanted openly, Vitels some times an Arria^ God grant
he now be sound in that point.
and upon hearty repentance, which then he showed he has been received into
the Church, and needs not now to be feared for teaching of any such
doctrine: I answer (albeit the Famely deny that ever he recanted, yet seeing
many witnesses alive can avouch it to be true) if he since have been sorry from
his heart, and upon his repentance be restored into the Church, God make him
to be a member, not a molester of the Church, least in the end his repentance
prove not to be as the sorrow of Simon Magus: Acts. 8.24. Math. 26.75.
but as Simon Peter's who earnestly and with tears bewailed the denial of his
Master: to whom since he stands or falls, I will not judge him: the Lord
make him both to be and to continue of the number of his children. Amen.

Notes upon the book entitled Euangelium regni, gathered by the Reverend
father in Christ I. Y. Bishop of Rochester, with the answer of the Family
unto the said Notes.
AS the Latin (a) is mean, so is the style or (b) manner of writing dark and
obscure in many places: Generaly HN. his Euangelye is to be mislyked for.
and although the Author had not set to his name, yet it should seem to be of
some Friars doing or some other that favored the Church of Rome.

Answer of the Family of Love.
FOr (a) the first part where ye take exception at the meannes of the Latin
(which yet perhaps ye would hardly match, Odious comparison of the Fam.
much less better it all things considered) methinkes ye might out of
reasonablenes consider, that ye meannes of the Latin in any work, is not any
hinderaunce to a right and good matter: for the more common the Latin is, the
easier it is to be understood of the simple Clerks, and therefore that is
not worthy of note to take exception at, for the single and lowly minded
respect more the intent of a matter, then the flourished style or speech. etc.

Fam. makes Gods word hard to be understood, so do the Papists contrary to
the scripture. Prou. 8.8.9. Psalm. 19.7.8. All without the Fam. fleshly and
worldly minded.
(b) Secondly whereas ye find fault at the obscurity and darcknes of the
Authors writing, I might answer that it might seem so much the more to be
the same, that it gives forth it self for ( videl a work proceedyng from the
spirit of the Lord) and therefore hard to be understood of all minds of the
flesh, and out of the industrious prudencie of the manly reason or knowledge.
(For then should they right well understand it, for the world can understand her
own) whose wisdom makes all men (in their manly wisdom) mere fools,
compassing the wise in their wisdom, and prouyng their thoughts to be but
vain will, therefore as S. Paul and likewise the Prophet affirms destroy the
wisdom of the wise and reject the understanding of the prudent. Untruth for
the Prophet Esaias, and the rest are very eloquent
For it has been evermore an order with the holy ons of God, in the bringyng
forth of the holy things, to express it more out of the authority of the
spirit, and with power (I mean out of the efficacy of the Lord had by their
essential operation in their inwardnes) the^ with the entising words of manly
wisdom, that our faith might not stand or rest grounded in the wisdom of
man, but in the power of God: by which means the natural man perceives not
any thing of the spirit of God. Yea the things of God and his wisdom, are
mere foolishness unto him. And therefore he shall be found happyer that
becomes deceived with such a godly deceit, All without the Fam. directed with
dreams of man's fantasy.
then shall those which are borne in hand to be in a right way and a good case
being yet in the mean time directed with the dreams of man's fantasy in
stead of clear truth. etc.

Rochester.
THe greatest part of this book is nothing but a brief discourse either a
rehearsal of the story of the Bible, as appears from the.5. chapter, to
the.27. and.28. chapters. And his collectio^ is none other, but such as any
meanly learned may gather by dilligent readyng of the Scriptures.

The Family of Love.
HOw well soever the greatest part of the book be judged by you to be
nothing, but a bare brief discourse or rehearsal of the histories of the Bible:
which any meanly learned (as you say) might do the like yet seems it to me
to be of greater force neither have I ever in my time heard or by readyng
perceived that the greatest learned among the prudent wisenesse (which rest
grounded more on ye litterall knowledge of the Christian verify then on the
being of the same) No book of any wrighter like HN. his Euangelye.
have atchiued the like or brought the match thereof to light (all things
considered.) For it is not only an evident declaration of the singular good
will and operations of God toward his creatures in respectyng and tenderyng
their salvation, HN. his Euangelie in Exposition of dark figures in the Bible.
darckly figured forth in the Bible: but also and express manifestation of
the approchyng of time, wherein the purpose of the Lord drawn a long and begone
as the time state and age of the world would permit the same touching the
disposing of the wicked world with her ministers and adherentes, and the
erectyng of the righteous world to flourish there over in vigor for evermore
becomes as he there testifies. Full accomplished through the same service of
God, or ministrations of his love expressed or mentioned in the same book
according to the promises. To the which ministration God has chosen the
Author as he there alleges to be a right minister, and prepared him thereto,
in the form and sort mentioned in the head of his book, No learned man in
these days like HN.
unto which like function and holy annoyntyng no conceited Scripture learned or
Doctor of the letter, that I can any way mark or perceive has in these days
attained or reached. And whether that be a pretending of the Ghost or no, that
will well appear and be seen in his time by the sequel thereof (to weete) in
the perseueraunce and forth going of the same among and with all such as shall
endure to see the trial thereof. etc.

Rochester.
THe Author does much pretend the holy Ghost, and entituleth his book, An
Epistle written from the holy Ghost, which is to be suspect of high
Revelations, dangerous to deceive the simple.

Family of Love.
THis is answered in the Section before.

Rochester.
INtreatyng of Antichrist in the 28. chapter, he teaches no certain doctrine,
who he is, or where to be found, that we may know him and beware of his
doctrine, but it seems altogether doubtful, in so much that the Note in the
marge^t says, O that this Antechrist were known. Whereas if the Author would
have dealt plainly and according to the scriptures, he might easly have showed
that Rome is the seat of Antechrist. And that the succession of Popes, and
that body and kingdom is the very Antichrist mentioned and described in the.2.
Thessal. 2. Apocal. 13.17. etc.

In the Chapter 31. 32. the Author HN. bewrays him self to be a Papist.
1. FIrst, he calls the Church of Rome, HN. a Papist.
the communion of all Christians, whereas it is but a particular Church fallen
away from the universal Church of Christ.

2. Although he seems to confess that the Church of Rome has not that
perfection of Religion, which it had in times past (which the Papists do and
must grant) yet he seems to allow and speak reverently of all Popish
orders as they be now.

The Pope he calls the chief anointed, Chap. 31.
the chief Bishop, or high Priest, who has his heyng in the most holy
sanctuary of true and perfect holiness, most holy Father.

Next unto him he places the Cardinals whom he calls most holy and famous,
and he says that they are next the most auncientest and holy Father the Pope
in most holy Religion and understanding.

Next unto Cardinals he reconeth Bishops whom he calls chief Priests.

After Bishops, he names Curates, Deacons. etc.

After those he makes mention of Monks, whom he commends as men addicted to
holiness, and separated from the world, and all carnal desires.

But most plainly the Author shows him self a friend to the Church of Rome,
saying: Chap. 31. sent. 4
that many through contention and discord did cast of the Church of Rome, and
did blaspheme her with her ministeries, and of their own brains pretending the
Scriptures, have brought in other ministeries and Religion: they spoke much of
the word of God. Who doubts that this is the voice and judgment of Papists
against Protestauntes and true Christians.

Family of Love.
WHere as you furthermore complain of the insufficiency of the expressing of
Antechrist (as to say who he is and where to be found) because the Author
applies him not to the Pope and his succession in the Church of Rome, it
seems if the matter were well looked unto, that me^ should find that
Antechrist even in the very self same place from whence you gather your
exception flatly detected: (although he is not so employed to men's
conte^tations) for if men could see what Christ according to the spirit is,
Christ what he is according to the Family.
as he is a living power of God, were whereas his whole scope and drift of
writing stretches) they should then right well perceive thereout that the man
of sin and child or brood of the Devil and condemnation (being a right
adversary or an express contrary being unto Christ, Antichrist nothing but
sin according to the Fam.
the righteousness of God the father) and reigning in all states of men
generally. Being fleshly Popes or other, from the time of the declinyng of the
man from the true faith in Christ the light of life to the addictyng of him
self to the lie or darcknes or ever such time as they become converted to
their God and are regenerated in the spirit of their mind, is the greatest
Antichrist which also from the very beginning as likewise in the very corporal
appearaunce, of Christ in the flesh (like as S. John also expresses) impugn
it and persecute it in the truth of God (and that in the inwardnesse of the man
to the establishyng of all unrighteousness in him, and not only a certain
disordred or abused Papistrie (yea or ever the Papistrie was thought of) which
no Pope also (or such outward fleshly creature) could or can ever work or
bring to pass. And therefore deceive not your self in the point, to judge the
Author to be a maintainer of any fleshly or creature like Pope with his
adherentes in their abusion of Ceremonial services and Ceremonies: but he
drives his matter only (as in his work being well noted you may see) to this
point (to wit) that after the entrance of the darkness once chanced (the
manly generations being fallen away from the faith toward God, which was
established by Christ in his Apostles and Disciples) the old Fathers grew out
of a zealousnes of the mind toward God and his righteousness, to institute
certain Ceremonies and services (so near as they could out of their insight
and comprehendyng, that they by their diligent study and searchyng of the
Scriptures had attained unto concerning Gods truth hit the same) that resembled
or were conformablest to the holy and divine Scriptures to a commemoration of
the things wrought and brought to pass before with Christ and his holiness in
the very true being to the susteinyng and staying up of the ignorant people in
the time of darkness from falling into any greater absurdities, enormities and
errors, that might have happened unto the^ and which also did happen unto many
such as maliciously and obstinately, not rightly seeing but rather in meaning to
set up some better, degressed and winded of them selves there from and
maliciously blasphemed and continewed the same, tell that the light of Gods
truth might spryng forth again or be erected in the service of the love,
according to the promises and goes not about to establish the same in, and of
their ceremonial (much less abused) service and Ceremonies (where about men
presently so greatly strive and vary) now in this present time of the light of
love) which he affirms to be ye day of the clear and righteous judgment of
God: wherein god will restore all things to their right (to wit) bring or set
the lie in his lying being to be condemned in the hellish cave, and the truth
likewise in his right form or degree, to wit to prevail flourish and bear
sway over the unrighteousness for ever more.) Whereby that the will of God might
eue^ so be accomplished in earth as in heaven. Wherefore me thinks that should
be very small discernyng in such as can not distinct the shadows figures or
image of a thing from the body it self, or the very true being either
substance of the same. And that he speaks of men's ignorance in that place,
and touching their slender knowledge and understanding in Gods word that
lays he forth flatly to the effectual word and not the imagelike or written
word wherein the right Christians are not iniuried but the conceited Christians
detected. Two kinds of Gods word after HN. his Family.


Rochester.
THe rest of the book from the 34. Chapter unto the end is of the calling of
the Gentiles, and of the grace of God offered to the world in the last age of
the world, which seems to be the best part of that book.

Family of Love.
IT is well that ye like some part of the book, and if ye could therewithal
note that there were a defectio^ from the truth, and that there were also by
that means no difference to be had, betwixt a ceremonial either letter
doctor Christian, and an uncircumcised Heathen so had ye then somewhat for
your part.

Rochester.
THus have you a taste of this book gathered as the time would serve, whereby
it appears to be no such precious price of work as of some it is supposed to
be. Such fair shows and glorious titles may soon deceive the simple to have
such books in more admiration then the holy Scriptures. Luke. 16.28.
But we have Moses and the Prophets let us hear them and judge all others by
them.

Family of Love.
I do not so collect by the authors wrighting that he would prefer his writing
above the scriptures given by inspiration of God, and brought forth, and
written by the holy Fathers in times past. But if you had well marked or
considered the same, he witnesses as by a concordable, and uniform
testimonye, either by record of the same their writings what the Lord will now
accomplish in these last days, A notable untruth for HN. no where in his
books does wish me^ to read the Scriptures.
wishing every one in the same book to search the Scriptures, whether that
they also mention and record not the very same: affirmyng also therewith that
God is not ne cannot be a God of contentatio^ but of peace and unity. And that
God moreover, has stirred him up to be a serviceable instrument, or as his
elect minister to bring down (according to his promises written in the
Scriptures) all controversies grown among men about their misunderstanding of
the scriptures to bring ye same to an end. And does also in ye same book,
uncover sundry secret things which they that have seeing eyes may by ententiue
reading of the same together with the Lords assistaunce well perceive and
understand: that no selfewise, or envious scripture learned could or can ever
attain unto it again. Horrible blasphemy HN. his book of Euangelie made
equal with the word of God.
What injury were it (seeing that it proceeds by the same spirit) to value it
equal with those same sacred scriptures, that were tofore written by the holy
one of God.

Also ye may remember that the fleshly Jews had also for their answer to
Christ envying against him being the truth it self, the same testimonye that
ye allege, to weete, that they had Moses and the Prophets: etc, But who were
in the mean time greater persecutours of him then they.

Rochester.
WE are sure that the holy Scriptures were wrighten by the (spirit of Love,
and truth,) the holy ghost: And contain all true and necessary and sufficient
doctrine for our salvation, Ephe. 5.21. 1. John. 4.1.
let us not hold upon men: prove all things, hold that which is good, believe
not every spirit but prove the spirits.

Family of Love.
I Grant that right discerning is good, and comes from the Lord, and through
him from them, whom he and not themselves places, and by them that are set in
the right place of judgment by the Lord himself, and not by those that sit
on their own stool: for it is to be doubted that so many as take upon them
that office of judgment, or meddling with gods matters or ever Christ be come
unto them, or have a living shape in them, that they all will comme to short in
their reconing. etc.

I may not deny but that there is contained in the scriptures given by
inspiration of God (being rightly understood, followed, and obeyed,)
necessary and sufficient doctrine of salvation: but for want of these three
principal points, many have small profit truly. I could also with all my
heart wish that man with man committed not filthiness, No man may judge of
doctrine but the Familye.
nor depended one upon an other: but to stay them only on the Lords truth,
and not on flesh and blood, so were then all controversies at an end.

It were well also to prove all things: but not as seems me by the crooked
rule of man's own judgment, or fleshly mind and concerning, nor by his
imagination (without the light of Gods truth, or spirit of righteousness and
love:) taken on in constructing, and wresling of the right sense and mind of
the scriptures which being separated from the light of life, as he in the same
work alleges is a closed book, or a dark word without light, and the
service administered thereout as a dead body without a soul, or as a dead wife
deceased from her husband, which could bring fourth no children of life. For
what can the natural man judge, that is altogether ignorant of the things of
God, or yet open the holy things without the key of David, or behold the
Paradise of God, when as men can not freely enter the Seraphin with his fiery
sword not being taken away: or yet judge of an other which has overcome, and
attained to have a new name, written in the white stone: that lies himself,
yet in the mean time altogether be wrapped and buried under the bondage and
subjection of the earthly being, and ungodliness. etc.

Consider therefore every thing in his right degree (if you be endewed with
ghoastly understanding, and possessed with the right spirit of judgment,) and
then out of your spiritualnes judge all things according to the balance of
equitye, and trying squaire or measure line of righteousness in the life and
truth. Try also the spirits by the same rule, and be not unbelieving toward
the right spirit, but follow and embrace that which is good. For if you can
show us any passinger God of Israel, or any better law, rites, and ordinance:
then is his laws, rites, and ordinances, or any perfecter life then the
love: whereon Christ with his holy ones have heretofore testified, (Whereto
also the Author presently as a concordable witness with the same does only point
and direct us) or that there be any better thing then the eternal life and the
love it self. So let not the^ that same most best, be withheld from us
(whilst that we only enforce us thereunto) that we might serve eue^ so the
only living God in vniformenes of heart, and vnpartialitye of mind together
with an upright righteousness, and holiness.

Take this brief freindly and well meaning answer to your exceptions in good
part, and way it not as a matter done to defend the work by the way of
contending: but rather as one out of goodwill do but give you occasion thereby
to weigh more distinctly, and reasonably of that which comes so lively, and
freindly to your hands, out of grace, to your profit and welfare. Therefore
save labor for making any further reply hereunto, least you do but lose your
travail herein, for Christ with his holy ones will not now in this same day of
the Love (like as do the princes of the earth whose kingdom is of this world)
set up and maintain his kingdom with contention, and discord, but with
peaceablenes, loving kindness and long suffering. Lovely Poetry of the Family.
But if one listed to see wrestlers bestirre them in their play: then for to
grant them leuill ground, he might not well denay. And if one should trauers
the right of his case: then must the Judge sit vnparciall in judgment place,
so shall then all matters in equalitye out fall: but otherwise be perverted and
oppress right we shall.

Vale quod F. L.

Errors and absurd asseuerations out of HN. his Euangelie, gathered by
William Wilkinson.
Preface sent. 2. Resurrection is appeared unto HN.
HN. Says the day of Love (by him preached) is the appearyng of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Resurrection. Esaias. 26. c. 1. Cor. 15. f. of the dead, wherein
the law and the Prophets, Law and Prophets and all fulfilled in HN. his Love
day. Preface. sent. 3. HN. takes on him John Baptistes office.
and all that is written of Christ becomes fulfilled. Luke. 24. e.

HN. says he is the Angel of the Lord, or messenger before him for to
prepare his way. Math. 3. a. Math. 11. b. and to publish an everlasting
Euangelie. Math. 24. Apoc. 14. a unto all generations, languages and peoples
according to the promises.

Sent. 4. HN. his writings the Gospel. Sent. 6.
All the testimonies of HN. set forth in the Glass of righteousness, are the
Gospel.

HN. says the Family is the rest of God prepared from the beginning, for the
people of God, and for all repentaunt persons: and is appeared in the last time
according to the promises.

Cap. 1. sent. 4. Liberty of Religion.
HN. permits to every nation, what Religion they will, so they hold with his
heresy of the Love.

HN. received this message of his Euangelie, Chap. 2. sent. 1.
from the mouth of God him self.

HN. makes the day of the publishyng his Euangelie, Fol. 4.
to be the last coming of Christ in judgment with thousa^ds of Saints. For
proof he cites Esaias. 3. b. Math. 24. d. and 25. d. Jude. 1. b.

HN. builds upon miracles without Scriptures. Cap. 2. sent. 1. Cap. 2. sent.
11.


HN. says he will declare the secret mysteries of God, and make relation of
things hidden before the world.

HN. says the former kingdom, Cap. 4. sent. 1.
wherein man was set (that is Adam before his fall) is brought again in the
lowlynes of the upright being.

HN. says of the Preachers, Cap. 4. sent. 4. HN. rayleth on the Ministers and
Preachers of Gods word.
that they vaunt and give forth themselves for Christians, and as illuminated
men, that are Masters of the Scripture, being crafty, subtle, perverse of
heart, darcke in their understanding, of a perverse nature.

HN. says that no man how wise and understanding soever he be in the knowledge
of the Scripture, Sent. 5. Only HN. his Family wise.
can by any means understand or comprehend the wisdom of God, but they only
that be of his Family.

Therefore hope we (says HN.) with much joy over the dead which dye in the
Lord, or are dead in him, Sent. 15.
Resurrection comes to pass in HN. his new day.
(to weete) that they in their Resurrection from death shall liuyngly come
unto, or meet with us. For all the dead of the Lord, or the members of Christ
shall now live and arise with their bodies, and we shall assemble with them,
and they with us.

This day of the Love is the last coming of Christ. Heresy sent. 18. Cap. 5.
sent. 1.


Abell was slain through the wicked nature of sin, through the hands of his
brother Cain.

HN. depraueth the whole History of Abraham, Cap. 8. sent. 4.5.6.8. etc.
from Gene. 16. unto the 27. Chapter by turnyng it into an Allegory.

The greatest must serve the less, Cap. 9. sent. 7.
that is says HN. the great righteousness of the law, with the great
knowledge or prudence of the flesh, or of the earthly being, which is borne
out of the letter, shall serve the little minded simplicity of Christ.

Cap. 13. sent. 3. Cap. 13. sent. 4.
HN. peruerteth the fourth Commandment.

HN. says the Ceremonial law is needful to be observed.

Cap. 19. sent. 5. Sent. 11.
HN. terms our Baptism an handful of water.

Who soever is not Baptized according to the form or manner of John: that is
with the water of repentance confessing their sin, he is no Christian.

Cap. 23. sent. 2.
No man says HN. can Minister the upright service or Ceremonies of Christ
truly, but the regenerate.

Cap. 23. sent. 2. Cap. 25. sent. 6.
HN. denies the outward admission of Ministers.

The Family shall be in all perfection euerlastyngly upon earth, to the end,
that Gods will might be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Cap. 25. sent. 6. Cap. 25. sent. 6.
HN. beasteth perfection in this life and in many places.

HN. says that this testimony and publishyng of the joyful message (videl his
Gospel) is the kingdom of perfection, and that all the services, and
prophecies, which are gone out from God do lead hereunto, and rest and cease
herein.

Ibid. No dissembling is lawful by HN.
HN. his says Family must not conceal or dissemble their Religion, but they
must hold it out before every one, who^ the Lord stirs up in their ways.

Sent. 10.
In HN. his Family is the true, most holy of the everlasting being of God, from
whence the upright service of the Family is ministered: All prophecies do lead
and end in HN. his Fam.
whereunto all services and prophecies, which are gone out from God, and his
truth, do lead, as to the right and very true perfection: that God might ever
be declared upon earth.

Cap. 28. sent. 4. HN. raileth upon preachers.
HN. says of all preachers without his Fam. that they are vnilluminated,
unregenerated, unrenewed, vngodded unsent, good thinkyng, which out of their
literal knowledge come into the sheepefold of the beleuers, besides the Church
of Christ. Which Christ calls thieves, wolves, murderers, false hearts, and
Scripture learned.

Cap. 30. sen. 5.6.
HN. allows confession of sins in his Family and forgiveness of the same,
HN. likes of purgatory.
and clensing which he calls Purgatory.

HN. says that the Romish Church has obediently grounded it self on the
services and ceremonies, Cap. 31. sent. 1. HN. Favors popery. Popish
discipline good by HN.
which are the prefiguration of true Christianity, and her services, and with
diligence and ferue^cie observed the same to a good discipline, or ordinance
of the congregations.

HN. says that the annoyntyng with oil, Cap. 31. sen. 4. 7. Orders a
Sacrament by HN.
which the Papists use, is a Sacrament of the holy Church of Christ: and
signifies unto us the annoyntyng of Priests, and Elders, with the holy Ghost.

HN. allows of the Pope, Sent. 5.7. The truth spread in all lands by the Pope
says HN. Sent. 8. 10. 14. 17. 18. 19.
(because says he) through his service of the holy word, the true clearenes of
Christ was spread abroad in all lands.

HN. of the Popish Hierarchy namely Cardinals, Bishops, Parish priests,
signifiyng the Leuiticall Priests Deacons or helpers of the Parish Priests,
Sextons, or keepers of holy things.

Monks which signify such as dwell alone, and are through the love of
righteousness sanctified, Sent. 23.
and therefore separated from the world, and all that is fleshly: for to live
even so as sanctified ones of God.

All the aforesaid (says HN.) has been used in times past in his true being,
when the light of life had his clearenes, but now is become darkened.

HN. condenmeth as many out of their knowledge, Cap. 32. sent. 4.
which they take out of the Scriptures: brought in certain services, and
ceremonies in any other wise and order, then the Church of Rome appointed: as
unorderly reiectyng and blasphemyng the Catholic Church of Rome, and rentyng
the consent, and nurturable sustentation of the same.

It is mere lies and untruth which the Scripture learned, Cap. 33. sent. 11.
through the knowledge which they get out of the Scripture institute, preach
and teach.

HN. says God raised him up (which lay altogether dead without breath and
life) Cap. 34. sent. 1. Blasphemye.
from the death anointed him with his godly being, named him self with him,
and Godded him with him self.

Cap. 35. sent. 1.
All the Scripture speaking of Christ, of his seed, of his coming in his
glory, is in this day of the Love fulfilled.

Cap. 35. sent. 3. 4 5. 6. 7.
HN. says that the prophecies. 1. Edras. 4. d. Esaias. 3. e. and 11. b. Ezech.
39. c. Soph. 3. b. Zach. 2. b. are in this day of Love fulfilled.

Sent. 8. Resurrection passed already says HN.
Moreover the raising up, and Resurrection from the dead, comes to pass also,
in this same day through the appearyng of the coming of Christ, in his
majesty, acaccordyng to his saying, John. 6. e. I will raise him up again in
the last day.

Cap. 36. sent. 13 Cap. 37. sent. 1. and.14. and. cap. 38. sent. 1.3. Cap. 4.
sent. 7.
In this day are all prophecies fulfilled.

The service of Love is the perfection it self.

All (says HN.) shall perish without the Family of Love.

Heretical affirmations, and ungodly expositions of Scriptures by HN. out of
the documentall sentences.
EVen thus have the services of the testimonies of the holy spirit of Love
their ministrations among the perfect ones: Scripture vildly abused by
Allegories.
and do remove the middle wall: which is betwixt ye perfect and imperfect ones.
To make even so of twain that it be one namely God, and the man in one true
being of Jesus Christ. cap. 1. sent. 4.

Nothing can come from the true perfection, Nothing comes from HN. his
perfect ones but perfection.
but all humble and meek virtues and righteousness which flow out of
perfection. cap. 1. sent. 7.

He alleges that there is a perfection in his life, Perfection.
to prove it, he quoteth 1. Cor. 13. b. cap. 1. sent. 9.10.2. Pet. 1. d.

The perfect can bring forth nothing but all good, and love, quoted as a proof.
John. 13, 14.16. he leads the^ into all truth. Cap. 2. sent. 1.

Christ is taken on 1. With an imagination of knowledge. Cap. 2. sent. 1.
Videl. 2. Good thincking of the heart. 3. Or out of the text of the letter.

No man can teach the word of doctrine of Christ but such as have been
disciples obedient of the Love. cap. 2. senten. 1.

Vnilluminated Scripture learned and unsent preachers. cap. 2. sent. 2.

The word that is ministered speakeable or in letters out of the Love, and out
of the true life, Christ after the flesh what?
is also Christ after the fleash. cap. 2. sent. 4.

For even so among the beleuers of the word, the word became flesh, and dwelt
among them, and Jesus was in such sort borne of the virgin Mary out of the
seed of David after the flesh that is of pure doctrine, Christ rooke no flesh
the virgin, but doctrine. etc.
out of the seed of the Love, and whosoever feadeth of the overflowed word,
and his life beleuingly in his soul, he eats truly the flesh of Christ, and
drinks his blood: and is raised up by Christ in the last day to eternal
life, and becomes even so in his new birth, Consubstanciated with Christ
after the spirit. cap. 2. sent. 5.

As also for that the seruauntship of the Law should be noe Gal. 3. and. c.
heir with the beleuer. cap. 3. sent. 10.

That same was the complaint of Abraham, which he or ever he had a son, or an
heir complained before the Lord, that he had obtained no. Genesis 15. a. seed
out of the belief. And supposed even so that his servant (that is his
seruauntship out of the law) should be his heir, but the son which shall be
borne out of the spirit, that is out of the faith of Abraham. cap. 3. sent. 11.

HN. his perfect ones not subject to Gods word always.
As long as the young ones are childish, and not yet grown up unto the
Elderdome of the perfect being, they are yet under the ordinance of the Lord or
his word: not that they should always remain as subject thereunder, but
until the appointed time, until the manly old age in the godly understanding
of the holy word: (that is) tell sin in them be subdued, says HN. cap. 3.
sent. 12.

Shrift.
Let every one confess his sins wherein he falls before his Elder in the
holy understanding, and make manifest before him all his dealyng, and
conversation. cap. 4. sent. 3.

Scripture untruly Expounded. 1. Cor. 15. cap. verses. 50.53.54 Resurrection
denied.
Verily the mortal whereof S. Paul witnesses is not any creature of earthly
flesh and blood, but it is the living word or being of God: which in the
beginning was mortal in the manhood, and is in us for our sins cause become
mortal. cap. 6. sent. 3.

The letter slays. 2. Cor. 3.6. namely the administration of the law after
the letter, or ministration of Christ after the flesh: that is nothing else but
that the letter according to the requiring of Christ, points, and leads us
to the death of sin, and withdraws even so our minds, and thoughts, from
all that which is ungodly. cap. 11. sent. 6.

A man which loves the upright righteousness cannot apply hinselfe uprightly
thereunto, The Family will have all the whole man or nothing at all. Admission
into the Family.
before he have wholly given over himself to the gracious word, and service of
Love, for to be obedient unto the word: and even so to be admitted thereto by
his elder in the holy understanding, and minister of the gracious word, for to
become taught therein. cap. 13. sent. 1.

He that is admitted into the Famil. promises before God and his holy ones,
Admissio^ to the Family with an oath. Herodes oath in the Family. Why few
Fambles return from HN. his doctrine.
that he will cleave only to the word, and his requiring, and show faithful
obedience out of his whole heart and mind, and not separate himself therefrom
for ever. cap. 13. sent. 4.

But if they (our old sins which he calls our Paramours which in times
past we loved. sen. 7.) take or lay hold on us with force, and violence, and
that then although we cry there comes not any power or help unto us, for to
withstand their force and violence: and that they even so ravish us against our
will: Giltles of particular sins. Antecedent.
so are we guiltles of the transgression, for we have cried for to be released
from the tyranny of the evil, and there is no help come unto us, Ergo, if we
sin, we are guiltles. HN. his argument that we may sin.
Of the which guiltles transgressing, the law likewise witnesses, where it
says: Deuteronomy. 11.27.

A woman which is violently taken in the field, Scriptures wrested.
whereas there is not any help, and so ravished (and although she have cried
aloud and gotten no help) she shall be guiltles of the transgressing. cap. 13.
sent. 8.

If it chance that any man through weakness do sin, yet let him not cover
his sins: Shrift.
but let him confess them before his Elder, in the holy understanding, and
repent him, so shall then the Lord be gracious unto him and forgive his sins.
Cap. 13. senten. 8. and Cap. 11. senten. 6.

This is the day which God Acts. 17. e. HN. takes to him that is proper to
Christ. Agge. 2.7. Heb. 12.27. HN. 1. Epist. cap. 1. sent. 2. and pub. of the
peac. sent 14. Shrift worse then Popish. Conference denied.
has appointed for to judge in the same the compass of the earth with
righteousness, through his word, in whom he has concluded his judgment. Cap.
15. sent. 4.

They of the Family must manifest them selves and their whole heart, dealyng,
and inclination, to the Elders in the Family of Love. Cap. 16. sent. 4.

Have not much prate or disputation with strangers, nor with the^ that fall
away from the service of the Love, nor with the unwilling ones and resisters.
Cap. 16. sent. 18.

O ye adjoined ones, and incorporated ones to the word ye shall not hold you,
Math. 18. and. c. 1. Cor. 5. b. 2. Thessal. 3. b.

HN. his holy bread daily eaten at Tables. Scripture wrested.
Common with strangers and decliners from the service of Love, for to eat
daily with them at your Table the holy bread John. 6. d. Acts. 2. f. But
break and eat the same among each other. Cap. 18. sent. 10.

Bear in no wise any enmity to any one, but show always your brotherly love,
which ye have amongst each other. Cap. 16. sent. 11.

Sins forgiven in the Family only.
Come now all and turn you to this mercy seat of the Love of the holy spirit
of Jesus Christ, and obtain the forgiveness of your sins. Cap. 19. sent. 2. 3.

ARTICLES Which I exhibited unto a friend of mine, to be conuaied unto the
Family of love, that I might be certified of the doubts in them contained.
Which for my further instruction one Theophilus sent me with a letter, and an
Exhortation annexed unto the said Articles, with his exposition, in manner
following.
THEOPHILUS

TO the collector of these after expressed Articles (that out of his malicious
mind perverted the sense, and true mind of the Author, and framed sundry of
them into errors,) and to the rest of his Assistants in these and such
uncharitable dealinges, wheresoever they be, greeting.

W. WILKINSONS TITLE.

ERrors out of the books of HN. faithfully, and truly (if says THEOPHILUS
such preachers as be vncircumsided both in tongue and ears be to be believed in
these days) gathered, and quoted as in his book by Chapter, and Section they
are to be found.

THEOPHILUS.

YE might rather in truth have affirmed, unfaithfully, Gay Rhetoric of the
Family.
lyingly, slanderously, and maliciously, or uncharitably.

W. WILKINSONS CONFVTATION.

Mark (I pray thee gentle Reader) what a cholorick, and taunting spirit these
Familers be of, and yet they needs will be called the Familye of love: as
though all that comes from them, were nothing but love, and the very
pefection of it self, Docum. sentences 1. Chap. sect. 3.7.
(For so they affirm of themselves. Now if these be their sweet and amiable
words, and lovely phrases, what cutting terms shall we then look for, when
they shall see us that we withstand their enterprise, and control their
doctrine: especially seeing that I did neither by word, nor writing, ever give
the^ any occasion. But if this be their love, and perfection, then truly I
confess that I mean not to walk with them. I envy not their happiness,
neither care I amongst them to be reckoned imperfect. In deed these speeches
be such as the Anabaptists used against the preachers of the Gospel,
Bullenger against the Anabaptists.
which withstode their heresy, they rayled on them calling them Lutherans.
Fol. 254. False and carnal Gospellers 255. erroneous and unskillful preachers
256. succeders of the Pharisees. ibid. Hypocrites, blind guides, fools,
serpents, generations of vipers, hirelinges, 2576. fellows of thieves whom
David makes mention of Psalm. 50. These were the flowers of Anabaptists
Rhetorique: but S Paul teaches us another kind of Eloquence, which becomes
the children of God. 1. Cor. 16.14. Gal. 5.22. 1. Cor. 13.4. 1. John. 3.18.
Let all things (says he) be done in love, and the fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith: Love suffers
long, it is bountiful, it enuieth not, it does not boast, it is in deed and
truth, not in tongue and word only. Now whether this family have been taught
in the schole of the holy ghost, or in the schole of the Anabaptists, I leave
it to the indifferent reader to be considered. But if any man shall muse to see
such envious speeches to flow from so lovely a familye, I answer: No
merueile at all, for such a fountain, such water: men gather not grapes of
thorns, nor figs of thistles. And true it is that our Savior says, Math.
7.16. Luke 6.44. Math. 12.34.
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

ARTICLE. 1. No Church.
THe house of Love says HN is the Church of God. 1. Exhor. cap. 7. s. 37.

Theophilus his exposition.

FIrst note that it is all one to say the house of Love and the house of God:
the familye of Love, and the family of God: and then proceed.

William Wilkinson.

Dark words and double speeches, have bin always the starting holes of
heretics, plain meaning men walk openly at noone, lewd and evil disposed
persons vage, and wander abroad at midnight. John. 3.20.
For he that evil does, hates the light, neither comes to the light least
his deeds should be reproved. Ye speak in a riddle, neither does your reason
follow. Because it is framed A petitione principij. You take that to be
granted which is in controversy (or rather clean false.) For what proprietye
of speech is this, or how does this reason follow: The house of God is the
Church of God: therefore the good willing ones in England, Fam. of Love in the
brief rehearsal the title.
which are named the Familye of Love, are the Church of God. But if you will in
plain words affirm, that you only which are of that familye, and no man else
which is not of that societye, is of the Church: First I answer, Bulling. 1.
book chap. 8. leaf. 18. a
that the Anabaptists did likewise of their conuenticles affirm that they
were the true Church: Next I say: that when I shall understand your meaning
better, I will tell you more. In the mean time I would you knew, Cyp. de
simpl. August. ad Crescon. 2. book 7. chapter.
that you are not of the Church, but ye have made a Schism from the Church.
Christ's coat without seame ye have rent in pieces. Truly says a learned
father: whosoever does cut a sunder the unity, and disturb the peace of the
Church, Schismatiques. who.
whereby the fellowship of the faithful is torn into diverse parts, he is a
Schismatique. Such were Chorah, Number. 16.1.
Dathan, and Abiram against Moses: such were they which disquieted the church
of Corinth by holding some of Paul: 2. Cor. 1.12.
some of Peter: some of Appollos, some of Christ. Acts. 20.28.29 30. verses.
Such are they whom S. Paul bad the Elders of Ephesus take heed of, for they
should be grievous wolves not sparing the flock, who speaking perverse things,
should draw disciples after them. Of such S. Paul says: Romans 16.17.18.
I beseech you brethren mark those, which cause dissension amongst you,
contrary to the doctrine which you have received, and avoid them. etc. As for
you of that Family, Fam. bred and brought up among the Papists. Deuteronomy. 27.18.
neither were ye of us, nor went from us. So ye have choked the word in many
weak brethren, laying stumbling blocks in the ways of the simple. Ye have led
the blind out of their way, therefore are ye by Gods mouth accursed. And
albeit that offenses must needs come, Math. 18.7.
yet woe be to him by whom they come, it were better a millestone were hanged
about his neck, then to offend one of the little ones. There must be heresies in
the Church to try the faithful, 1. Cor. 11.19. Revel. 3.11.
and happy is he that holds fast least another take his crown. When ye can
show me by the scripture, that your Family is the house of God, 1. Tim. 3.15.
the pillar of the truth, I shall confess my self to be in an error. Christ
has given us warning to take heed that no man deceive us, Math. 24.5.24.
for many shall come in his name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many:
and there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets etc. but he has told
us before that we should not believe them, nor go after the^. Believe not every
spirit (says S. John, 1. John. 4.1.
) many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Thus are we warned in the
mouth of the son of God, and if the sword come and take us away, Ezech. 33.4.
our blood shall be upon our own head.

HN. His assertion.

1. Epist. cap. 2. sent. 2.6. 1. Exhor. cap. 7. sent. 38. leaf. 16.
IT is the hill of the Lord whereon his house is builded, to the which he that
subiecteth not himself, is a false heart, and stands minded against God, and
his Church.

Theophilus exposition.

THat is spoken of the love it self, and not of the Family: (For how is an
house to be builded on an house?) which thing also may not be denied, for so
much as God is love, and the other must consequently or necessarily follow.

William Wilkinson.

FIrst to the text of HN. and to Theophilus his exposition. The familye says
HN. is the hill of the Lord whereon his house is builded, for proof he
quoteth. Esa. 2.2. a. Mich. 4.1. a. Scripture abused.
It shall come to pass in the last day, the mountain of the Lords house
shall be prepared in the top of the mountains. etc. The sense of the which
places of the prophets is, Last day.
that in the last day vz. in ye first coming of the son of God, the Church
shall by him be restored to her glorious beauty, the which places in HN. his
new gospel 3. chap. 3. sent. are applied to HN. himself, and to the time of
his appearaunce in these words. Now shall the law be taught out of Sion:
Euang. cap. 3. sent. 3. Psalm. 118.24.
and in the 4. sent. for this is the day of promise: Psalm. and ver. 24. c.
which the Lord has made: which first place is directly understood of Christ,
and the building again of the Church by him. The other place of the psalm.
declared that David being appointed by God to be king over Israel, should
deliver the Arc out of the hands of the Philistines: wherein he foreshewed
that by a figure which was true in Christ. Ephe. 4. verses. Ephesians. 4.4.
4.8.11.12.13. the which HN. presumptuously taking unto himself, grossly
erreth in applying the scripture, and gracelesly blasphemeth ye son of God.
First making Christ less careful of his Church, than he is in deed: Secondly
he is openly impious in this, that whereas Christ says, All is finished: Marc.
15.28. John. 20.30.
(meaning all types and figures,) HN. makes all imperfect, affirming that in
him and his appearaunce all becomes fulfilled. Euang. praeface. sent. 2.
His words be these: The day of Love Psalm. 118. ver. 24. c. is the appearing
and coming. Mat. 24. c. Luke 17. c. Acts. 24. of our Lord Jesus Christ in
the resurrection of the dead. Esa. 26. c. 1. Cor. 15. f. Wherein the law of the
Prophets and all that is written of Christ becomes fulfilled. Luke. 24. c.


Scriptures quoted in vain.
All which places by him quoted are very plainly meant of the resurrection, that
is, the second resurrection from death, and the second coming of Christ to
judgment: whereby HN seems to emply the resurrection of the body, and the
second coming of Christ to judgment to be past already, which is heresy: or
else quoting those places for his first coming he alleges them amiss, which
is ignorance.

HN.

TO the which he that subiecteth not himself is a false heart.

William Wilkinson.

Cyp. de simpl. praelat.
IT is very true, he that submits not himself to the Church of God is a
false heart. etc. For he shall never have God for his Father, which has not the
Church for his mother. August. ad petrum. dia. cap. 34 6* Epist. 1. book.
The Church is Noah's Arc out of the which he that is must needs be drowned.
Christianus non est, qui in Christi ecclesia non est says Cyprian. He is not a
Christian which is not of ye Church of Christ. Cyp. ibid. throughout.
They be Antichrists which go out of the Church, and deal against the
Church. The which Church of Christ if your Family be, Show me out of the
scriptures these marks whereby the Church ought to be known: this if you can
truly do, I confess that you have the Church: if ye cannot, beware least the
further ye wander from the shepfold, the further ye go astray from Christ, and
increase you own damnation. Therefore look well to your standing. Iud. 6. verse.
The doctrine is very true, yet the place quoted by HN Fol, 16. sent. 38. out
of S. Jude to prove it is very impertinent having no such proof in it as he
alleges it for. For how hangs this reason together. God has reserved unto
the Angels (which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation)
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day, which S.
Peter calls their damnation. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Therefore he that turns away from the comminalty of Love (which as you
term is the Church of God) brings even so over himself the judgment of
his condemnation. But it were heartily to be wished that his fault in abusing
Scripture were the least (which in the eyes of God is damnable) so should not
his cancred and poisoned Heresies, besides his own guilt, draw with them
likewise the souls of those that stumble upon him. And thus much for HN his
text. Now to Theophilus exposition.

Theophilus.

YOu say that this clause: It is the hill of the Lord: is spoken of the love it
self, and not of the family.

W. Wilkinson.

THen belike you would have me take your meaning to be this. The love (ye is
God ye say, for so in the next clause ye expound it) is the hill of the Lord,
whereon his Church is builded. What a perplexity of speech is this, ye ye can
not utter your mind so, ye I may understand ye? If you mean ye God is only
ye foundation of his Church. I grant: yet has not your Paraphrasis upon HN.
his words as yet forced thus much. Ergo, God is the foundation of your Love
Family. Ye take in hand to explicate HN. his meaning, but the old Proverb
will still belike be true: An evil expositor marreth the text. For herein you
do but raise dust with your shufflyng: and tell us there is a mark if we could
see it, when ye have dimmed it with a dark exposition so, that it can not be
seen. For in my simple judgment you leave the words very doubtful. For
whereas you make a circumloqution and say, it may not be denied, for as much
as God is love and the other must consequently or necessarily follow. I
understand HN. very well, when he says God is love, it is very true, and
therefore I take it that in diverse places he uses this diffuse term the love,
for the Lord our God as a word that is equiualente of signification. But
whereas you say the other must consequently or necessarily follow, I understand
not yet what you mean, for it is as though ye bad me look steadfastly and yet
shut mine eyes: For what is the other which you add. Is the sense this? the
Family of Love (by you pretended) is Gods Church: and that God is the ground
of that your Family? Give me leave to use your own words, neither is the
consequent good: nor does it follow of necessity for which you induce it. For
to let pass your learned and weighty Parenthesis (for how is an house to be
builded on an house?) with a sad interrogatorie ministered in the same, what a
necessary conseque^t is this? God is the hill of the Lord: or this, God is the
foundation of his Church Ergo, your pretended Family is the Church of God. How
this consequent does halte in his followyng, he that knows what a consequent
means can easily consider. But it seems that you are no great gatherer of
necessary consequentes: albeit ye iumbling stumbled on these words: To follow
consequently or necessarily unawares. But if hereafter upon a further
deliberation by you had you shall enforce your consequent more necessarily: I
shall hit on your meaning the better and so shape you a fitter answer. And
thus much of the first Article.

An addition to the first Article, out of HN.

1. Exhor. cap. 12. sent. 42. fol. 27.
THe Family and co^munaltie of the same house (vid. of the love) is Gods chosen
people of Israel, and he him self with them is. Ierem. 24. a. and 31. d.
Ezech. 27. c. Apoc. 21. a. their God, and will likewise bide their God, from
generation to generation, everlastingly. And if they chance to transgress in
any thing, God will then. 1. Chron. 3. chaste^ teach and inform them: but he
will no more withdraw his grace and mercy from them. Psalm. 89. c.d. For God
has chosen none other house, nor Ierem. 7. b. Temple, 1. Exhort. cap. 20.
sent. 7. fol. 49
but 1. Cor. 3. b. c. and 2. Cor. 6. b. c. the godly children, or Communialtie
of love. For the F. of L. is the mercy seat of the love (that is of the Lord,)
the schole of grace: Exhor. Cap. 12.44. Heb. 5. a. Dictata. cap. 19. sent. 3.
Euang. praefac. sent. 6. and cap. 23 sent. 7. Euang. cap. 3. sent. 3. fol. 4.
HN. wresteth. 3. Article of the Lords Prayer. Euang. cap. 24. sent. 9.
The rest prepared from the beginning, for the people of God and all repentaunt
persons. It is the Sion and Jerusalem from whence the law was prophesied Esaias.
2. Mich. 4. to come. The Family of Love is the true tabernacle of God, which
shall in all perfection be everlastingly upon earth. For so it has pleased God
to the end that his will and judgment of his righteousness may be done upon
earth, as it is in heaven Math. 6. Luke. 11. All prophesies and ministratio^s,
which are gone from God do tend or lead (to the Family of Love) as to an
everlasting, very true, perfect, good and most holy service of the love (that
is the Lord) which shall remain in the same clearenes in his ministry
everlastingly to the end that the same most holy Prophet good from henceforth
might perpetually be declared upon earth.

W. Wilkinson.

THese have I (good Reader) put down as a taste, that thou might be
somewhat acquainted with their horrible blasphemies: and thereby thou knowing
them, might more carefully eschew and avoid them.

ARTICLE. 2. HN. No truth.
HN. says that he can not perceive nor find the true belief in Jesus Christ
amongst any people upon earth, that walk without the Communialtie of love,
and live unto them selves: and that same is appeared and manifested unto the
holy ones of God in the Communialtie. 1. John. 1.3. a. of the love, through the
appearyng. Mat. 25.3. d. Act. 1.11. d. of the coming of Jesus Christ, out of
the most high heaven. So can not likewise the same most holy belief become
rightly witnessed or confessed by any other people, nation, or communialities,
but only by the 1. Cor. 12. a. b. Ephesians. 4. b. communialitie of the holy ones
in the love, or by such as walk and live. 1. Pet. 1. b. 1. John. 3. b. and. 4.
b. obediently under the gracious word and his service of love.

W. Wilkinson.

HN. says, he can not perceive or find the true belief. etc. to this I
answer, that it is Gods just, though secret, judgment, that when men ask
amiss they do not obtain, Iam. 4.3.
when they knock at the wrong door, they are not let in, and being on sleep
when the bridgrome comes and want light in their lamps, they enter not in,
Math. 25.11.12.
with him into the Marriage. That HN. has not found nor perceived the truth,
the reason is he will not learn. Pro. 8.8.9. he stops his ears charm the
charmer never so wisely. Prou. 8.8.9.
Psalm. 58.4.5. The Lord will guide the^ that be meek in his way. Psalm. 58.4.5.
Psalm. 25.9. but knowledge enters not into a froward soul, and a fool that
seeks wisdom finds her not: for the Lord withstandeth the proud and
gives grace unto the humble. 1. Pet. 5.5. The Israelites sought God as a
people desirous to know his ways, but because the fear of him was learned by
men's precepts Esaias, 29.13. and they were self conceited wise Esaias. 5.21.
Therefore did they hear and not understand, see and not perceive, their heart
was fat, their ears were heavy and their eyes were shut. Esaias. 6.9.10. Where
note (courteous Reader) that this holy Prophet (for so will the Ioigner needs
have us for to take him) HN. and our Papists use the self same weapon, and by
the same knife seek to cut the throat of gods Church, which they handle after
this sort. Popish chaleng 9. Artic, 8. demaun. D. Fulkes book. Stapleto^.
Controuer. 1 lib. 4. cap. 9. page 121.
Your Church ye Protestates was not always visible neither did it always
appear unto the world. Therefore it is not the true Church. What a faint
Consequent and weak reason this is (especially with our Papists, which can
not abide an Argument drawn from the Negative) by this which follows being
the like may easily be proved. I see no sun (says the blind man) neither
hear I any sweetness of song or pleasant Music, says the deaf man.
Therefore there is no sun says the one, nor song quoth the other. HN. the
son of perdition, and the Romish brood of old Hipocrites can not see the
truth, or will not: therefore there is no truth at all. The communialitie of
the holy ones in the love (for so unless ye term them they will be angry out
of measure) creep in corners as owls do at noone, even as did the
Anabaptists in the first spryng time of their heresy: Simlers epist. fol. 1.
therefore there is now no Family of Love, neither were there any Anabaptists
any where in times past: this Argument as it is evident in the one, so will it
not be denied by ye other. Albeit in deed it be a feeble kind of disputyng
and far swaruyng from all rule of reason. For the seeing or not seeing of
mortal man does not approve or disprove the truth of the immortal God. Pharao
king of Egypt saw Moses and Aaron, Exodus.
and confessed the miracles by the^ wrought to be true miracles: yet saw he not
a reason to persuade him to let Israel go. John Baptist did as it were point
out Christ with his finger, saying: John. 1.36. Marc. 7.37.
Behold the lamb of God. The Jews confessed that Christ had done all things
well. Math. 9.4.
The Pharisees saw their thoughts disclosed yet reasoned they thus: The
Scribes and Pharisees and rulers believe not on him: but only the rude and
accursed multitude. Therefore is he not the Messiah. John. 7.48.
And if I should use the like form of Argument as this is: trow ye the Family
would think the consequent necessary? Before the days of Queen Mary, or An.
1555. at the furthest, this Lovely Family was never seen nor heard of, only
the hatchers of this Family, the Libertines, the Arria^s, the Anabaptists,
the Free will men, Fathers of the Fam. of Love, Apoc. 9.3.
and Catharistes were than extant: but as yet this brood of Locustes had not
broken out of the bottomless pit neither had it the name of Love, which it
now has. Therefore the Family of Love neither is the Church of God, neither is
the holy truth of God in that their conuenticle: but unto them and their
Patriarch HN. I leave such kind of reasonyng, most humbly beseechyng God to
give them eyes to see, and tongues to confess the truth to Gods glory and the
safegarde of their souls in the appearaunce of his Christ.

After HN. had told his Disciples, where he could not find the truth, now he
tells them where he found it. vz.

HN.

THe same is appeared and manifested unto the holy ones of God in the
Communialtie of Love.

W. Wilkinson.

SO that then belike, unless it be granted him that he found it there, all
his labor is lost. Secondly it was not found out there before he found it,
and to that purpose it is which in his new Euangely he says. Cap. 2. sent. 11
leaf. 7.
He will declare the secret mysteries of God, and make relation of things
hidden from the world until his new day. Cap. 1. sent. 1. fol. 3.
etc. And he is anointed with the holy Ghost: Godded with God in the spirit
of his love: made heir with Christ in the heavenly goods of the riches of
God: elected to be a minister of the gracious word, which is now in the last
time raised up by God according to the promise. Ierem. 33. Which is meant of
Christ, wherein HN. blasphemeth. What if for all these, his great boastyng
crakes, his swellyng words of vanity turn to smoke out of the furnace, and
dust before the wind? what then? if for all his outfacyng of the simplicity
of the Gospel, and shouldring out the son of God, the Lord lay open his
folly to the world and his shame unto the sons of men? And if he found no
truth, or if it be truth, yet not of his findyng. Was there no truth before he
told it? Was there no Gospel before his heap of confusion and huge lompe of
shapeles and unshamefast heresies? If there was (as most undoubtedly there was)
a light before darkness, and an Ark of God before Dagon the Philistian Idol,
why boasted he then thus presumptuously, that the truth was of his findyng
only? Neither is it yet agreed among his new peruertes, concerning the age of
this new found heresy. For some of his Sectaries being demanded where his
Church was from the Apostles time, until the appearaunce of HN. this new found
Prophet of theirs, he answered not only obscurely to the question, but also
fondely to the purpose, and vnfittely to satisfy a waueryng conscience. Truth
from Christ and the Apostles time until HN. where the Fam. affirm it was.
It was in the land of the living among the holy ones. But thus does the Lord
suffer their eyes to dazell, who are quick sighted to seek out Fantasies to
feed the it itchyng ears of them who^ no doctrine can content.

HN. alleges. 1. John. 1. a for proof: The words be these. 1. John. 1. a.
That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you that ye may also have
fellowshyp with us, and that our fellowship may be with the Father, and with
his son Jesus Christ. Where S. John teaches he is a true witness, because he
saw and heard: secondely he was a profitable minister, because he kept it not
to him self but declared it unto others. Thirdly the profit that does ensue
to the Children of God by S. John's declaration: that ye may have fellowship
with us. Lastly to make his message more amiable in the sight of men, and me^
to embrace the same more greedely, he adds: that our fellowship may be with
God the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and to entise them more
effectually to take hold of Christ, he shows that Christ comes not bare or
naked, but clothed and accompanied with all his mercies, to the increasing of
his children and comfort of the godly. This word fellowship gives us to
understand, that among the godly there ought to be a mutual feelyng of
infirmities, with a supplying of all comfort both in things spiritual and
temporal. This doctrine contains the true Exposition of the Article of our
belief. Communion of Saints expounded.
I believe the communion of Saints. So that HN. might even as well have found
his Communialty, (nay with much more ease and less labor) in the belief as in
S. John the Apostle.

But let us see the application of this place of S. John. The faithful have
fellowship with the Apostles and God the Father, in or with Christ Jesus:
Therefore this fellowship is in the family of your love only, and there is no
society in truth but yours. Not so. For many a day before HN. was heard of was
there a Communialitie of Saints, neither was it a Communialitie of goods, of
which the Anabaptists did dream, neither that filthy and graceles
Communialitie of the Femal kind of wives, virgins etc. which the
Nicholaitanes did dote of: Apoc. 2.6.
But this it was that made HN. so far to ouershoote him self, that
wheresoever he found this word Communialitie or fellowship, straight way he
imagined that it might prove unto us the Family of his new invention. For
neither did the words Acts. 2.44. Act. 4.32. And all that believed were in
one place, and had all things common (meaning that quoad ad vsum to help and
releive the necessity of such as could not labor, there ought to be a mutual
contribution among the faithful of the irtemporall blessings, as there is in
all Churches rightly governed) prove quoad possessionem according to private
right no man ought to enjoy any lands or other possession to the mainteinance
of his calling and nourishyng of his family, though in holy Scripture it be
set down for an vnfaillible: truth that Phillip the Deacon had a house: so had
Matthew and Peter, and Joseph of Aramathia, Lidia a purple seller and Cornelius
the Captain had private abidyngs and great wealth: so had Philemon a
faithful Preacher and companion of Paul the Apostle both house and
servants, yet no Community.

HN.

How HN. found the truth.
THyrdly he tells them how he found the truth: Through the appearyng of
Jesus Christ out of the high heaven.

W. Wilkinson.

TO prove that Christ appeared unto him he cites. Math. 25. d. wherein is
contained how Christ shall come in his second coming, to separate the sheep
from the goats etc. Act. 1.11. b. the men in white garments said he shall
come again, so as ye have seen him go into heaven. Thus then if Christ did
appear in his body (to HN.) and in his second coming, or if he appeared not
otherwise, than did he not appear to HN. at all: and does the mighty Rabby of
ye Familiely: which is very like to be true: Math. 22.23. 2. Tim. 2. v. 17.18.
or else with the Sadducies he denies the resurrection, or with Himeneus and
Philetus he affirms that the resurrection is past already.

HN.

THe same most holy belief cannot become uprightly witnessed, nor confessed by
any other people. etc.

William Wilkinson.

THis is the last part of HN his assertion, Where HN. found the truth.
wherein he shows where only the truth and true belief is to be looked for:
that is in the Familye of Love, of his coigning and not else where. The mortar
whereby he labors to build, is vnte^pered, the stones are very precious but
neither fit nor coucheable in that place wherein he says they shall be laid.
The place by him alleged 1. Cor. 12. a. b. prove that although there be
diuersitye of gifts in Gods Church, yet is it thereby builded up. For there is
but one spirit whereby, and one Lord to whom the Church is builded. And this
he amplifyeth by diverse examples and similitudes of the body of man. etc. And
Ephe. 4. b. he shows that there is but one Church, one Faith, one Baptism,
and yet are there diverse functions instituted of God for the building up of the
Church as Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and teachers, yet do all these
diverse gifts tend this one, and the same end.1. to the gathering together of
the Saints.2. to the edification of the Church.3. to the unity of faith. And
to touch S. Paul his meaning and scope: Therefore Christians ought to live
charitably together in love. Does this then prove, that if men should agree,
they had the truth, and none but they that do agree? does unity of minds
prove a truth in doctrine? Unity not always proves the truth.
S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles in their fervent prayer affirm that 1.
Pontius Pilate.2. the gentiles.3. the Jews agreed to put Christ to death. Act.
1.27.28. Was here truth because they had unity? Even so though I grant all to
be true that S. Paul affirms (as no doubt it is very true) yet has not HN
fitly alleged these places. 1. Cor. 12. b. Ephe. 4. b. to prove that the truth
is no where taught but in his Familye.

HN.

11. Epist. cap. 5. sent. 4. and.1. Epist. cap. 1. sent. 5.
Without the Family, is nothing but good thinking, tedious travail, labor,
and misery.

Theophilus.

SO then this is very true (saving that you have put truth, for true belief)
the rest of the words are spoken or referred to the rest which God has
reserved to his chose^ in that house, and to the service of that house. Look
better on the text.

William Wilkinson.

Whensoever any man shall be without or depart from the Church, he shall
neither find rest in body, nor peace in conscience: as they do very well
know, who have departed and fallen away from the known truth, or which at any
time suffer their consciences to waver and halte betwixt God, and Baal, truth,
and error, light, and darkness. God for Christ his sake keep us from falling
away from the truth, or standing in mammering thereof, knowing that Neuters, and
Hipocrites, with Lukewarm brethren shall be spewed out of Gods mouth, which HN
and his Familye must take heed and harken to, which gives any man liberty
(so he be of their Familye) to embrace, HN. gives liberty of Religion.
and like of what religion he list, in his new Euangely. cap. 1. sent. 4.

Now if there be nothing but travail, misery, etc. Why wish ye peace and
health unto them, which are dogs, and not of the household of Faith,
permitting them what religion they will. But hereby ye thought to stretch your
Familye, from sea to sea, and from one end of the world to another. So that
here you show what kindred and acquaintau^ce your Heresy has with ye
Anabaptists, Bullinger against the Anabap. 2. book. 4. Chap.
who affirm that for their quietness sake they may confirm them selves to
any Religion of the people amongst who^ they dwell. How near you and these
me^ iumpe, I leave to the discrete Reader to discern. M. Bullinger his censure
on them is this. Of this judgment was that beast David George (says he) and
this sect is the most pestilent of all others. Thus much says M. Bullinger who
was acquainted with the^ as he him self testifies. I did put truth for true
belief, thinkyng them to be all one, Bullinger 1. book. 4. chap. leaf. 9. b.
line. 17.
neither as yet have ye showed any difference betwixt them. I have looked on
HN. his text sufficiently, God give you grace to look better on the Testament:
and to come back to the truth whence ye have slydden, and keep me in that
which I do and have professed.

HN.

THe true light has not been declared by any of them all, HN. 11. Epist. cap.
5. sent. 4. 1. Exhort. cap. 16. sent. 9. leaf. 42.
that have taken on, set forth and taught before the same, and without the same
Family of Love. Heb. 9. b. and. 10.

Theophilus.

YOu should do well to allege the text as it is, and not your own imagination,
which is that there is, has been or can be any more tha^ one true light (vz.
Christ) or the love which presently is appeared to his chosen in the house of
love or of God. For before and without the Church and his service there ca^ be
no truth taught.

W. Wilkinson.

THat our blind southsayer told us, there is not any truth to be found,
without his fond Family, although it has by me been handled, in that part of
this Article, which immediately goes before, yet this learned Elder of this
Lovely Family barketh and brauleth still against us, and will not suffer plain
and manifest truth to stop his mouth. And although the place by me alleged out
of HN. be verbatim and word for word as I alleged it, yet will he not be
satisfied, but as it were facyng me out with a card of x. he seeks to
ouerrunne me with his eloquence, and says to blanke me withal, that I have
mistaken and falsified the author. But because he takes me up for an Imaginer
of the text, vouchsafe gentle and courteous Reader to way mine Imagination, as
he pleases to term it. The place by me rised out of the 1. Exhort. of HN.
Cap. 16. sent. 9. fol. 42. is in the very first line thus. Therefore the holy
nor the most holy, the true nor the most true light (which the most highest
has presently in his most holy service under the obedience of the love given
unto us, for to be declared forth) has not Heb. 9. b. 10. a. been declared by
any of the^ all, that have taken on, set forth, and taught any thing before
this same or without this same our service of the love. Are not these my very
words saving that for breuities sake I pretermitted your long and unnecessary
Parenthesis? Have I not dealt truly with your houshold-father in that I truly
and faithfully as from his own mouth did report his words? Am I not unjustly
charged and falsely blamed for my Imagination in the text of so worthy an
Author? But seeing it is not expedient that I be mine own judge of mine
innocence, I refer me to the sentence of the indifferent Reader, whom also I
desire to be advertised, that he has heard me take an Elder halting in his
word, Theophilus utters an untruth wittingly. 1. chap. 7. senten.
when as the faith of their Family ( HN. I mean) in the book by him
entitled. Dictata per HN. or documentable sentences says, nothing can come
from the true perfection, but all humility and meek virtues and righteousness
flows from all perfection. Now if to slander and misreport be a work of
righteousness and worthy of their perfection, let them glory therein, I had
rather in that sort be imperfect. As for me and those that desire not hand over
head to receive all that comes from every man, it is sufficient and shall be that
if they lavish out any untruth, that I be pardoned for not sealyng unto it,
before I way it in Gods balance, least it prove light, and try it at the
touchstone least it be counterfeite.

The places of Scripture by HN. quoted are very impertinent and absurdely
alleged, having not any three words that sound toward such a sense as he
would father on them.

Theophilus.

THere has not been, is, ne can be any more tha^ one light which is presently
appeared unto his chosen in the house of love, or as HN. says, our house of
love.

W. Wilkinson.

WHy then have ye left the Church, into the which ye were Baptized? why did ye
promise ye would manfully fight under Christ's banner, and continue his
faithful soldier and servant to your lives end, HN. and his scholars
traitors of Christ's Church.
and now like a runnagate Apostata and a cowardly soldier or rather a
traitorous Judas ye betray his Saints to Satan, and break truce with the son
of God, into whose obedience ye were sworn? Why do ye like children past grace
insolently taunt and check your mother, and impudently tread under your feet
the Lords pearls as most filthy swine? why come you not to ye light that your
works may be seen how they are wrought in God? what mean you to frame and
imagine to your self a new Church? For whereas so often you affirm, that you
have no church but ours, no assemblies but ours, why does HN. term it our
Family or service? does not this word, our Family, note a particular sect or
faction in the possession of a few. Ye say very truly there can not be any
truth without the Church. Ephesians. 4.4.
If this be true then your doctrine is false, for there is but one Lord, one
faith, one redeemer, one spirit of sanctification, one Abraham the father of
the faithful, one Isaac, one Jacob, one body whereof we all are members. The
Church has but one head and one body. As for deridyng and scoffing Ismaell,
he shall be cast out with the bondmayd his mother: profane Esau shall have no
part in the Lords inheritance, neither your Schismatic Family unless ye
repent heartily for that which is past. They Jews cried the Temple of the Lord,
and yet were they a stiffenecked peopel: you cry the school of grace the mercy
seat, the Family of the Lord, and yet all is but hypocrisy. For the Jews
had an external tabernacle instituted of God. Therefore they might boast better
tha^ you. You have coined and invented a Schism, and yet very co^fidently you
affirm, your conue^ticle is the Church without the which is no truth to be
looked for.

An Addition of HN. unto the 2. Article.

Euang. cap. 4. sent. 5.
NO man (says HN.) how wise soever he be in the knowledge of the Scriptures,
can by any mean understand or comprehend the wisdom of God, Sent. 7. 1.
Exhort. chap. 16. sent. 16.
but only they that be of the Family: who soever is without the Family is
inueigled with wiles, subtletie, and falsechode. For no man rightly according
to truth of the Scriptures, nor according to the spiritual understanding of
the godly wisdom, can deal in, or use the true Gods service, nor the services
of the holy word, but only the Illuminate Elders in the godly wisdom which
walk in the house of love.

Euang. chap. 23. sent. 6.
The wise men of the world and the Scripture learned have not known the verity
of the heavenly truth, nor yet obtained or gotten the clearenes with Christ.

It is mere lies and untruth, Euang. cap. 33. sent. 11.12.13.
what the Scripture learned through the knowledge they got out of the
Scriptures, institute or teach. etc.

They preach in deed the letter and Imagination of their knowledge, but not
the word of the living God. 1. Exhort. cap. 16.17.18 Cap. 16. sent. 5.
Therefore says he they are me^ whose knowledge does imagine much in them.

ARTICLE. 3. of HN. No Baptism.
WIthout the Familye of Love (says HN) there is no true Christian Baptism. 1.
Exhort. cap. 7. sent. 10.11.32. fol. 12. and. cap. 12. sent. 44. fol. 27.


This same is the schole of grace, to an everlasting remission of sins over
all such as cleave there under.

There is no true Christianitye but the Comminalty of the holy ones in the love
of Christ Jesus. Ion. 17. c. Ephe. 4. a. h. and. cap. 16. sent. 20. fol. 43.


All other that have not the Christian doctrine of the service of the love
forgoing their Baptism, It is not meet and convenient, that men should count
such unbelievers, and unbaptized ones for Christians: neither yet also for men,
at whose hands one should any way suppose or trust to find any word of Ioh.
1. a. 3. a. gods truth or yet any works Mar. 1. a. righteousness or Gods
service, Euang. cap. 23. sent. 7. and. cap. 4. sent. 57.
that God regards or accepts. They are without Christ's body.

Theophilus.

COnsider better of the text. Rather under the obedience of the father and his
love, under the obedience of Christ, and his belief, and the obedience of the
holy ghost, and his renewing of the life, and mind etc. to be baptized in the
name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. etc.

William Wilkinson.

WHat account HN. makes of our Church, and the truth therein taught, is
already declared. Now follows it to be understood, what his opinion is of our
Sacraments. And first to speak of baptism (For of the holy Sacrament of the
supper of our Lord he has written very little) what he attributes to our
Church therein is plain, that unless we have our foregoing in the doctrine of
the love, we are not to be counted of him, and his Fam, to be baptized ones. To
the which I will answer briefly, if first he shall satisfy me in this
demand: Whether when there was no Family of Love, there were no upright
baptism in England? If he say there was a lawful baptism, than is there an
upright baptism without the foregoing of his lovely doctrine, and without his
Family a true Christian baptism. If he say there was none, than do I
answer, that these Famelers in England are not rightly baptized, and speak
the truth, and work righteousness, or an acceptable work in the sight of God.
To the which, if the Familye shall further answer, though then they were not,
yet since they have bin rightly baptized. This it may be, Vitels the Ioyner
will answer to approve his heretical behavior at Cholchester: ad to this I
am to reply, that if the Fam. acknowledge a rebaptization, then are they
hypocrites all the sort of them. For they in their last confession (being a
rehearsal of their doctrine, belief, and religion,) affirm, Confess. leaf.
7. a. Ibid. 6. leaf. v.
that they do deal simply, and plainly. etc, We have (say they,) nor use any
other Ceremonies, laws, statutes, nor Sacraments: of Baptism, and supper of
the Lord, then such as are ministered in the Church of England. But I say that
the Church of England uses not rebaptization. Therefore if they be rebaptised,
they be double faced dissemblers. Furthermore if they shall affirm that they
use not other Sacraments etc. than is used in the Church of England, that is:
in their Fam. in the Church of England, because it was said in the first
Article, that we have no Church without their Family: I answer: They pretend
in their confession, they deal faithfully with all men: If this be their
faith, what I pray you is their falshode. Furthermore I let pass to repeat,
much less to confute, that fond opinion of those vain heads, which thought
the parties baptized of heretics, ought to be rebaptised again. Of this
opinion the Fam. of Love seems to like very well, for because they affirm
before, that without this Fam. there is no Christian baptism.

And thus much for this Article is sufficient. As for you friend Theophilus, ye
huddle up so, that no man can understand you: when you shall learn to speak
out of the mouth, and leave to fumble with your. etc. I will tell you my mind
more art large.

An addition of the 3. Article of HN.

HN. Reproves our doctrine with this term, HN. Euang. cap. 19. sent. 5.6.
and handful of water, an Elementish water. Whosoever is not baptized according
to the form and manner of John, who baptized the people confessing their
sins, flowing with the water of repentance into their hearts, he is not
rightly baptized, neither may he boast else that he is a Christian. Sent. 11.


ARTICLE. 4. HN. No forgeuenes of sins.
WIthout he Familye faith HN. there is no forgeuenes of sins: 1. Exhor. cap.
7. sent. 40. and cap. 12. sent. 44. Euang. chap. 41.7.
for this is the true Christianitye the Familye of Love, wherein God himself
2. Cor. 6. b. Apoc. 21. a. dwells, lives, and walks.

Theophilus.

FOr so it is agreeable with the Scripture.

William Wilkinson.

THe truth of this exposition, I must gladly grant, and willingly confess.
vz. No pardon of sins without the Church of Christ. For truly it is said. No
man must sever or put in sunder, that which God has lincked together, and so
in our Creed the Communion of Saints, and forgiveness of sins are joined
together. Ephesians. 5.25.26.27.
And S. Paul says, that Christ gave him self for the Churches, to satisfy
it, and cleanse it, by the washyng of the water through the word, that he
might make it a glorious Church spotless and without wrinckle. etc. And I know
very well that we are naked in our selves and poor, but in Christ, and his
Church so many as are members of that head are clothed richly, with the
manifold graces of God, and continaully enriched. And to this purpose fitly
says the spirit of god by Esaias the Prophet, Esaias. 45.14.
God is in the Church: and the 21. of the Apocal. 3. a. is fitly alleged, and
the truest hitherto that HN. has cied. As for his place out of the Corinth, 2.
Cor. 6. b.
there is no such thing, nor any step of such a sense as he seems to
allege it for. All the Article if it should be given, yet shall you not
thereby prove that without your particular conue^ticles, Math. 16.19. and.
18.18. John. 20.23.
and Schismatic assembles, is no remission of sins. For the promise of the
keys, and the remission is given to the Church which is Christ's spouse, not
to an harlot, and shameless strumpet. Jerusalem above is free, and is the mother
of us all: but your Agar is in bondage, and is cast forth with her children.
The Lord give you grace to consider in what case you are. There is no favor of
God to them that forsake his truth, and cleave unto error. Most of your
illuminates have been professors, though now most deriders of the gospel, and
skoffers of Religion, making a profession of religion, but inwardly having
denied the power thereof. The further you walk in darcknes, the greater is
your danger.

An addition to the 4. Article.

THe same doctrine is in diverse other places affirmed that there is no pardon.
etc. 1. Exhort. cap. 11. sent. 10. and cap. 15. sent. 29. etc. cap. 18. sent.
7. Euang. cap. 41. sent. 7.

ARTICLE. 5. HN. No Ministry.
WE must have respect unto the service ministered in the Family by the Elders
thereof. 1. Exhort. cap. 12. sent. 40.41.42.43.44. and. cap. 16. sent. 16.
For God has chosen unto him self the Family of love, and this service of
the holy and gracious word: for their ministration is the safe making
ministration.

Neither is there any minister of the word rightly called but by their
Family. Lam. co^p. sent. 31.


Theophilus.

BEcause their exercise is obedience and love according to the requiryng of his
word.

William Wilkinson.

TRue it is that Gods ministry is an holy and sacred thing, in thought not to
be violated, in word and deed greatly to be had in reverence. Euang. cap. 52.7
Math. 4.14.
For they which are Gods messengers do bring the glad tidings of deliverance
from sin and Satan unto the people of God. Ezech. 33.7. 1. Pet 5.8. Luke
22.31.
They are Gods watchmen and do warn us of the coming of the enemy, which like
a roaryng Lion goes about seeking how he may devour us. Malach. 2.7.
And because their mouths should keep knowledge, of them must we ask for
the understanding of the word, and enquire after the will of our God: yet does
not all this prove, that that ministration which is by you, of that faythlesse
Family forged, is the true and holy ministration. For sometime (as now in your
Family) it comes to pass, that false Prophets will say, thus says the
Lord, and yet the Lord has not spoken. They will presume to preach without a
vision, and prophecy without a burden: run when God bids them not go,
and take the testimonies of the holy ones in their mouths, when yet the Lord
sends them not. Heretics will with a face of the Church seek to outface
both the children of God and the truth also.

Thus then not every one that pretends is called in deed, for some come not
in at the door, but clyme in at the windows, and as many as come before
Christ, and set down a contrary requiryng (as ye do) he is a Wolf and seeks
but to rauin. Not every one that cries Christ, Regeneration, Bulleng. 1. book.
8. chap. leaf. 12. verse.
the spirit, a perfect, and true incorporatyng into the upright, being a
consubstantiation and counityng with God, is a true teacher and faithful
Christian. Nor every that takes upon him to expound knows the meaning of
the word. For many of you, when as ye would be Doctors of the word, had need
to be instructed in the very principles of faith, and first ground of
Religion. So the true Ministers have both a public and external calling by
man: as also a private and internal calling by God, which who so has not he
is an heretical intruder and no prophetical Minister of God, nor Preacher of
the most holy one. The which internal and external calling to the Lords
harvest to be a true labourer, if any man shall pollute with his lewd life,
and light conversation, he is at the Lords hand to be beaten with stripes
without number. Yet if any man shall say well and do evil (which God
forefend) with man it may discredit him that does speak well and yet do
amiss: with God evil deeds do not disanull the truth of doctrine, as good
deeds prove not evil doctrine to be true. A ring of gold in a swines snowt
cease not to be a ryng of gold though a swine wear it: pearls are pearls
before dogs or swine. The broad seal of England, is highly to be honored,
for the Majesty of the Prince therein appears: though some time the party
that may carry it may be a lewd person and a Godles Atheiste. The word and
Sacraments ministered by wicked men cease not by their administration to have
their force. For the wickedness of man can not overthrow the institution of God.
Where, I in good conscience testify, that I speak not to defend corrupt life
in any man, but to uphold the truth, of good liquor in an unsavory vessel, and
gods good word, and sacraments in a minister of an evil life, and
conversation. For that Judas, and James in their ministry gave the same word,
and wrought to the same wonders, yet the one a reprobate, the other an holy
one, and a perfect Saint of God.

So then this reason that in corners your froward Familye uses to whisper
against evil men (though Gods Ministers) is Anabaptisticall. Bullen. 2. book.
7. chap. leaf. 97.
Your Ministers live not as they teach. Therefore their doctrine is not true.
In Scripture I know this reason is often used: Your life is not according to
the law and your profession: Esaias. 58.
Therefore you are hypocrites and dissemble with me says God. The former fond
argument I never hard of any man that is sound for judgment, and sincere for
godlynes.

The same reason is by your Familye, and by your good minded brethren the
Papists alleged against the truth, now preached after this sort. We work
better then you, therefore our religion is truer they yours. The first
exposition (if you know what proposition means) I deny, and also the
argument. More than we they mark I grant (so had they need that will have
heaven by desert, or else will-naue none of it) but better they do not. Quod
non est ex fide peccatum est. What is not of faith etc. The Pharisie gave more
alms, tithes etc. than the Publican, yet was the Publican more just by much
then the Pharisie. Not to work, Luke. 18.11.
but to work well in Gods sight is commendable. Non tam quid, quam quomodo
operamur, inquiret dominus. Not so much what as with what faith we work, that
will God demand.

Thus have I obiter and by the way touched your Families Papisticall, and
Anabaptisticall argument, Bullen. 2. book. 8. chap. leaf 18. Euang. cap. 13.
sent. 4.
whereof the one will be saved by the fulfilling of the law, the other will
have marks concur with faith in the matter of Justification, clean contrary
to S. Augustine who says, Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt
iustificandum. The works we do follow as fruits and go not before as the
efficient cause of our justification. And thus much of the worthiness of the
Ministry, and ministers thereof, Whom I counsel you to reverence in better
sort, both in word, and writing, than ye have done. The dignity of the
Ministry. Math. 10.40.
For you know what Christ says: he that despises you, despises me etc. and
read further Exodus 16.8.1. Sam. 8.7. Number. 16. chap. throughout.

I have in this place (gentle and indifferent reader,) to desire thee
diligently, to mark the sly and crafty dealing of this peuish Familye. For in
my Articles which I exhibited unto them for my further satisfaction, I added
this clause of the outward calling of the minister, which then I did suspect
they denied, and since by their faythles demeanor of concealing that clause,
Fam. conceal that makes against them.
I am certainly persuaded to be true, where also it shall not be amiss if
besides their fond behavior (in ouerhipping that which they needs must
confess to be truly reported of them by me) to consider also how guilefully
they protest that. No man is able justly to blame, accuse, detect, Confess. page
4. confuted by Theoph.
or burden them as transgressors of the law bei^t against any the Queens
Majesty's proceadinges in causes Ecclesiastical etc. And yet in this place by
me quoted out of the lamentable complaynt, sent. 34. They deny without their
Familye their is no lawful calling of Ministers. Lam. Compl. sent. 34. of HN.
Their words be these. For to be a teacher or minister of the holy word is
not every man's office but his only, which is thereunto, even like as was Aaron,
called and elected of God, whose rod or staff greeneth, blossometh, and
bears fruit, as likewise his which is a true disciple of the word, and lover
of the truth, has received the learning and administration of his holy word,
with integritye of singlenes of heart of the Elders in the house of Love,
obediently, and eue^ so is growe^ up under thobedie^ce of the love in the holy
understandings, till unto the Elderdome of the man Christ, and taught to the
kingdom of God. And the same is by the^ in plain words affirmed, but more
skoffingly, and contemptuously in the same book. sent. 34. But of that place
more hereafter in the addition to the Article.

They with their cavil, as it is common unto them with their brethren the
Papists, and Anabaptists, (who always, not being able to criminate, and
blame the doctrine taught, fly straight ways to the person of the preacher)
demanded, A Sir what auctoritye have you to minister, and who laid hands on
your, who called you? etc. Zuinglius against the Catabap. fol. 188. John.
1.22.25.
as also their forefathers the old Pharisees, which demanded of S. Iehn the
Baptist the same question, with that learned man M. Musculus. I answer,
Musculus Common places title of Ministers. page 182.
Qui legitime vocati non sunt, quaestionem de vocatione mouent. They which are
not called lawfully, first move a controversy about a lawful calling: which
objection M. Bullenger in his book against the Anabaptists does answer
learnedly and at large. Bullenger against the Anabaptists 3. book. 4. chap.
90. leaf.

An addition to the 5. Article of an outward calling.

SVch an one as in even so with his understanding, Lam. Compl. sent. 33.34.
and thoughts, become incorporate in all obedience of the word to the truth of
God, and life of Christ, and even so acknowledge the truth, the same verily
bideth rightly in the doctrine of Christ, and is apt to minister the holy word
of truth, and to be a teacher of the people. etc. Docum. sent. 3. cap. sent. 1.
No man can teach the word of Christ, and his doctrine, but such as first have
bin obedient disciples of Love.

No man ought to busy himself about the word, 1 Exhort. cap. 16 sent. 16.
but the Elders in the Familye. etc.

No man knows Christ nor the father nor yet also the services or Ceremonies
of Christ, Euang. cap. 23. sent. 2.
but even only those which are even so through Christ, as we have rehearsed,
renewed or regenerated in their spirit and mind: neither does it also behoue
or belong unto any other to set forth any services of Ceremonies of Christ nor
to preach or declare the Euangely: but such are those which are sent of Christ
himself, for otherwise it is all false. The Disciples of Christ could not
understand the clearenes of Christ before the fifty day, taht the holy Ghost
was poured upon them: much less then verily can now the Scripture learned,
which have not kept the passover from death into life, and from flesh into
spirit with Christ, nor yet atteined through the power of the holy Ghost to
the clearenes of Christ, understand out of the knowledge of the Scripture, the
clearenes of the word of Christ; nor yet set forth or teach according to the
truth his ceremonies or services, nor also preach or declare the Euangely of
Christ.

ARTICLE. 6. of HN. of uniting into God.
1. Exhor. 13. chap. 18.
ANd the Elders of the Family (says HN.) are illuminated from God they are
Godded with God they are incorporate into God, Cap. 16. sent. 16.
with who^ God also in one being, is Hominified, or become man.

Theophilus.

WHat error is this if it were rightly seen unto? whilst the vine branch is
to be vined in the vine John. 15. and he that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit with him, 1. Cor. 6.17. 2. Pet. 1.4.
and are made partakers of the godly nature. 2. Pet. 1.4.

William Wilkinson.

Calvin upon Math. 26.
TRue it is that a certain godly and learned man affirms, writing upon the
fall of S. Peter, When God leaves us to our selves their is not hope to stay
from ru^nyng headlong into sin, right so it fares in Gods judgment with
this coal Prophet HN. and his dreamyng Disciple Theophilus. For the master on
still falling from fantasy to fantasy, and from one error into an other
and the scholar brings in stones and mortar to build up the confused heap of
all impitie.

In the former clause was showed that they utterly condemn and mislike all
Ordination, and Election of Ministers with their Family: now if follweth to be
handled what privilege and prerogative his Elders purchase unto themselves, by
the admission they have into that blind society.

HN. affirms very soberly as it seems that the Elders of his brood are
illuminated and Godded with God or incorporated into God. etc. his scholar
Theophilus labors to strengthen his Assertion with the testimony of
Scripture to that end by him wrested and wrongly alleged: wherein seeing he
ca^ not slip the collar with me as erst he did in leauyng the former
sentence, now to outcountanaunce the truth with the impudency of his forehead,
he asks. What an error is this if it were rightly seen unto? what error
do you ask? truly an horrible and palpable error it is, flat against the
truth of ye sacred scripture, straungely saueryng of those dregs, which you
have deeply drunk both at the hand of the Anabaptisticall Sinagogue, and also
of the Romish harlot and sea of Antichrist. But whereas you added a Caveat
which is: If it be rightly seen unto? I answer: he that puts on the
Crystal spectacles of Gods word, and takes in his hand the Lantern of holy
write to look diligently to your steps, shall straight trace out a thief
and a rebel against the Lord.

But first to proceed orderly let me answer your authorities, and then in a
word or two, will I set down the horriblenes of that opinion.

You say: The vine branch is vined into the vine. I find no such words in
the place by you quoted out of S. John, neither does the Greek or Latin
translation afford any such terms of vinyng into a vine as ye seem to import.
Scriptures falsified.
There is to abide or remain in the vine verse. 2. and 6. and in the 7. verse.
he expounds what is abidyng means vz. If you abide in me and my words in
you. etc. but he it granted that ye quoted it (for perhaps you you followed
the translation of HN. his Dutch Bible) if it I say be granted that you have
not wroo^g in the error, by writing out of a false meaning of S. John his
words, Know ye not, nor have ye ever heard, that Parables in the Scripture
are rather to be considered in the end, whereto the doctrine they contain is
applied then in every part of the Allegory? is each circumstaunce to be sifted
and stood in? The cunnyng Archer respects more to hitte the mark, than the
curious wathchyng of the cloue^ air, which parts in sunder at the end of his
arrow, or the falling of his feathers: even so the spirit of God does rather
respect the end of the similitude and the doctrine contained there under with
the especial application thereof, the^ the waying of every word or each
singular circumstaunce therein comprehended. Luke. 16.
The estate of the godly and the wicked after this life is most lively painted
out by the Parable of the rich man and poor Lazarus by S. Luke chap. 16. of
the which Parable if I should stand in every particular circu^staunce thereof,
I should very much entangle my self with vain and idle questions, and
disturb the unity of the Church, whereof the one were hurtful to my self,
the other intolerable to others. By the similitude of the lost groat ye Lord
shows the great and unspeakable joy, Luke. 15.8.
which he conceiueth at the conversion of a sinner: now he that besides this
needs will descant out for Allegorical or Anagogical sense, as what the
besome signified wherewith the woman swept, what the the candle, what the
neighbors called in, etc. He that is curious thus vaynely to hunt after every
syllable, shall, as others have done before, stir many coals and yet find
small light, raise much dust and yet see the meaning and mark of the Scripture
not any whitte the sooner. The word of God is Lex vitae ad been agendum not
ansa rixandi ad contendendum. A rule to lead our life, thereby to attain
everlasting happynes, not an occasion to contend or quarrel to endless and
needles ianglyng. Which I note the rather because that in your love house it is
accounted and high matter, to be hable to fetch a far and an unhard seen out
of the words of Scripture: yea and higher tha^ to be humbly obedient to that,
which is revealed in the Scriptures. And to speak with proof to avoid
cavil, the strange stretchyng of the place of Christ's driuyng the devils out
of the man possessed into the heard of swine, Math. 8.32.
videlic. the sins and sinful being of the earthly, Fam. of Loves
Exposition.
and as yet vngodded man, is driven unto the souls of the sinful wordlyng,
who fall thereout into everlasting damnation. This their vain and Godles
exposition is very much rewed of the godly, and loathed of them who tremble in
heart to hear the name and word of God thus impiously profaned and horribly
abused.

Now to come to the sense of S. John his meaning, which is this: By nature we
are dry and naked, so is the vine branch not abidyng in the stock. Christ is
the author and fountain of all goodness and grace, John. 1.6.
wherewith plentifully flows and vnmeasurably abounds for his dear spouses
sake the Church, and those that he his children, which none do any longer
enjoy, then while they stand in deed, and live to that which in tongue they
do profess. So is it betwixt the branches and the tree. He that is not of
this mystical body in this life, shall never triumph with him in the life
eternal: so does no brau^ch flourish in summer, which abides not in the vine
in sharp stormer of winter. If we suffer with Christ, 1. Pet. 13.
we shall reign with him. etc. Of the comparison between the vine and the
Church Read. Psalm. 80.9.6. Esa. 3.13. cap. 5.7. b. and Ierem. 2.21. d. and
12.10. Ose. 10.1. a.

Where also it is worthy the notyng to consider, that Christ is not said to be
a natural vine, but is by some quality of the vine resembled unto us: So are
not we naturally Godded with God in his substance, but in quaitie with the
image, whereunto man was first created Genesis 1.26.27. Ephesians. 4.24. and Luke. 1.
a. Here then we may easily understand, that this your reason does not follow
necessarily: because your Parables and similitudes according to the old
Proverb, prove not a thing to be, but manifestly and clearly argue a thing
taught and proved by an evident and undeniable example.

S. Paul to the Ephesians handlyng our conjunction Ephesians. 5.32.
with Christ says. I tell you of a great secret or mystery: which mystery if
it were fleshly, than to the carnal and outward man, it were very easy to be
understood, but being spiritual it is of more difficulty? For the carnal
and earthly man can not so easily perceive the things which are of God.

Now follows your second place out of the 1. Cor. which proves that the
Children of God are with him, Joined and united together in one spirit.

Somewhat concerning our uniting, which has bin touched before. To absolve all
the doubt which arises in this place, this question is here to be demanded.
What is it to be made one spirit with Christ? If you shall answer that to be
our spirit etc. is to have our spirit confounded with Christ's spirit in the
same substance, than do I reply: that this your answer is a dark and
unreasonable Paradox. For only bodily and corporal substa^ces are confounded,
and mingled, so that incorporall and immateriall essences cannot be coupled in
the same third matter, as far as yet my reason can conprehend. A spirit says
our Savior Christ has not flesh and bones: Luke 24.49.
that is: there is a spirit no earthly or corruptible matter, or corporal
substance. Therefore our joining and knitting unto Christ, is not in matter,
or substance, or being: but in spirit, and faith. Thus see you than that your
imagination is but the shadow of a slomber, whereof you doted all this while,
that you demed our earthly and terren nature, to be embodied, and incorporated
with him in perfect being, that is in his heavenly and divine nature: and so we
being men to become Gods to him, and he being God does become man to us. This
your fantasye is more apparent in HN. his dictata or documentable sentences:
Cap. 6. sent. 3.
but all your fantasies are but as mistes before the son, and the sleeps of
a sick man, whose dreams hand together.

To be united in spirit what it is.
To be united and conjoined in spirit with God is nothing else, but to draw
nearer unto the image of our first creation: wherein first we were created unto
holiness of life etc. to be heavenly affected, Ephesians. 4.24.
to savor spiritual and goastly things that belong unto the soul. Briefly
(I say M. Peter Mart. whose great judgment I know how much the learned
esteame) we are one spirit with god, Mart. 1. Corin. 6 17.
when we are joined unto him by the operation of his spirit, and the inward
working of the holy Ghost: Yet does not this uniting of us with God avail us
so far that we thereby should be equal with him, only Jesus Christ the son
of God according to the divine nature is so united with God, that he is one in
spirit with his father, and wholely equal with him, wherein we of right and
worthily are far unequal, and inferior unto him.

And thus much out of him concerning the meaning of this place of S. Paul,
whom ye wrest to approve your error, and yet in the judgment of the best
interpretours, your blind exposition and forced mind of that place is clean
overthrown and confuted: for we are says he far inferior unto God and our
uniting unto him is, that in the preaching of the word, and ministration of
sacraments, he stoupeth and lispeth with us that we may understand him.

Now concerning that last place by you alleged out of S. Peter. which is this,
we are made partakers of the heavenly nature, therefore say you, your Elders
are illuminated from God and Godded with God. etc. Truly, if ye had read any
learned wrighter upon this place, or if ye had but waighed with your self the
purpose of S. Peter in that place, comparing the place, you cited with that
which goes before, and that which even in the next words follow after, I
trust ye would have bin better advised before ye had wrested the place so
violently, to the purpose that ye have applied it. For in the very words
following does he expound his own meaning in this sort. To be made partaker of
the divine nature, is nothing else but to flee the corruption which is in the
world through lust, Romans 6.6.7.8.
which S. Paul calls oftentimes in his Epistles to be dead to sin, Romans
6.6.7.8. Romans 7.6. and. 8.5 etc. Leuit. 11.44.45.
and not to be in the flesh, and again let not sin reign in your mortal
bodies that ye should obey the lust of it: but even as the Lord is holy so
must we be holy, for we are the temples of the holy Ghost, 1. Pet. 1.15.16.
and the Lord God through Christ does dwell within us. See Bishop Jewels
replye where he expounds this place of S. Peter page 434. lin. 24.


But let me demand this one question of you, to the which if ye will directly
answer, ye shall see all this controversy betwixt us about this place of S.
Peter sone discussed, tell me but this? What is the nature of God which we are
partakers of? is it not his everlasting truth, his righteousness, his wisdom?
etc. Is it not peace of soul, joy of conscience, and all goodness which cannot
be imagined? is not he the^ which is made partaker of these good graces of God,
both in body and soul, rightly said to be made partaker of the heavenly
nature? yes verily. Then may ye very plainly see, and easily discern, that by
these words, the nature of God, We are not said to be partakers of his
substance or essence, but of the divine and heavenly qualityes which are in
God. Of this place read Caluins institutions 3. book. Chap. 11. sect. 10 Chap.
25. sect. 10. Acts. 17.27.28
I know in deed the heathen Poet Aratus, out of whom S. Paul does allege a
verse in the Acts of the Apostles, fayneth that we spring out of the
generation of GOD. But what have we to stand to his fond fantasy and idle
dream. True it is, the Manicheis held the same error, that we were sprung of
the same offspring and seed of God, and after we have run the race of our life,
we shall return to our fist original. And I know that in the former times of
our fore fathers, there were some frantic men which imagined that Gods nature
is so powered into us, that it wholly causes our nature, and being to lose the
force thereof. Right so dreameth your Fam. and as they quoted for proof, 1.
Cor. 15.28.
God must be all in all. Therefore are we wholly resolved and turned into the
nature of God. To the self same purpose have ye as fondly as they alleged in
this place, this text out of Saint Peter: but right so may it be affirmed of
you which is said of them, such a dotage as this never once entered into the
minds of the Apostles. Foolish therefore and ungodly are they (whosoever they
be) which out of this place imagine that the essential nature or being of God
is poured into us, our own being there utterly vanishing away. And thus much
for the meaning of these words of S. Peter We are made partakers of the
heavenly nature. And for a further exposition hereof, read the Bishop of
Salisburyes reply against harding. page 331. 5. Article. 7. division.

Now to satisfy your questions which ye ask of me: Goddyng into God what error
and whose.
What error is this if it were rightly seen unto? I answer Look you rightly
unto it and ye shall see it is the error of Manes, of Seruetus a Spanish
Arrian burnt at Geneua, the error of Osiander concerning the essential and
substantial justice, more largely expounded by HN. in his Euangelie. 1.
chapter and first sentence. From the which heresy good Lord deliver us. The
which opinions because I fear they will more hurt the simple people by
repeating, then do you good in confuting: of purpose I let them pass
reserving you for a more fuller and perfect instruction to M. Caluins
institutions by whom the heresies aforesaid so are clearly confuted, Call.
Institut. 3. book. 11. chap. sect. 5.6.7.8. etc.
that no godly Christian can or will desire a more absolute resolution.

Not meaning any further to busy my self with the confuting of the opinions
of our Romish Catholics, who in this point agree with you, affirming that our
conjunction with Christ, is carnally, and bodily.

HN.

CHrist himself is their light says HN. which becomes administered unto
them. 1. Exhort. cap. 14. sent. 1.


Theophilus.

IT is true unless ye will deny the scripture.

William Wilkinson.

You should first have proved it by the Scriptures, and afterward have
affirmed it to be true: bare affirmations bear no weight. HN. his proof he
quoteth John 1.9. a. (The light is the true light, which lights every man
that comes into the world.) is a rouing proof.

The meaning of the which place is this, that all men are equally endued with
the light of natural reason to see God in his Creatures, and thereby to
acknowledge him to be their creator. 1. Romans 20. c.
Which because they have light other where is, and Christ has light of and from
himself, therefore Christ is God.

But this place proves not that only the Children of God are lightened with
the light of Gods spirit, which assertion albeit it be true, yet is this place
by HN. quoted without discretion: for it speaks of a light general to all
that are borne, not proper to the regenerate: of this light Read. Esaias. 9.1.2.
Mat. 4.15.16. Ioh. 9. a. 5. Ioh. 12. e. 35. HN. his other places John. 8. b.
12. I am the light of the world. And Ephesians. 5. c. 14. Awake thou that sleep
and stand up from death and Christ shall give the light. The first proves that
without Christ is nothing but darkness and condemnation, and out of the body of
Christ, which is his Church, is no health nor comfort of body or soul, which
when ye can show me by the Scriptures truly alleged that ye are, I will
acknowledge my self to be in an error: until ye can so do, say: not every
one that says the Lord. etc. Heretics in crying the Church have always
sought to bring in a schism, to disturb and disquiet the state of the Church.

HN.

1. Exhor. ca. 15. sent. 4.
ANd even so out of this high Majesty of God does this true light show forth
his service through the illuminated or Godded man, Act. 23.4.5.6. 2. Corin.
4.2. 2. Pet. 1. v. 1. Ioh. 1.2.
with whom the most highest through the self same light, and his service is also
manned: witnessing and declaryng how that the true light consists, not in the
knowledge of this or that, but in an upright and true being of God, and his
eternal life. John. 17. c.

Theophilus exposition.

THat is through the new creature which is incorporated into God by the power
of his word.

W. Wilkinson.

IT is not in this place certain to be gathered by any apparaunt
circumstaunce, wherefore, or to what end, all these authorities are wrong in by
HN. for if he mean that no man ought to minister without a calling (as it
seems he would feign mean if he could utter it) the proposition I confess
is true: and I ask him what outward calling he had, and by whom he was called,
or who admitted him unto that Prophetical function which so often he boasts
of? Euang. cap. 1. sent. 1.
yet are these places by him very unskillfully cited and unaptly to the purpose,
the which he does allege them, so that herein I blame his evil choice for
he might better for proof have quoted John. 1.25. Number. 17.9. 2. Sam. 6.7. Heb.
4.5.

But if he brought them for his illuminated or Godded man, as it is like that
he did, because unto that place he made his directorie. g. I accuse him that
he quoteth scripture with an evil conscience. For that in none of those places
by him cited there is any word of illumination Goddyng, or mannyng. The places
of the Acts he deals like a thief that dare not make a plain stepe least
he should be taken, for he treads but ouerly and dare not set down either
Verse or Letter to direct the Reader: but using only his old ragged and
running manner of quotatio^s very impertinently and to no purpose, does he abuse
the Reader. As also in the places of S. Peter and S. Paul he has by his
direction set us to seek that which we shall never find. Lastly the place out
of S. John. 17. c.. is idle and empty having no one syllable tendyng to any
such end as he alleged it for.

As for HN. it is very like that he thought the world would allow his words
without proof: and as his Disciples use to do hand over head, he would take
whatsoever comes from him without examination, which his opinion is grounded
of the old doctrine of the Papists, that doctrine of teachers ought not to be
further shifted or judged by the hearer, of the which point we shall have
occasion to speak more Article. 8. page 89.

THE 7. ARTJCLE Conteinyng HN. his blasphemy what he boasts of him self, and
his miraculous and extraordinary calling.
11. Epist. cap. 2. senr. 1. and. 5. cap. sent. 10. Euang. cap. 1. sent. 1.
HN. Says that he is moved with the good nature of God: and that he is raised
up from the dead to judge the earth with righteousness.

Theophilus.

HEre are his words wrested, and wrongly alleged, his meaning subverted, and
misconstrued, Read Euang. cap. 3. sent. 11. cap. 28. sent. 3. and Dictata cap.
5. sent. 4. and ye shall see he points on Christ.

William Wilkinson.

THis Article as it is one of the most blasphemous, and Heretical of all the
rest, so in the Exposition and saluyng thereof Theophilus does so freate and
vary his old eloquence, as unless I were acquainted with his melancholy, and
whot complexion, I should hardly bear such coals as he heapeth upon me.

The hounds wherewith he persueth me are two, the first is wrestyng, the
second is wrongful alledgyng, subuertyng, and misconstruyng his meaning: to
the which unless I withstand with plain dealyng, and naked truth, it seems
that I shall find small favor at his hands.

And first whereas he burtheneth me with wrongful alleging, HN. him self
shall explayne his own meaning, who will say against him self much more then
I in the former clause did accuse him of, or for these words of his, He is
endued with the good nature of God: 11. Epist. 2. cap. sent. 1.
ye words be as plain as can be in the place by me alleged, which is also
more clearly by him aduouched in his woeful Euangely where he has these
words. HN. blasphemy Euang. 1. chap. 1. sent. 1. Raised from the dead. 2.
Anointed, and 3. Godded with God. 4. Heir with Christ. 5. Lightened with the
true being of God in the spirit. 6. Stirred up in the last time. etc
HN. out of grace according to the providence of God and of his promises John.
6. raised up by the highest God from the dead, anointed with the holy Ghost in
the Elderdome of the holy understanding of Christ. John. 14. Codeified or
Godded together with God in the spirit of his Love, made heir with Christ in
the heavenly treasures of the riches of God, Illuminated with the heavenly
truth, the very true light of the perfect being in the spirit, Apo. 21.
Elected to be a minister of the gracious word stirred up now at this last time
according to the promise Jeremy. 33. Thus you see he has word by word uttered
that which you maliciously affirm that I have wrongfully alleged: what
blasphemy these words contain no man can be ignorant but he that will not
see, concerning his words I purposely abstain to confute, M. Knewstub. Conf.
page 1.
for that they are learnedly by a godly man confuted already.

Concerning his meaning, I shall hereafter set down proof that arrogantly and
Luciferlike he takes upon him yt which is proper to Christ only: where
likewise I will touch the places by you cited, and prove that HN. points not
out Christ as ye affirm: HN. 1. Epist. 3. chap. 6. sent.
After the day of Love seeing the same is last or newest day, wherein the
universal Acts. 17. d. compass of the earth shall be come judged with
righteousness: There shall no (Apoc. 10. a.) day of grace appear any more upon
the earth but a severe. (Heb. 10. c.) or sharp judgment over all ungodly. We
acknowledge that there is none other light, nor life more that is true, nor
has bin neither in heaven, 11. Epist. cap. 5. sent. 4.
nor upon earth, but this same light which is now in this last time, through
the love of God the father reueiled and come unto us, and that same whereon
Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.6. and all the Prophets of God have witnessed. Esaias. 60. a.
John. 5. c. and which the holy Apostles of Christ. Scripture profanely abused.
Acts. 2.3.4, 7.10.13. etc. and the Evangelists have published. These be HN.
his own words, out of the which (because they were to tedious to repeat) I
made out of them this Collection.

HN. says he is endued with the good nature of God, and that he is raised up
from the dead to judge the earth with righteousness: 11. Epist. cap. 2. sent. 1.
also the day of Love by him preached is the last day and there shall be no day
of grace hereafter. Neither was there any truth before him, 1. Epist. cap. 3.
sent. 6. 11. Epist. cap. 5. sent. 9.
or besides him, or shall be after him. To the form of words he has framed a
wrangle, the matter he grants belike to be true.

Thirdly I affirm that HN. says he was prophesied of by Moses, and all the
Prophets, and Apostles, and the Evangelists: to prove this he alleges Deuteronomy.
18.6. Esaias. 60. a. John. 5. c. To the which Theophilus replieth thus.

Theophilus.

Read the place again, and you shall find he says that the light or life is
it which is prophesied of and not himself, and leave your lying for very shame.

William Wilkinson.

TO the which his reproachful reply and childish cavil I think I shall
answer fully, and satisfy sufficiently: HN. Challenges that is proper to
Christ.
If first I be able to justify (which gods assistance I hope I shall) that HN.
presumptiously takes on him, that which is prophesied on, and proper unto
Christ:

Secondly I will (co^paring him with Dauie George, and their heresies mutually
with other) prove that it is very like to be true, which they deny, and May.
Rogers does charge him with HN. to be Dauie Georges scholar and that in
impietye he goes far beyond him. HN. David George his scholar. HN. foretold
by the prophets etc. to be an Heretic.


Thirdly by comparing him, and his opinions with Gods word, I will show that
he is not the perfect Prophet, but the most pestilent Archheretique that ever
was: and that he was so prophesied of by the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists. In the which place to display all his wrestinges of the
scriptures, I neither am able they being infinite, nor willing because I desire
to be brief: only I will by a few give a taste, what the rest are which I have
not touched.

HN.

HN. Alleges* Esaias 60. a. to prove the light showed by him, was fore spoken
of by Esaias. 11. Epi. 5. chap. 4. sent.


W. Wilkinson.

IT is manifestly meant of Christ his first coming.

HN.

HN. Says that all the scriptures heavenly testimonies, 1. Epist. 1. chap. 1.
sent.
and spiritual voices of the eternal truth, which are gone forth from the
holy spirit of Love, (that is of God) are brought to light through him.

William Wilkinson.

THis is blasphemous against the Prophecy of Christ, and against the
Scriptures. Math. 17.5. Marc. 9.28. John. 1.18. Col. 23.

HN.

HN. Says yet once more he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
earth with righteousness. 1. Epist. 1. chap. 2. sent.
Act. 17. g. and this in the next sentence. 3. he does apply to his appearaunce
in these words, Docum. sent. cap. 15. sent. 4. HN. publish. of peace. 1. cap.
16. sent.
this day, and now is the day fulfilled in the Love, and this once more says
he is meant of himself: for proof he quoteth Act. 17. g. 31. verse.

W. Wilkinson.

THis is particularly meant of Christ's first coming in the flesh, prophesied
even in ye self same words. Agge. 2. cap. 7. verse. and in Christ fulfilled.
Heb. 12. cap. 27. verse.

HN.

11. Epist. 2. cap. sent. 6. and. 2.
HN. Quoteth Esaias. 2. a. 2. Miche. 4. a, 1. to be meant of the restoring of the
decayed state of Gods Church which is redyfied by him.

William Wilkinson.

THis is manifestly meant of Christ.

HN.

Euang. cap. 1. page
HN. Cites Math. 24. verse. 14. Esaias. 67.22. g. Psalm. 95.7.8. Heb. 3.7. and
the 4.7.8. Apoc. 14.6. to be spoken of his Euangelye by him published.

William Wilkinson.

WHich is understood of the preaching of the gospel by Christ and his Apostles.

HN.

Euang. cap. 1. sent. 1.
HN. Says he is an elected Minister of the gracious word, stirred up in the
last time, according to the promises. Ierem. 33. read the whole chap.

W. Wilkinson.

IT is meant of Christ.

HN.

HN. Says the testimonye of his Euangelie is not alone the Euang. of the
kingdom promised to be published in all the world, and to all people, Praeface
ad Euang. sent. 4.
but also all the testimonies which HN. has set forth in the glass of
righteousness.

William Wilkinson.

BLasphemous against the gospel, and a thing accursed. Galla. 1. chap. 8. ver.

He takes that unto him which belongs unto John Baptist. Mallachi. Math.
11.10. Praeface ad Euang. sent. 3.


HN.

HN. Says the misterye of the kingdom of God, Euang. cap. 2. sent. 1.
his righteous judgments. Math. 25. d. Acts 16.17. d. Jude. 1. and the
coming of Christ now in the last time in the resurrection. Ezech. 37, 6. John.
5. c. Romans 8.6. Phil. 3. b. 11. ver. of the dead is declared unto him, as an
elected vessel, from the mouth of God himself.

God has be gone a new miraculous work now in this day of Love, whereof we
witness, Euang. cap. 2. sent. 4. Quoted in vain. Euang. cap. 2. sent. 11.
with us his elected ones wherein the scripture is fulfilled. Esaias. 43, 6. c.a.
Esaias. 57, b.

HN. Says he will declare the secret mysteries of God, and make relation of
things hidden before the beginning of the world. Math. 13.11. b. John. 6.

The day of Love. Praefa. ad Eua^g. sent. 2. Scripture abused.
Psalm. 118. c. is the appearaunce and coming. Math. 24. c. 30. ver. Luke
17.20. ver. Acts. 2. a. of Christ Jesus our Lord in the resurrection. Esaias. 26.
c. 1. Cor. 15. f. of the dead wherein the law, the Prophets, and all that is
written of Christ becomes fulfilled. Luke 24. e. False Quoted. Euang. cap. 1.
sent. 9.


The day of Love preached by HN. is the day of the last coming of Christ in
judgment with many thousands of Saints. Esaias. 3. b. Math. 4.24. d. 37. and
25. d. 31. Jude. 1. b. Which places manifestly prove (being meant of the
second coming of Christ) that the resurrection of his coming is perfected and
past already. Euang. cap. 25. sent. 5.
HN. Says that this testimony (that is his Euang) and publishing of the
joyful message, is the same coming, and all services and prophecies which are
gone out from God do lead hereunto, and cease herein.

Euang. cap. 35. sent. 1.
HN. Says, Behold ye dearly beloved, presently even from the self same day
becomes the scripture in all fulfilled of that which it mentions of Christ
of his seed, and of his glory and Lordlynes. Therefore all scriptures was
until now imperfect and not fulfilled, contrary to that which John says.
19.28.

Euang. cap. 35. sent. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. After the end of the chapter.
HN. Says that all the prophecies. Esdr. 4. d. Esaias. 3. c. and 11. b. 12.
Ezechi. 39. d. 21. Zopha. 3. b. 9. ver. Zach. 2. b. 10. 11 Numb. 24. a. 5. 6.
are in this day of Love presently fulfilled all the which places are
particularly meant of Christ, and applied blasphemously by HN. to him for to
prove the day of his coming.

The Familye compare and make equal HN. his wrightinges with the holy
scriptures, because say they, they are written with the same spirit.

William Wilkinson.

Answer to the exceptions taken at the Euang. page
THus with as great breuitye as I could, I have set down a few of his
blasphemies, for that his vain and blind, idle, and impertine^t alleging of
Scriptures is infinite and without number: HN. seldom alleges Scripture
aright.
for almost he never cites any scripture aright: for the children of God it
shall not be unprofitable to consider, that to leave the Lords hye way and the
clear sun shine of his truth, is to entangle our selves with vain, and
endless Questions, which engender strife of words more the^ godly edifying, of
the which S. Paul gives Timothy a straight charge to beware 1. Tim. 1.4. and
4. chap. Titus. 1.14. 2. Pe. 1.16. 1. Tim. 6.4. The which watchword, if our
Familye had diligently taken head unto, they had not so mightily ben deceived
with such strong illusions. For this is the light unto the which we must take
heed, as unto a candle shining in a dark place, so shall we not fail of the
reward after life, nor in this life make shipwreck of our own salvation.

Now follows the second part of the comparison of D. George his heresies with
HN. whereby we shall see the one not to be any whit in impietye inferior unto
the other.

THe Familye of Love in their first Epistle to M. Rogers. D. George and Fami.
compared.
page 72. lin. 7. etc. very vehemently stomach (as their manner is) because M.
Rogers enlinketh HN. with John a Leyde, Page 3.
and the Archheretique David George to have been confederates in spreading the
heresy of the Anabaptists at Munster. Anno 1533. And least that M. Rogers
should escape vntarred with their opprobrious Eloquence they very lovingly (as
well becomes their Familye) brande him with his mark, Page 72.
An egregious untruth uttered by this new shameless wrighter. Furthermore they
affirm that many learned wrighters testify the matter vz. of David etc, to be
Anabaptisme, and yet say they this man will have it the Familye of Love: and
here they triumph having taken M. R. tardye as though the Familye of Love, and
the Anabaptists, Anabaptists and the Fam. very near of kin.
were such great strangers, that at no time they had bin acquainted, nor ever
yet talked, or met together. To remove the which doubt if any shall happen to
stand in doubt, which I think he will not that knows thoroughly what both the
opinions mean, by laying of the schismatic opinions of these two heretics
together, the Fam. shall not need to be so strange with their kin, nor be
so nice because their faction is more famous then the other of their Elder
brethren, I mean the Anabaptists. 1. Comparison of D. George and the Fami. 2.
book. 14. chap, fol. 68.


The first opinion of David George as M. Rogers alleges and M. Bullinger in
his book against the Anabaptists avouches to be true was this: The doctrine
taught by Moses, Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, is unto salvation, but
his heresy is perfect (as he says) to salvation.

D. George and HN. their heresies all one.
The reasons which do induce me to think the heresy of David George, and HN.
is in effect all one, are because they iumpe both in this. They prefer their
own doctrine before the doctrine of Moses, Christ, the Apostles and Prophets,
and secondly affirm it is abler to save those that hear theirs the^ the
other. Now to prove they prefer their doctrine before Moses. etc. This shall be
plain and an undeniable reason.

The doctrine which in the Church of England (the Lords most holy name be
praised for it) is by Public authorie commanded, by all that preach the same
approved, and by the Fam. of Love, confessed to be the doctrine of Moses. etc.

But they say that this is not sufficient unto salvation.

Therefore are they Anabaptists, and David Georges Scholars.

For proof of the first proposition, that the doctrine by public authority
commanded is the doctrine of Moses. etc. they will not deny it, for so much as
they have in their Confession of their faith published An. 1575. openly
protested that they are not justly to be blamed, Confess. page 4.
accused, detected, or burdened as transgressors of the law against any of the
Queen her Majesty's proceedyng in causes Ecclesiastical. etc. But all men
know, that it is an Ecclesiastical cause, concerning the truth of doctrine
Publicly preached, therefore they are likewise obedient to her therein. If
they shall here seek to starte by affirmyng that they mean outward policy
of the Church that is a thing of less weight then the doctrine of the word of
God openly professed: for that the truth of the word is always one, and
immutable, it is the same unto all nations and people of the world: But the
external policy in governing the Church is mutable, neither always one, but
changed diversely in diverse places, according to the state of the places,
times, and people. Therefore they shall answer here nakedly: if they say that
they agree unto the policy of government, not unto the doctrine of the
Churches of England they shall show very plainly, and that they 1. deal
doublely notwithstanding they pretend in their foresaid Confession, that they
deal with all men uprightly, Page 13.
faithfully, and charitably.

Further more when as in their confession me^cionyng Religion they affirm that
they obey our sovereign Lady the Queen, and the Magistrates our foregoers
spiritual, Conf. page 12.
and temporal. etc.

Which by the word of God they should not, Acts. 4.9. and. 5.28.
neither ought to do unless the doctrine by the Prince commanded were from
God: therefore secondly I conclude that they confess the doctrine by us
professed publicly to be the doctrine of Moses, Christ, and the Apostles, and
Prophets and this is the proof of my first proposition.

But concerning the second proposition, vz. that the doctrine of Moses is
vnsufficie^t, is apparau^t. For no man in the choice of two things, whereof he
must needs choose ye one, will choose that, which is insufficient therefore is
the particular Fam. (which they feign unto them selves) thought by the^ more
sufficient then the Public doctrine and assembly of our Church and Christian
congregation. Now least they should shift, in saying that our Chruch and theirs
is all one, as some times they do to dazell and deceive the simple: I answer
that in the third Epistle that is Extant of theirs to M. Rogers they affirm
that of such an household as we have challenged to our selves they are
strangers. Fam. not of our Church, by their own confession. Page 94.
Therefore say I they think their Fam. to be more sufficient for to attain
salvation in, then the open visible Church of Christ is England, which does
impugn their Family. 1. Epist. to M. Rog. fol. 73. page 2.
And to this purpose very naturally they Exhort such as be wise among us to
look over the Scriptures again. For if their Fam. of Love have found the
true or old way correspondent with all the doctrine of the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, and therefore s needful that without it there shall no man find mercy
with God, or else through Christ become saved. Item read the second Article of
HN. page 23. and there this is handled at large. The places which further at
large out of their books prove this matter are. 1. Exhort. cap. 12. sent. 42.
and. 20. sent. 7. Dictata cap. 9. sent. 3. Eu a^. cap. 3. sent, 3. and. cap.
23. sent. 7. and. cap. 24. sent. 25. in all the which they affirm as David
George does in his heresy that only their Family is sufficient unto
salvation, whereby is clearly avouched, that their Fam. of Love are guilty in
the first degree.

2. Comparison of D. George and his Fam.
David George his second heresy was that he affirmed himself Christ and
Messiah the beloved son of God.

HN. dare not expressly and definitiuely so affirm least all me^ should hold
him for a false Prophet, yet as it were a sloape and covertly affirms it in
taking unto him the prophecy of Christ etc. as is declared before page 52. 53.
so that yet in the second degree. D.G. and HN. agree very filthy in their
heresies each with other.

3. Comp. of D. Georg and his Fam.
David George his third heresy was this: that he would restore the house of
Israel and the tribe of Leuy, he will raise the tabernacle of God by the
spirit of Christ.

That HN. is the minister by whom the Church is restored through the spirit of
the Love or of God, in many and sundry places cited already, is more the^
manifest: and if (though they being incident to the matter) I should repeat
them: Letter of the Fam. to M. Rogers. page 82. lyn. 24.
they of the Fam. would charge me that I alleged the^ often to make the volume
arise ye greater. Let it therefore (besides the places quoted already in the
page) be sufficient for me, by one testimony out of his Euang. to prove this in
him to be true wherewith I charge him.

Euang. cap. 3. sent. 21.
2. King. 7. 1. Cron. 18. Esa. 2. Iere. 30.31. Mich. 4. Luc. 17. John. 4.
Now in the same day shall the City of the Lord be builded upon her brief
place or ancient room of the temple of the Lord or tabernacle of his dwelling
shall stand even as the same ought to stand. Scripture vildly quoted by HN.
Namely inwardly in us in the being of the holy Ghost, and therefore when HN.
is disposed to boast of the restoring of the hill of the Lord and of the
repayring of the Church, then straight he uses to quote. Esaias. 2. chap. 2.
verse. d. and Micheas. 4. chap. 1. verse. d. and the^ immediately before or after
straight he puts this shall come to pass in this day of the Love or now or
in this same most newest day of the Love. etc. 1. Epist. cap. 1. sent. 1.4.
cap. 2. sent. 2.6.
upon the which places as those most often, wherein the redyfiyng of the Church
by Christ is prophesied and foretold of by the Prophets, he that marketh this
observation, well shall see him stumble very often. What may be gathered
thereby is not hard to conjecture, vz. that he dreamed, and so would needs
persuade his Disciples the instauration of the Church should be perfected by
him. Euang. 2. chapter 1. sect. 2. leaf. And in the third Chap. section the
first and 9. are notable places to verify the truth of this verdict, which for
brevity I pretermit, only notyng them not further meaning to encomber the
Reader with them: and thus much to prove that HN. agrees with D. George in his
iij. heresy.

David George his fourth heresy: 4. Compa. of D. George and the Fami.
That who soever speaks against his doctrine shall never be forgiven in this
world nor in the world to come.

In this does HN. fitly with David George agree, and accord in one, as in my
Additions may appear at large to the 3. and 4. Articles: and Theophilus him
self will not deny it. For he expounds HN. his meaning thus in the 13.
Article in these words. To the enemies or envious of the love of Christ, and
to the obstinate; which turn them away there from, there is no mercy promised.
If this be not all one both in words and sense with David George: I ca^ not
tell what it should be to agree with him, at every turn, both in words and
sense.

And because by the way of comparison I have in the former Articles declared
that HN. and David George do fully consent, and agree, in the principal
matters wherewith we charge them: let it be lawful for me (good Reader) to set
one foot further in this comparison that I may show more evidently how in as
weighty a point as hethereto I have laid against them, that in the accord of
their heresy they so conspire, either with other, that it clearly, and to HN.
his perpetual shame it may be affirmed which M. Rogers reports, that David
George laid the egg of this heresy, and HN. hatched the chickens. As for HN.
though it seems his wit is pestilent enough to pervert ye truth: yet by David
George his Masters whettyng him forward, having of him self a cankred mind
against the truth, and a swellyng heart: he became x. fold more the son of
perdition, in being wholly bent to seduce the simple that thereby he might not
so much be holy as he pretended, as increase his private wealth, which by his
fiskyng to and fro was not a little empayred.

For to affirm that in word, which the deed it self avouches to be true,
sufficiently apparaunt it is that David George first put down the principles
of this sect: which when he had so done, and with writhyng and wrestyng had
brought his heresy into tune, HN. was now by him further to be instructed how
with a malicious mind and perilous wit, he might run desca^t at will, and
quauer at pleasure upon this strange doctrine, and new tuned opinions.

The first strain whereon this further heretical accord was to be stretched,
was this yt after D. George perceived that openly in ye face of ye world to
profess his opinions was not without spot, and godly Magistrates had
diligently provided that the Church of God should no longer receive any
detrime^t, straight way then did he forge this new found fond principle, as a
sovereign salve, to cure that mischeuous malady and imminent peril which
abode those that were defiled with that horrible infection. And seeing the
danger was not small to be outrageous in so great a matter: he thought it
sufficient that his sectary bare a good heart, and stood single in myndedly unto
his doctrine, to keep their consciences to themselves, and for their further
quietness sake to conform themselves to any people whatsoever, amongst whom
they lived and with whom they had to deal. This as it was a principal point,
so was it also a pestiferous poison wherewith the devil has deceived many a
simple soul, and thrown many a stumbling block in the way of the wavering and
weak hearted Christian.

That this was David George his opinion, and that hereafter I be not said to
slander him, Lib. 2. page 32.
let M. Bullenger be heard who testifies thus of him: Of this opinion was this
beast D. George, which sect also is the most pestilent of all others.

To the which I further add: Of this opinion is that wretched man HN. and by
this bayte has he choked more Christians then by any other whatsoever.

For hereby in ye time of Papistry he had his faultors also whom by the
Suthwarke Ioyner he licensed to be present at Idolaters service, and to keep
their consciences secret unto themselves, having taught them before, it was an
indifferent thing to hold any thing, so they kept the doctrine of the Love by
him taught unto them. And this is manifest in his Euangelye, especially in that
O yes which he makes before his blasphemous proclamation, to the whole world,
in these words following.

To the lovers of the truth here and there, wheresoever or in what part of the
world they dwell, or have their abode of what sort or nation and religion as
Christians in their Mahomet or Turks in theirs, Heathen in theirs etc. To whom
after HN. has given particular titles, immediately he in the same section
adds. And yet furthermore every head properly for himself having then so
diverse and many manners of grounds, beliefes, religions, ceremonies, offices
and administratio^s, as they will wherein they love Gods truth and their
righteousness.

Then the which words what may be said more Satan like, or what even belched
out of the bottomless pit more blasphemous, if all the fiendes of hell would
conspire together to afford a graceles and godles speech, whereby the hearts of
them that stagger in the way of the truth: if not wholly they might be drawn
away to superstition (for as for the word Religion I fear me I have
attributed it to their scisme to often, albeit the Familye of Love in their
Confession would feign be counted religious) yet might they enjoy the heresy
of HN. Page 11.
with their opinions, and favor whatsoever likes them best.

So that certain it is, whereas this his Euangelye, and the other of his books
were nailed upon every post, in the common shops of stationers in dutch land
commonly sold (until by the restraint of the maiestrate they were bridled and
called in) they drew some Catholics also to his faction, for whose cause, and
with whom to creep into favor, to have a shealter ready for any storm so
notable he commends the popish Hierarchy, which order of popish pollicye
(to let pass that famous infamous book, the Declaration of the Mass I
mean,) after step by step he had extolled it above the clouds, from the highest
to the lowest he falls down after this sort. Euang. cap. 31. sent. 1.2. etc.
Section 4. he commends the Pope and expounds Papa to signify an old
Father in the holy understanding: to whom he coupeleth his College of
Cardinals. sent. 8. thirdly, Primates sent. 9. Bishops. sent. 10. Priests.
sent. 14. who say their service in the formest part of the Church, that is in
the chauncell. Parsons, Curates, Proctours, sent. 16, Deacons, sent. 17.
Sextons, or keepers of holy things that the same muy be occupied in due
season, and times convenient. sent. 18. Monks, which for the love of
righteousness (as HN. says, are consecrated and sequestered from the world (from
whom well it were if the world were separated also) and from all that is
worldly and fleshly. set. 19. and lastly the commen people. sent. 21. To the
which for a conclusion he adds. Sent. 23.
Behold all this has bin even so in times past in his very true being, when as
yet the light of life had the clearenes, HN. prophecieth of the restoring of
Poperye.
and the belief her service, in the holiness of God, the renewed or Goddead men
upon the earth, all which shall now in the sam day, likewise of the Love
through the coming of Christ, in the light of life, and his holy spirit, be
reduced or restored to his upright form, in the very true being according to
the Christian like ordinances, Popish Hieracye shall flourishe says HN.
and flourish in vigor or become forcible according to the promises.

The which as I quake to wright so (to mark the ripenes of sin that HN. is
come unto) must it needs enforce the godly Christian, and tender child of God
to melt at the horrible outrage therein contained. To the which if the
goodwilling in England which are named the Familye of Love shall reply and
allege, (for I hope they are not so far gone to defend this so great
blasphmie, against the kingdom of the son of God and his glorious gospel)
that they will not defend neither like in all things of his opinions to this I
answer as M. Bullenger does unto the like objection. Bulleng in his preface.
Sometime they are of this judgment, sometimes of that, neither do they all
agree among themselves in the certaintye of their error, for as truth only is
like it self error must needs iar and disagre.

But herein it had been somewhat more tolerable for our Fam. if they had not
set down this in wrighting that herein they might show themselves to be
perfect scholars of a perverse master. But he that never keeps touch with
his servants has here betrayed them by their own words to the world ere
they were aware. For in their first Epistle which they make as an answer to
M. Rogers book. fol. 71. page v. lin. 30. they utter these words.

You forget (say they to M. Rogers) many protestants in Rome, Spain, Italy,
Note how ma^nerly they speak of the Pope.
and many other places under the Bishop of Romes inquisition which hold it
good policy to defend themselves and their consciences from such tyranny:
Will not you allow to others which you gladly challenge to your self? etc.

Whereby it is clearly proved and manifestly affirmed, that HN. and his
scholars termed the Fam. of Love in England, draw all in one line, and hold
the same opinions with David George that he does: whom because they affirm by
the testimonye of learned writers to be an Anabaptist needs must it necessary
by the same consequence be urged, that they are Anabaptists by their own
confession, and labor to bring Anabaptistrie into the church, from the which
and other heresies, sects, and scismes, the Lord deliver both us and all his
chosen dispersed wheresoever. Amen.

It remains that with the like breuitye or greater (if so large a matter may
be contained in a lesser room,) as I before promised, so I compare HN. with
those evident noates and manifest tokens of an heretic set down by the
spirit of God in holy Scriptures. For by that judge both he and I must be
tried to be true meaning men in this life before the Militaunt Church, and
receive our dome thereafter before the triumpha^t Church in the world to come.

Tokens of an heretic out of Scripture. 1. Toke^.
Cantic. 2.5.
THe holy ghost in the Scriptures does liken those heretics, which disturb
the peace of the Church unto Foxes, which privily, and by night, are wont to
spoil and rauine. Math. 13.25.
And in like manner our Savior Christ does describe not only the father of
heretics, but his children also by the name of a envious man which sows
tears whilst men sleep. S. Paul terms then false teachers, Gal. 2.4. 2.
Pet. 2.1. Jude verse. 4.
crafty creepers in: S. Peter says false teachers shall priuilye bring in
damnable heresies. S. Jude says certain men have crept in which turn the
grace of God into wantones: upon all the which places it may very easily be
gathered, that whosoever intends to broach any new and strange doctrine, (as
false coiners use to do) he counterfaiteth in secret. That this has bin the
practice of heretics from time to time needs no long proof: only it is to
be considered who it was, that renewed Arius heresy in Constantine the
Emperors days: Ruffinus Hist. Ecclesia. cap. 11.
was it not a priest which priuilye bare Constantia the Emperors sister in
hand, that the Counsel of Nice had done Arius wrong, who thought not of
Christ's deuinitye as the Counsel supposed and the rumor was spread abroad of
him etc.

And have not the Familye of Love this long time borne their scholars in hand
and others whom they seek to seduce: nay do they not now at this instant
persuade the simple, that Henrye Nicolas and Christofer Vitels are no such men
as they are bruted amongst ye people.

The like is reported by Josias Simlerus in his Epistle prefixed before M.
Bullengers book against the Anabaptists. Fol. 1.
Of the Anabaptists themselves whom he says fly open conference, and creeping
from house, and seduce the simple.

M. Huldrich Zuinglius, Fol. 11. and. 93.
in the same words does utter the same sense of the Catabaptistes of his time,
which says he, privily spread abroad their books in the hands of their own
sectaries. Whereas when Christ taught any thing, he came first into the
Sinagogue, Luke. 4.16. Math. 26.55. John. 18.20. Acts. 3.11.5.20.
priuilye says our Savior I have said nothing.

The Apostles in semblable manner when they preached any thing, they came to the
temple: and when the hye priests called them and commanded them to silence,
committed them to prison: the Angel of the Lord said unto them, go your way,
and stand in the temple, and speak unto the people. etc.

Furthermore S. Paul coming unto Antiochia on the Sabbath day, he went into
the Sinagogue, Act. 13.14.
and being at Athens when he saw the whole City given to Idolatrye, Acts.
27.17.
openly in the market place he disputed with the Epicures, and Stoic
Philosophers, 17
and such as he met, and Standing in the midst of the Mars streate he openly
inueighed against the superstition of that worthy City, and University, 22
even to the faces of the greatest Clerks and wisest men (or natural light I
mean) in all the world besides. Neither was S. Paul afraid of all their
learning, and countenance, but boldly he preached unto them the unknown God,
and the resurrection from the dead, unto whom how unlike our Familyes are in
zeal of profession, I leave to the whole world that knows them to judge, and
their own consciences to testify.

For whether in the teaching of their doctrine, and in the defending of the
same they are lykest to the ancient Anabaptists, and to the old heretics,
and unto S. Paul the Apostle this one coullor whereby we see a schismatique
discribed, can sufficiently testify. For if the doctrine secretly taught by
those, who are termed the Famlye of Love, be such a truth and grounded upon
such invincible profes as they in every corner use to brag of: why follow
they not that course which the son of God by his example shaped forth unto
them, that is even in the presence of the civil and spiritual Magistrate, in
the chiefest City of the Realm, and that in the concourse and greatest
asse^blies of the people? why do they not before them that openly blame them,
and in sermons publicly confute them, protesting the truth of HN. his books
openly at Paul's cross? Nay being at Paul's Cross for their fantastical
opinions, why do they deny them and renounce them with detestation openly?

But herein did the Anabaptists deal more orderly then our Fam. in England.
For they procured an open conference, 1. At. Tiguri. Bulling. lib. 1. cap. 5.2.
at. Bern. cap. 7. fol. 17.
and disputation to be had in the presence of the Maiestrate, thereby to
testify their schism to be truth, but our Fam. are so far from procuring an
open that dare not abide a private conference, if they be thereunto urged by
any man privately, without witness, whereby they indeed betray their sect to be
but a scisme, and show how far unlike they are herein unto the old Prophets
and Apostles of the Primative Church.

2. Token of an heretic out of Scripture.
THe second note of an heretic, says S. Paul, is this, that those, which
sow the corrupt seed of such erroneous doctrine, An heretic out of Scripture.
(as schismatiques most commonly do,) they become vain ianglers, desirous to
teach, and yet understand not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm.
Whereby it is given to understand, that they who in S. Paul his time began to
sow such seed were but simple men, and in knowledge very base, in that they
took in hand to dispute they wot not what, and maintain that which they had no
skill of. Such in times past were heretics, and such as thought it a glorious
and glittering thing in the sight of the world to set abroad strange opinions,
that they only might carry away the prick and prise, not having so much as the
emptye caske and smalest smacke of learning. And so always has it fallen out
that those parties which first taught heresies were least able to defend them,
tell by little and little they gathered strength: Sometime vain heads being
not altogether unlearned took part with them: and vnhapely labored to perfect
that which was vngratiously begone.

The chief of the Anabaptists in Germany were men silly, for their wits,
rather to be pitied for their folly, the^ envied for their knowledge. Which
being weary of their several crafts and occupations sought by a more easy
trade to get their living. And being of mean and illiberall sciences, sought
in the profession and interpretation of the word to shoulder and out face the
Preachers thereof with reproachful tauntes and scoffs intolerable: such was
Cnipper Dollyng, and John a Leid being a Boatcher. HN. was a Mercer in
Amsterdam, and those who are yet alive both in Emdene and London and else where
who have kept him company and knew him very well, affirm that his knowledge was
but small, neither was he expert in any tongue save his own Dutch tou^g only,
neither was he ever trained up in any liberal Art, or had commendation for his
learning.

Vitels was a Ioyner, and if his learning was so singular as his friends
affirm, it is like that he came by it rather by Revelation the^ by the
ordinary means of study.

There is a T. in Cambridgeshyre, who was Vitelles companion, who was a flat
Arrian, as by his own hand I am able to avouch, and before men of worship
Anno. 1574. March. 24. in Ca^bridge denied Christ to be God equal with his
father. 2. He said that children are not by nature sinful neither ought to be
Baptized tell years of discretion. 3. The Regenerate sin not. 4. S. Paul
his Epistles be not to be more accounted of, then the letters of private men.

This man being then a flat Arrian, since once recanted his error, and
secondly is fallen into the same opinion. His name is W. H. of B. perhaps unto
the Family he is not unknown, for that Vitels had sometimes lodged in his
house, and he uses to confer with them concerning their opinions: this man
would seem in the company of simple me^ to be very learned, and they that have
talked with him affirm, that he has many words but small wisdom, being of
a wealthy occupation but small in wit, and might be better occupied to learn
the first principles of Gods fear and him self be instructed before he teach
that, which he has no skill of.

And so is it with the chief Elders of our Lovely Fraternity, some of them be
Weauers, some Basketmakers, some Musicians, some Botlemakers, and such other
like which by trauailyng from place to place, do get their living. They which
amongst them bear the greatest countenance, are such as, having by their
smoth behavior, and gloasing talk deceived some Justices of Peace, and other
worshypfull of country, where they dwell, have gotten Licenses to trade for
Corn up and down the country, and using such a romyng kind of Traffic
keep not commonly any one certain abidyng place, but runnyng fiskyng from
place to place, stay not for the most part any where long together, save where
they hit upon some simple husbandman, whose wealth is greater then his wit, and
his wit greater then a care to keep him self up right in God his truth and
sincere Religion. His house if it be far from company, Zuing. contra Catabap.
fol. 39.
and stand out of the common walk of the people with whom he dwells is a fit
neast wherein all the birds of that fether use to meet together. Thus did the
Anabaptists in their time, and I wish heartily in the love I bear to some of
the Fam. that our Familiers of Love were far unlike them. And thus much for the
manner how, and the persons by whom their doctrine is set abroad in the hands
of the simple.

3. Token to know an Heretic.
THirdly concerning the doctrine, Verse. 19.
which is by all heretics generally taught in corners, 2. Pet. 2.2.
S. Jude says it makes sects. Romans 16.17.
S. Peter says it speaks evil of the way of truth. S. Paul gives them
these titles: Men that cause division and offenses, which serve not the Lords
Jesus but their own bellyes, who with fair speech and flatteryng words
deceive the simple.

Now whether HN. have made a sect, and be author of admission or not the
subscription of those letters, which come from his Scholars with these
words, Your loving Friends the Fam. of Love, can sufficiently testify.

That HN. speaks evil of the way of truth is manifest, for these be his
words. 2. Exhort. cap. 15. sent. 17. fol. 38. d.
Whose false being (vz. of the Preachers which through the false light have
taken on an imagination of knowledge) is the Devil, the Antichrist, the
kingdom of the Majesty of the Devil him self. etc. and in the same place
the 10. sent. he says they are but a neast of Devils, and of all wicked
spirits. 1. Exhort. cap. 16. sent. 19.
The hearers of the Preachers he calls the Sinagogue of Satan, or School
of the Devil. What God HN. and his confederates serve, I will not Judge, but
what speech they use toward the simple people in their day communication with
them, whether they be flatteryng and sweet words, they can at large
testify, who at any time have used their company: may easily affirm with what
sugared words they feed the itchyng ears of those, who^ they labor to draw
into their opinions.

2. Pet. 2.7.
Furthermore S. Peter he terms the doctrine of heretics. Wells without
water, clouds carried about with the tempest, speaking swellyng words of
vanity.

Verse. 12.13. etc.
S. Jude says they are corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead and pulled up
by the roots, ragyng waves fomyng out their own shame, wandryng stars. etc.

The which excellent Metaphores here used by the holy Ghost, lively and to the
full describe unto us the properties of Schismatic teachers, and their
heretical doctrine. For the nature of the cloud is, when the earth is parched
with heat, and the fruit thereof for want of moisture begins to windell,
and wither away with gladsome weate and silver dropes, to cherish and relieve
the tender plants, which by the hardness of the earth does hurt their sappy
juice, for want of water: even so should the Preachers of Gods word, and
Ministers of the Gospel, with wholesome doctrine and godly exhortations water
the consciences and supple the hearts of their hearers, which are wounded with
the feelyng of their sins, and inwardly in some measure touched with a
conceived grief, because they have displeased God, which is their loving
Father and merciful redeemer. And this is that which S. Paul calls the
Preachers of the word waterers and planters. 1. Cor. 3. chap. 6. verse.

Now in so much as Schismatic and fantastical teachers make in word great
boast, and to the world wards will needs carry a countenance of planters and
waterers: Yet when the afflicted soul and tormented heart shall come to such
wells to draw, thinkyng with their liquor to be relieved, when they look for
most succor, their comfort is the least, and all the hope they have of
moisture is turned into emptines: for the least storm that is will soon
scatter such clouds, and the smallest heat will so resolve them, that when
our hope is the greatest, our help is very small. So that in false teachers it
is assuredly true, which the holy Prophet long sithence complained of the
halting Israelites their goodness is like a morning cloud and as the dew that
goes early away.

Now whether HN. his writyngs have in them ought but swellyng words of man's
vanity, Hosea. 6.4.
and being fruitles trees, and stars that wander without a certain motion,
it is a little further of us to be considered.

For, to examine the matter contained in HN. his books it is very small and
silly: for let the diligent Reader pare and set aside his wrested and violent
Allegories, his unusual and insignificant phrases, of being United into the
perfect being of the love in the spirit, HN. his scripture quoting.
incorporatyng into God, consubstantiatyng with Christ. etc, and such like
words of course, he shall find small substance and little stuff in matter
that may be gathered by the order of readyng by pen or memory, and sometime he
shall be so plunged in the words, and wander for matter, that he shall very
hardly or not at all make sense of that he reads. That this is true, they
know which are occupied in the perusing of them.

As for his vain and idle quotation they are innumerable which as Mutes upon
a stage called forth to fill up a room and make a show, depart not vtteryng
any word at all. His cityng of Scriptures sometimes for the phrase, wherein his
greatest vain is, and wherein oftentimes he is vaynely occupied, sometimes
for one word only he clappeth out many places, without any further matter,
sometimes neither for word, nor yet for matter. Yea sometimes he alleges a
place for a proof, which clean ouerturneth the Assertion why he induces it
for. As for example. 1. Exhortation. 6. chap. sent. 41. leaf 17. line. 16. to
prove the resurrection he alleges Ezechiell. 36. chap. b. there is no such
place, neither in that whole Chapter any word that makes mention of the
resurrection. In the.37. chapter v. verse. 4. etc. the resurrection is clearly
prophesied and by him rightly and to the purpose alleged. But Esaias. 26. c.
verse. 14. The dead shall not live, neither shall the dead arise. etc. Is
alleged to the same purpose, where the words seem to be clean contrary,
(where note also what HN. thinks of the Resurrection) being meant, that the
Lord will so scourge the wicked that even in this life, they shall feel in
some measure the torment and worm of the conscience, that they shall have in
the world to come, when as the godly shall have all joy that can possible be
thought, and more in deed then mortal man can imagine, the quietness of
conscience that passes all understanding: but this is meant of this life, and
not to be understood of the resurrection or the life to come. For that, in
all that Chapter the meaning and scope of the Prophet is not to handle any such
matter.

And thus much for the manner how, the persons whereby, and the doctrine that
is taught by them, whom the scripture terms an heretic, 2. Pet. 2.
which in my judgment does as fitly agree to HN. and is by S. Peter as fully
foretold as if he had lived in HN. his time, and bin privy unto all his
dealinges. Now in one word concerning HN. his style, and the manner of the
deliuerye of his opinions in his books.

HN. his style is heretical.
His method is, take it among ye: The thread of his speech is sometimes knotty,
and sometimes great, and sometime small as unskillful spinners use to afford,
his grace and gifts in pe^ning thereof is even such as Marcion is reported to
have used in penning of his heretical writings, Calvin against the Libertines,
leaf. 131. and. 129.
Whose whole talk of the spirit was in such a strange kind of style, that
those which hard or read them at the first did wonder at them. And this being a
part of that wherein our Familye do as it were wonderful love, and make of
themselves, so that in their speech which they daily use in talk with any man,
if ever they may be gotten to confer of the knowledge of the Scriptures, of the
law, of sin, inner man and regeneration, of the humblyng of the soul, which
are the largest Common Places of their study, straight way by the vnusualnes
of their speeches, and strange terms ye may easily understand what way they
are inclined. So that when I my self have spoken publicly the great pains
which I have taken in perusing their books, have so acquainted my self with
HN. his phrases, that I using them at unawares have by diverse, which knew me
not, ben suspected to be privy unto their doctrine.

But concerning the general noates of an heretic this shall suffice with the
particular application thereof unto HN. it remains that I confer his opinions
with the particular fantasies of diverse heretics with whom we shall find him
so to agree, that it may easily appear they have had all but one and the same
Scholemaister, who has instructed them in the same principles, to overthrow
and disquiet the Church of God.

HN. his opinions compared with Heretics opinions.
THe Origianists, Nepotians, and Priscilianists, did altogether pervert the
certaintye of the written word of God, by turning it into allegoryes: so does
HN. Docum. sent. or Dictatis. cap. 3. sent. 11. 12. Euang. cap. 8. sent. 3. 4.
5. 6. 1. Epist. 3. cap. 22. sent. and almost in every side of every leaf in
all his wrightinges.

2. The Montanistes, Praeputians, Donatists, Luthusiastes, Monks, and
Anabaptists: boast of revelations: so does HN. Euang. cap. 2. sent. 1. contrary
to the Scriptures. 1. Gal. 8. ver.

3. The Cerdonians, Marcionites, and Appellites, boast of their new Prophets,
and prefer them before the old: so did the Anabaptists prefer Thomas Muncer
their Arch-heretique before Luther, and Zuinglius, Bulleng. fol. 9. b. Vitels
in his reply to M. Rogers display, terms HN. a Prophet in these words. Ye
despise HN. because he says he is a Prophet sent of God, but the time may come
that you shall find his prophecy true. and in the same reply he says:
whereas ye say that HN. does call himself Rectorer of all things. I answer
that there is no such word written by him, and yet has the Lord accomplished
according to his promises through the spirit of Christ in him all what he has
spoken through the mouth of his servants the Prophets. And again ye say we
affirm HN. to be the true Prophet of God, sent to blow the last trumpe of
doctrine, which shall be blown upon the earth: mark what his works testify
of him, and so is he: whether it be believed or not.

4. Noetus said he was Moses, HN. says he is Malachias and John Baptist.
praeface Euang. sent. 3.

5. The Heracleonites made a double confession of God whereof either part was
equal: one was with the heart only, and the other with the mouth to avoid
persecution. So does HN. Dictatis 16. chapter 18. sent. and 11. Epist. cap. 6.
sent. 3. So says Theoph. that the mysteries ought not to be reueiled to the
withstanders. etc. contrary to the scripture. 1. Pet. 3.15. Heb. 10.23. Phil.
2.11.

6. The Messalians taught it was lawful to deny God and the faith of Christ.
Theophilus says the belief ought to be declared to all men: But not the
secrets no more the^ we ought to confess to a thief what treasure we have
about us: the Anabaptists thought it was free unto them either to confess,
Bulleng. 2. book 4. chap.
or deny their faith in persecution, the sam opinion held the Priscianistes,
and the Andiani contrary to the Scriptures, Math. 10.33. Luke 9. 26. and 12.8.
contrary to HN. his own doctrine. 1. exhor. cap. 5. sent. 9. cap. 6. sent. 1.
cap. 4. sent. 5. 7. 8. cap. 12. sent. 22.

7. The Hetianites, Cerinthians, Nazarenes, affirmed that Ceremonies of Moses
law are to be kept of necessitye: so said the false Apostles. Act. 15.1. so
says HN. Euang. 13. chap. 4. sent. contrary to S. John. cap. 19.30. and the
whole Epist. to the Galatians.

8 The Nazarenes had more Gospels then 4. the Papists had S. Thomas and other
gospels: HN. has made a gospel of his own, contrary to S, Paul. Gal. 6.8.

9 The Basilidians thought that the mysteries of Faith ought to be revealed to
few, so thought the Papists, so thinks the Fam.

10. Hymineus and Menander thought that sanctification and regeneration of the
spirit was the resurrection of the flesh: co^founding the first and second
resurrection: so does HN. 1. exhor. cap. 7, sent. 24. 11. Epist. cap. 5. sen,
10. and Dictat. cap. 6. sent. 3, he says the 15. chap. to the Corinthians.
verses 50.53.54. are not meant of the earthly body in these words. Verily the
mortal, whereof S. Paul witnesses, is not any creature of earthly flesh and
blood, but it is the living word or being of God which in the beginning was
mortal in the manhood, and is in us for our sins cause, became mortal.

11. The Aerians, Docum. sentences. cap. 3. sent. 12.
and Iouinians refused to come to sermons so do the Familiers of Love which be
illuminated. For says HN. As long as the yongons are childish and not yet
grown up into the Elderdome of the perfect being they are yet under the
ordinance of the Lord of his word: not that they should always remain as
subject there under, but vntell the appointed time, vntell the manly old age
in the godly understanding of the holy word, that is tell sin in the^ be
subdued.

12. Fol. 71. b.
The Pelagians and Coelestinians denied the doctrine of Predestination wholly,
the Papists deny it in part, the Family in the first Epistle to M. Rogers
blaspheme the doctrine calling it a licentious doctrine which fills all the
prisons almost in England.

Contrary to the whole body of the Scriptures particularly. Romans 9.11. Ephesians.
1.1. Tim. 3.16.

13. Nouatians and Donatistes say that the Church ought to be spotles, the
Papists say that the Church can not do amiss or err, so do the Fam. affirm
that the Commandments are able to be kept, and that there is a perfection in
the godly and regenerate in this life. Docum. sent. cap. 1. sent. 7.1. Epist.
Praefac. sent. 2.6. 1. Exhort. cap. 7. sent. 19. and. cap. 12. sent. 18. cap.
15. sent. 26. cap. 17. sent. 18. Euang. cap. 4. sent. 1. cap. 21. sent. 2. cap.
25. sent. 2.5. cap. 27. sent. 1. cap. 28. sent. 13. cap. 37. sent. 14. And
Vitels in his reply to M. Rogers display. And the.2. Epistle of the Family to
M. Rogers page 1. fol. 86. per E.R.

14. The Origianistes and Hierarchitae, denied that Paradise was a certain
material place: HN. depraueth the History by wrestiyng it into an Allegory.
1. Epist. cap. 3. sent. 17.18.19.22. And the Fam. by the picture of a heart of a
man utterly deface the written word, affirmyng also Adam did not eat a
material fruit.

15. The Family of Love affirm that men that live wickedly ca^ not teach the
truth. 1. Epist. to M. Rogers. fol. 73. a. so affirm the Anabaptists.

16. The Nouatians etc. Arrians, Donatistes affirmed that those which were
Baptized by others then their fellow heretics, were not truly Baptized, and
therefore they ought to be rebaptized. HN. says that without the Family of
Love by him found there is no true Christian Baptism.3. Artic. page 33. of
this book.

17. The Pellagia^s affirmed that infants ought not to be Baptized, so did the
Anabaptists affirm, tell they come to years of discretion. So says HN.
Eua^g. cap. 19. sent. 11.

And thus much in few words (by the way of Comparison, first to declare that
Henry Nicholas, is a Blasphemer. Secondly, A false Prophet foretold of by
Christ the Prophets and Apostles. Thirdly, that in 17. points he agrees with
all the old Heretics in their particular heresies, shall be sufficient.

ARTICLE. 8. HN. Videl. What is to be required in his Disciples.
THe Disciples of the Family must give over them selves to be obedient. Iam. 1.
b. Disciples of the gracious word and the service of the Eldest of the Love,
and renounce all their self wisdom. 1. Cor. 30. own knowledge, and be
persuaded that before their new. Ioh. 3. c. birth that they know nothing. etc.

Theophilus.

VIdel. of the godly causes, or have no experimented but a literal knowledge
thereof.

William Wilkinson.

THis whole 8. Article being framed of diverse several propositions, with
sundry interpretations of Theophilus unto many parts of it, may for orders
sake be reduced into these three especial points.

The first is what HN. requires at the hands of all them that desire to be
incorporate into his Fam. and what it is, which he would have them think
concerning them selves, videl. They which desire to be Disciples, etc. must
give over them selves, and renounce their own knowledge, and be persuaded they
know nothing, but they must stand single mindedly to hear right sentences of
their Elder. etc.

Secondly what opinion they must have of their Elder in their Fam. that is,
They must not mistrust the Eldest in the Family, nor suspect any manner of
evil or vnwisedome by him, nor persuade them selves that the instructions
taught by the Father of the Fam. of Love, or Oldest Elder are to (1. Cor. 1.
b.) slight or childish or to unwise, for them to follow after, or to obey.

Thirdly what devotion they must have to the doctrine being heard of the Elder,
and how they must be affectioned thereunto, that is, Yet must not their
Disciples carry the resolution and instruction (of their Elders) as in manner of
acknowledge in their memory and understanding. The other clause conteinyng
revelations and confession of sins to the Eldest in the Family being things
of great importance, I shall handle them several in particular Articles
hereafter.

The first part of the 8. Article, videl. No learning, or knowledge.
THe Disciples of the Family must give over. etc. and be persuaded that they
know nothing, etc neither ca^ they judge rightly, etc. First Theoph. expounds
thus: It is very true for so shall they escape the deceit of the enemy, and
not remain in error nor yet be deceived.

Even as a certain profane Rhetoritian, which being desired to instruct on
that was well minded toward his Art of pleadyng, when he asked to great a
stipende was answered by him that desired to be his Scholar, that he was
somewhat already entered into the principles of that faculty, whereby his
Masters pains should be the less: The Orator replied that therefore he ought
to have a double sallarie: because first he must teach him to forget and
unlearn that which he had already been practiced in, and then afterward he
must inform him a fresh after an other Method: right so deals HN. in this
article with them, which by him desire to be instructed into his Lovely
Family, vz. he affirms that none in his School can profit sufficiently,
unless before he enter therein, he utterly go backewardes and unlearn that
which he has learned before he come of him to be instructed.

Wherein the Devil that old Serpent, and subtle Scholemaister very wily does
seek to insinuate unto us, that unto the knowledge of that error, the which
at his hand he would have us to receive, there is no further understanding
expedient, then wholly to submit our selves to embrace the doctrine, which he
seeks to set forth unto us: so that whatsoever knowledge any man has in any
point of learning (unto HN. his further instruction in his sect) it is nothing
worth at all, but utterly it must be rejected: and concerning any skill it does
not greatly matter whether the nouice, which comes to be further instruct,
be expert in any kind of knowledge, utterly or ignorant. It is very true that
he which measures the mercyes of God carnally, and according to his sensual
understanding, does err with the Capernaites, and he which examineth the high
and heavenly secrets of the most wise God, according to the crooked rule of
man's reason, and in the ballaunce of flesh and blood the incomprehensible wait
of so great mysteries: Heb. 11.6.
can never aright understand the things which are good. For every man has no
faith: without the which seeing God can not be pleased, how is it to be hoped,
that without the brightness of that candle any man can see to do ought that
God shall love and like of.

Now if hereupon the Family will gather as perhaps they will, and some
Anabaptists have done heretofore, that seeing faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God alone: and therefore all other helps of learning are
unnecessary: To beget faith only Gods word is necessary.
I answer that unto the begettyng and obtainyng of faith the ordinary means
and conduit whereby this gift of God is conveyed unto us, is the blessed
written word of God sufficient and only necessary, but to increase and
conserve faith, the Lord has left in his Church many excellent help and
means as prophesying (that is, 1. These. 5.20.
interpretation and expoundyng of Scripture) which must not be neglected or
contemned: furthermore the gift of tongues. etc. Whereby as by precious stones
and costly pearls the pure gold of Gods word to the beholders and lookers on
is bewtified, and adorned, so that albeit HN. himself were never instructed in
the knowledge of any of the seven liberal Sciences as Gra^mar, Rhetoric,
Logique, etc, neither trained up in the knowledge of the tongues: he must not
contemn that in others, which he him self does want, nor set down his own
ignorance as an example and pattern for others to imitate. Neither is it
reasonable that because some men be blind, therefore other men, which have their
eyes should violently deprive them selves of that benefit, which God in his
great mercy has bestowed upon them.

But it shall not need I hope to make any long proof that there are necessary
in Gods Church, diverse particular blessings, and gifts, which serve to the
buildyng up of the same (for that no man herein will wrangle if he have any
skill at all and knowledge is most hunted and hated by those, who are least
acquainted therewith) yet in a word or two to prevent the cauilles of the
barbarous and unskillful adversary, it shall not be amiss, if with a few
testimonies we stope up that gape, at the which those beasts do enter in, to
tread under foot, and utterly lay wast all the seemly ornaments of liberal
Arts, and good literature, whereby both the Church of God is excellently
guarded against Hereitques, and their Schismatic factions, but the common
wealth also very much maintained and defended against the invasion of those
mischievous Machiauellistes, which think that the obedience of subjects does
especially consiste in the ignorance of all human Sciences, and commendable
learning.

Genesis 11.7.8.
The Confusion of tongues, as first it was a punishment for sin, so afterward
the singular mercy of the Lord made it an unspeakable benefit, and blessing,
the use whereof served to confirmation: Acts. 2.11.
first of the faith of the Apostles, Secondly to the increase and enlarging of
the flock of Christ. wherein albeit diverse of the Apostles and sundry of the
ancient fathers did notably excel: yet the sacred scriptures as a most
plentiful storehouse is abundantly fraughted with most clear and evident
examples, it shall be sufficient to fetch profes, from thence, thereby to
defend such heavenly blessings against such rude Barbarism as the Family of
Love and other their accomplices do labor to bring in.

Acts. 9.15. Romans 1.1.5.
The blessed Apostle S. Paul being chosen an especial vessel to bear the
Lords name before Gentiles, used none instrument more effectual (to make them
both one fould under one Shepherd) then the gift of tongues. And though he
excelled in the working of Miracles, and in many other gifts which he does
singulerly commend. 1. Cor. 12. chap. 8.9.10. verses and 4. chap. 5. ver. yet
in the same place verse. 18. he thanketh God very heartily, that very
plentifully was endewed with the gift of tongues. Wherein how he excelled, read
Acts the 12. verse of the 14. Chapter.

He disputed at Athens with the Epicures and Stoic Philosophers, Acts. 17.18.
defending against them the doctrine of the resurrection. He disputed in the
Sinagogue with the Jews, and in the market place daily with whom soever he
met, Verse. 22.
he stood in the midst of the Mars street and reproved the superstitious
worship of the Athenia^s, which whole Action of his had not be so profitable to
those amongst whom he spoke unless he had used the tongue of that country,
that is the Greek tongue. How excelle^tly he understood the Latin tongue it is
manifest in that he mentions there were some which did salute the
Philippians: Phil. 4.22.
those who were of Cesars house show that Paul converted some even in the
Emperors courts, which he could not so conveniently have done unless he
could have privately have instructed them in their native speech. But the
Epistles of S. Paul to Seneca, and of Seneca to S. Paul do argue the mutual
conference they had at Rome under Nero in the Latin tongue. Act. 21.40.
Furthermore it is apparaunt that the Appollogie, which he made for him self
before the chief captain was in the Hebrew tongue. which gift of tongues he
does worthily commend 1. Cor. 12.7. b. 28. d. where he shows likewise the use
of them, which he never would have done, if the knowledge of the tongues had
been a thing of so small account.

But in the dispraysing of these and such like blessings, the old proverb,
which the Romanistes reproach those graces of God withal, in the mouth of HN.
is likewise (showing what spirit he is of) verefied to be true, that is, the
knowledge of the Hebrew, and Greek makes many an heretic. But what do I
bring in many examples, or seek for any further proof? does not HN. his
translating of Hebrew names (out of that translation which the Papists call S.
Ieromes bible) brought forth so often in the Euangely of HN. prove that the
knowledge of the tongues is an excellent means to understand the scripture? if
it be so, how then does HN. so vnskilfullye counsel those which be his
scholars to renounce their knowledge. etc.

But if the Familye shall object that I am not sufficiently acquainted with
their meaning, neither HN. his sense: for that he will have them that desire to
be made pertakers of his doctrine to humble themselves, and to abject and
captiuate their own understanding, and that the understanding of spiritual
things is to be enquired of persons that be spiritual, so that only the
taking on knowledge which is learned out of the scientialnes of the letter, and
the imagination which proceeds out of the selfemindednes of the outward man,
and unrenewed creature is blamed by HN. and that he does not conte^ne, nor
dehort them, from the knowledge of Gods word, nor the study of tongues. etc.

I answer, albeit it were true that he says, yet seeing under the mist and
darkness of words, and terms he does seek to rob and spoil us of the precious
iuell of holy scripture, and the knowledge of the will whereby our Savior
Christ dying and departing from us has left bequeathed unto us the Legacy of
eternal life: yet shall he not escape after that sort, neither shall he so
start away: for the practice of his Familers shall clearly descry his meaning,
and what that is indeed which he in word seems to insinuat unto us. The
behavior I say of diverse of them that are said to be of that Fam, shall most
assuredly affirm my assertion to be true. For diverse of the^ have privily
whispered abroad in the ears of the simple, as also with some men of wealth,
who themselves have told it me, and are ready to testify the thing it self
to be true, that they of the Familye have disuaded and dehorted some: not to
put their sons to schole or university, for that simple wrighting and
reading (say they,) is sufficient for a Christian, without any further
knowledge of the Latin or Greek tongues, or any other facultye of learning
whatsoever: So that by this means they seek to discredit learning, to deface
the learned, and to strengthen ignorance to be the hye way unto true devotion,
and to advance the glory of God, which is flat Poperye: so that thereby they
labor to put out the eyes of this land (the Universities I mean) the vtilitye
whereof as it is unspeakable for that from them come the most skillful
stearesmen to govern, both the state ecclesiastical, and civil in this land:
so also is the antiquity of such kind of discipline and good nurture of youth
most ancient, 1. Sam. 19.18, 2. King. 2.4.5. and 6.1.2. Acts. 6.9. Acts.
19.9.
and in sondrye places of Scripture commended, and confirmed by the word of
God, and so having trodden underfoot this most precious orchards of the Lord,
they might not only run uncontrolled, but also bring the commen wealth unto
that estate that the Anabaptists brought the free Cities of Germany unto, in
the time of their seditious tumult, and unfaithful rebellion.

But for a playner and euidenter proof I desire thee gentle reader, (But thee
especially which art haplesly gracious with that graceles company,) to mark
diligently, and thou shall see it to be true, ye very few of the Fami. (or none
at all) be furtherers of learning, or favorers of learned men, much less do
they train up their children in the knowledge of the liberal sciences, either
in the commen schools of this realm, or in the universities, to the robbing
both of Gods Church and the common wealth of many a toward wit, being also
utterly unthankful to the flourishing state and peaceable government of this
noble realm, wherein they might use all means possible to further and promote
the glory of Ged, and also discharge some part of the debt wherein they are
bound to the country wherein they were bred and brought up.

Furthermore it is to be understood, that if this first steine of the 8.
Article, concerning the renouncing of knowledge by the disciples of the
Familye, be thus to be expounded, that no man ought to seek neither can
attain unto any knowledge but only those which be spirituallye minded and
regenerated, standing wholye subject unto their Familye of Love, which is
taught by the books of HN. then does the Familye accuse all the churches in
England (the particular congregations of the faithful I mean, yea and the
general and visible Church in England to be vnrenued in spirit and
unregenerate, for that the visible and general Church of England neither has
nor now does allow the sect and schism of the Fami) of unregeneration. For
that they affirm they know nothing before they new birth quoting for proof
John. 3. a. Except ye be borne again of water and the holy ghost, ye cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. The Fam. what they think of the doctrine
taught in England.
Thus covertly they affirm that there is no truth taught in the Church of
England which is the second Article wherewith I charge HN. in this book. page
23. he avouches here to be true, and that we have nothing but a literal, not
having yet attained unto the experimental knowledge whereof he dreameth. So
that first they acknowledge no truth without their Fami. secondly he that is
not regenerate can not speak the truth. etc:

Herein then was HN. much ouerseene that whilst he would feign have his sect
to be some singular thing, he put no difference at all betwixt the knowledge of
the learned, and the blindness of the ignorant, but either of them alike which
came to be made free of his sect and incorporated into his Fami. and had a
longing to be instructed by him, must equally cast of and renounce all their
learning and knowledge whatsoever, albeit they had studied sore and swet not a
little for it before they could obtain it. So that betwixt the well practiced
and expert man in the holy word, and those which be simple and plain men,
which never hard if there were any such thing as men use to call learning,
there is no great difference but all is one, wherein a man of mean wit may
easily perceive, that at the fist entering into HN. his schole, HN. makes all
his scholars to be a like and equal towardnes, placing the^ all in one form
to learn one lesson, wherein it had been well if for his credit sake he had
used a further forecast and more sober discretion.

The reason and Argument whereby HN. would feign persuade us that we should know
and understand more then we do, if we would suspect our knowledge and confess
it to be less, (and that being wholly naked of our own skill, which we have
learned out of the word of God, we might be warmely clad with his exceeding
learning and so stand single myndedly obedient unto his documentable Sentences)
it is the same Sillogisme and seducyng fallations wherewith the Devil being a
subtle Sophister beguiled and blinded our graundmother Eve in Paradise. Genesis
3.5.


That is, if he would forgo that measure of knowledge, which God had bestowed
upon her, and if she would be endued with a more excellent knowledge of good
and evil she might easily attain thereunto by eating the forbidden fruit,
and breakyng the express commandment, which she confessed she had received
from the mouth of God.

This then is the judgment of HN. that we should abjure and recant all such
knowledge of the word of God as we have already learned out of the word, and
take unto us such glosing Expositio^s, as he would teach us. So that we should
be always learning, but never attainyng unto the truth: contrary to the
doctrine of S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19.
which says That we have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which if
ye shall take heed ye shall do well. And S. Paul says, we must not be as
children waueryng and carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephe. 4.14.
Jude. 12.
nor as clouds carried about of wyndes, nor as unstable minded men, which are
unconstant in all their ways, Iam. 1.
but we should be grounded and rooted in the truth, holdyng the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience, 1. Tim. 1.19.
knowing that if the Heathen writer only endued with the light, which God gave
him naturally without the knowledge of his word, could say, Cognita iudicio
constant, incognita casu.

That is, that which we know to be true it is undoubtedly to be embraced, but
things unknown prove true but upon adventure: therefore ought we not to forgo
the one to find the other: for if we wa^e indifferent, whether we kept the
word of God or no, the testimony of the Heathen shall convince us and our own
Newtralisme, and Lukwarmenes shall in the wyng of Gods son utterly condemn
us.

But if the Family shall hereunto further reply that their meaning is not to
deprive their Disciples of all knowledge, as I would seem to burden them. I
answer their words shall discipher and explayne their meaning, and the
Scriptures quoted by HN. shall verefy my saying to be truth: where he says.

They must be obedient Disciples. Iam. 1. b. (which place is utterly falsified,
for there is no such word) of the gracious word and his service of Love, and
that they Heb. 12.1. a. (cast away every thing that presses down) 1. Pet.
2.1. a. Turnyng them away according to the requiryng of the gracious word and
his service from all their self wisdom and knowledge that rises up or
becomes imagined in them. 1. Cor. 3.18. d. All these places does HN. allege
to prove that they ought to renounce all their own knowledge, the which how
unskillfully and vnshamefully he does abuse may plainly appear by the same
words used by S. Paul, Ephe. 4.22.
Cast ye of concerning your conversation in times past the old man, which is
corrupt through deceivable lusts. Colos. 3.8.
And again, Put ye away even all these things wrath, anger, malitiousnes,
etc. So that the meaning of these places is that we ought to be at war and
hatred with sin, etc. and as for renouncyng of knowledge in the word of God,
there is no one word that tends unto any such meaning or renouncyng of
knowledge, as HN. would seem to importe. But more plainly does he inueigh
against a particular knowledge of Christians in Gods word. 1. Exhort. where he
says: 1. Exhor. cap. 13. sent. 6. leaf. 29. b
Verily to know the difference of all things. 1. Cor. 8. a. is no right
knowledge of the godly wisdom, but the love with her virtuous nature and
being, is the upright wisdom of the godly knowledge. And most plainly. ibid.
1. Exhor. cap. 15. sent. 4. sent. 36. a.
The true light consists not in the knowing of this or that, but in an
upright and true being of God and his eternal life. John. 17. c.

By the which two places out of HN. it is apparauntly evident, that he
withdraws his Nouices from the searchyng out of particularities in doctrine,
only he wills them to stand subiectiuely obedient to the Love, and her
requiryng, being wholly resolved in the general knowledge thereof, 1. Sam.
2.3. a. Dan. 1.17. c.
and standing simply counited thereunto. Whereas the spirit of God in the
Scriptures does not only commend a general, but also command a particular
knowledge of the mysteries of salvation. John. 11.22. c. 1. Cor. 5.1. a. 1.
John. 3.2. a. and. 5.19. a. 1. Cor. 14.20. d. Hebr. 5.14. d. and 8.11. d. 1.
Cor. 2.8. and 10.1. a. Math. 22.29.


First that a particular knowledge of Gods favor toward us is necessary.
Secondly, that in matters of faith and Religion a knowledge in particulers is
necessary the Scripture is plentyfull, neither do I mean in many words to
confute HN. his opinion therein: so that in one word to testify a truth
whosoever doubts of Gods love toward him (as the Papists would have us)
shall in this life never be certain of his own safety in the day of
judgment, Math. 16.26.
which every man ought to be most careful of. Secondly whosoever has an
intricate and doubtful faith of his Religion, which he has reposed in any
man (but in God and his word alone) he must needs often have as many faythes
as there are Fathers in the Church concerning many particular points of
doctrine, as also he shall stagger and reele in the worship of his God, seeing
that man is mutable not having any certain hold of him self in any thing: yea
the greater in countenance, the deeper in knowledge, the more zealous and
earnest men show them selves to be, when once they begin to totter and swerve a
to side, unless the Lord underset them, their fall is more great and grievous.

Furthermore that this knowledge in particularities is that which the Family
can not abide, I by mine own experience which I have had by conference with
diverse of them, am able to testify: for demaundyng of them how a man might
fully and in deed become instructed in the love, they have answered me, that
all the knowledge which I have, must be of me utterly forsaken: and asking of
them a reason of that speech, they have alleged unto me for proof hereof
knowledge puffs up but love edifieth. 1. Cor. 8.1.2. a.
etc. And Pro. 26.12. b. and Mar. 10.15. c. whereby I am assuredly persuaded
(mine experience having proved it true,) that the first part of this Article of
renouncyng of knowledge in the Disciples of the Family is assuredly true.

The second part of the 8. Article, videl. Mistrust not HN. vnwisedome.
HN. As in the first strain he would not be content unless his Disciples were
witles, In renou^cing of their former knowledge, so in the second that he would
have them not to suspect any vnwisedome by him, or think his instructions to
be to childish, or unwise for them to follow. etc. He would deprive them of
their common senses, and the wit which God has bestowed upon them by the
benefit of nature. For what unspeakable childishness and extreme madness is
this, that in buyng of spiritual things at the hands of the Lord his
factours, he would have us more void of skill then the common chapmen of the
world, which when they come to choose or cheapen, bring their eyes with them to
judge, if that which they are about to bargayne for shall be for their turn or
no. And even as true meaning and faithful dealyng men are not displeased with
those, which intendyng to buy bring their wares to the light, and pry, and
pore on them, and open them to see if they be such as unto them by a price
pitched they are delivered out for: when as false men and disse^blers desiring
for true to utter wares that are braid and counterfaite, whisper in men's ears
and lead them aside into the furthest part of their shop, and sometimes into
their warehouses where partly with a true and false light, partly for want of
light they beguile and deceive them: so HN. in this place like a crafty
merchant subtly seeks to lead his Scholars into the dark, where he
offers them doctrine and wholesome instructions which he tells them is for
them and shall fitly serve their use, when in deed there is nothing less then
he in word pretends.

And whereas by his experimental knowledge HN. can very well testify, that he
has often tried that those men which sell by whole sale have a quicker
dispatch, and sooner riddance then those which stand pelting out until the end
of the market: the same pollicye uses HN in uttering his spiritual traffic,
not bearing any which may checkmate him in his doctrine like a franck merchant
he by wholesale delivers out his divinity, and takes it greatly in the
snuff, that his stuff which he delivers should be brought to light and be
examined. Whereas he shows very clearly what his opinion is of those which
he would have to be his scholars, that they would straight way take for gould
whatsoever glistereth.

But to stand unto HN. his judgment, shall we think that if HN. were in the
open Mart of Emde^ or Amsterdame that he would be such a want wit as to take
all kind of coin yt were brought him and never examine it? would he never
bring his silver to the touch, nor his gold to the ballaunce? so fares it with
Gods children in buying the precious pearls of Gods truth and heavenly
doctrine, they must touch all with the proportion of faith, Romans 12.6.
and as in the meat wherewith our body is nourished the danger of poison is
carefully to be avoided and taken heed of, neither can we be to warye that the
health of our bodies be indamaged: so is the infection of doctrine by the
contagiousnes whereof our soul is in hazard, it is most diligently to be
considered of, for that as the one does endaunger but the body, Reuelat. 22.15.
the other does pitch down hedlong both body and soul into everlasting
torments.

Stapleton. controuer. 2. 5. book cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. page 161. 162.
The principle which HN. does publish in this place is mere Papisticall, as
witnesses M. Stapleton in his book of Controversies: the wares he offers to
sale he has bought at Rome of the purpule strumpet, as ye by mark may sone
discern, which will bring it to light, and offer it to the trial: if they
demand unto what light or trial: I answer unto that candle which S. Peter
says, shines in a dark place, and we shall do well if we will look unto.
Let us then in a word or two consider of HN. his doctrine by the Analogy of
faith, and light of holy scripture, and straight way espy the difference
betwixt HN. his words, and the word of God.

HN. says. He must not be suspected or mistrusted whatsoever he teach: Math.
7.15.
Our Savior Christ gives us warning to take heed of false Prophets: HN.
says if the Eldest say it, it must be believed.

Math. 2.4.5. a.
Herod demanding of the Scribes, where Christ should be borne was answered,
at Bethlem in the land of Judah, for thus it is written Miche. 5.2. so there
unto the truth of their answer, they joined a proof out of the scripture: yet
will HN. have us believe his resolution and that without proof, wherein he
deals more unequally with us then Herod was dealt withal by ye Scribes and
Pharisie.

Furthermore HN. says that right sentences must be heard of the Eldest in the
Familye. John. 5.39.
Christ says it must be learnd out of the Scripture.

HN. draws his disciples from the examination of his doctrine, for says he
they must not suspect it to be to slight, childish, or unwise for the^ to
follow. The noble Berrheans when they heard S. Paul preach, searched the
scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. 1. Cor. 11.13. 1. These. 5.21. d.
whether those things were so.

S. Paul bids us judge what he says, and prove all things, and S. John
says: Try the spirits whether they are of God adding also a reason for many
false prophets are gone out into the world, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
and yet says HN. his doctrine must not be examined.

The spirit of the Prophets says S. Paul are subject to the Prophets, 1.
Cor. 14.32.
and in another place speaking to the whole Church, and every particular member
thereof, he says, that the Discerning of spirits is the gift of God. 1. Cor.
12.10. Psalm. 119. ver. 98 99.100.104.
The kingly Prophet David says that he was made wiser then his enemies, by the
law of God, and that he had more understanding then his teachers because he
meditated in Gods law, he understood more then the aged because he kept Gods
precepts. For by his word he gat understanding, which word alone it is
whereby the simple ons are lightened and instructed: Psalm. 19.6.
yet would HN. have us leave the broad and beaten highway, refusing all such
means as holy David was a bettered by, and dig unto us cisterns out of his
inventions, where he first accused Gods revealed word and ordinary means and
fly to his strong method, whereby he says his scholars may attain perfect
wisdom.

But the same persuasion wherewith HN. seeks to blind his sectaries, if they
would profit under the instruction of the Eldest, not to suspect his doctrine
which he terms right sentences, Genesis 3.5. John. 10.27.
but they should stand single mindedly to receive the doctrine of the Ouldest
Father in the Familye, is that wherewith Eve was beguiled in Paradise. But as
many as are Christ's sheep, hear his voice, and they follow him only neither
know they the voice of strangers.

Lastly whereas HN. would not have the truth of his doctrine come in
contruersie or be doubted of, he secretly would steal away with this
Papisticall assertion that he can not err: Vitels in his reply to M. Rogers
his display.
And so likewise Vitels affirms of HN. saying, I know not how he or any other
should err which are ruled by the spirit of God. Which is all one with ye
judgment of the Papists concerning the Pope, in determining of matters of
religion. So that they will not only drive us to poisoned pastures, but in
eating whatsoever they shall set before us: we shall by them be compelled to be
accessarye unto our own destruction. And thus desiring the Reader to mark how
just the Papists and HN. do iumpe in this point. HN. agrees with the
Papists.
I end the second part of this 8. Article.

The third part of the 8. Article.
THe third and last clause of this Article as it is a palbable gross and an
absurd Paradox, so is the fondness thereof more evident, 1. HN. his doctrine
contrary to Gods word. 2. To himself. 3. To natural reason and common sense.
in that it sets it self not only flatly contrary to the written word of
God, but also it is manifestly repugnant to HN. his own doctrine, delivered in
his books, and lastly to the very practice of humane Arts and the light of
nature it self, in the judgment of all the which witnesses it is most fond
and foolish.

1. Exhort. cap. 13 fol. 30. b. line. 25
The words them selves are manifest and not able to be denied vz. And not for
to carry the resolution and instruction ^s in manner of a knowledge, in their
memory or understanding, in the helpyng and saluyng whereof the Expositor
Theophilus is far over the shoes, that being not able to shift the error, or
to get out of so manifest a slyp, he returns the fault upon me by a
Rhetorical Anticipation, and thinks wholly to stop my mouth byddyng me
look on the text and leave my peruertyng, whereas if I should look upon it
never so often, I should not neither if I should use his eyes find any words
then already I have set down. For that which he him self adds for an
Exposition, Theop. Exposition.
how I pray you does it expound, vz. Yea verily but not to carry the resolution
as in manner of a knowledge in their memory: look the text and leave your
peruertyng. But thus falls it out with those whose heads labor with a
Schismatic fantasy, even as a woman is payned in her travail tell she be
delivered.

But to come to HN. his words The Disciples must not carry the instruction.
etc. Thinks that these three several and distinct phrases have this meaning:
To carry in manner of a knowledge in Latin, cognitione co^plecti, that is, to
know, to carry an instruction in memory: in memoria habere, to Rome^ber or have
in remembrance. And to carry in understanding: intelligentia compraehendere, to
understand, from the which proprieties of speech if either HN. or Theophilus
shall seek to slip, they shall straight declare how well they are ouersene in
the tounges and common speech. So that if upon all these we shall gather this
sentence. The Family must not know, remember, nor understand the doctrine or
instruction which the Eldest in the Family delivers forth unto them, which
Eldest says Theophilus is Christ him self and his holy word. How
blasphemously and Papistically HN. and Theophilus, do play the heretics is
manifest. For what man is so blind that he will not see or so graceless that
he will not confess that The word of God must be known remembered and
understood of the simple, Ierem. 31.33.34 Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 11.19. Prou. 8.9.
Esaias. 11.9. and 52.6. Col. 1.9. Romans 15.4. Math. 11.23. Luke. 10.21. Esaias.
54.13. Prou. 2.2. Psalm. 119.104. Dan. 2.21. and. 8.17. and. 10.11.12. Math.
15.10. Mar. 7.14. 2. Tim. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 6.6.8.9. and 11.18. Numb. 10.10. and
15.39. Psalm. 119.52.55. Acts. 11.16. and 20.31. Romans 15.15. 2. Pet. 1.15. and
3.2. Jude. 17. Prou. 4.4. d. 1. Exhor cap. 13 fol. 30. line. 25.
if this be not Popery, what is Popery. And that First, the simple ought to
know. Secondly understand. Thirdly remember these places quoted for proof out
of the Scripture shall be sufficient.

Furthermore HN. is contrary to his own doctrine, which he him self teaches,
in his own books whereas for his usual Emblem, he takes. 1. Exhort. cap.
12. sent. 10. b. this sentence or posie for his common badge whereby his books
are known from others of his fellow Elders Take it to heart. Which is according
to the best translations. Let thine heart hold fast my words. Where it is meant
that his words ought wholly and thoroughly to be known, understood and
remembered, contrary to his former doctrine in the place first alleged.

But to let pass these two former parts of contrariety: betwixt HN. and the
written word of God: secondly betwixt him self and his own writings: if we
diligently, way and consider we shall assuredly find, that this third clause
concerning natural reason and common experience it is as wholly against HN.
and impugneth his doctrine as truth is against falsehode, and light darkness.
And herein to use the same example, which the Scripture does in like matter.
The wiseman does very excellently commend the diligence of diverse men in their
sundry occupations and several handlabours. Ecclesi. cap. 38. v. 27. 28. 29.
30.
As the Grauer in his Imagery, the Smith at his anuill, the Potter at his clay,
all these (says the wiseman) use wisdom in their work, which they could
not do, unless their common practice had taught them experience, and use
making the^ perfect, they should by remembrance renew the same from time to
time, which they before had learned.

And to use yet more familiar example, think you that it is like, that when
Vitels Master instructed him in his Art of Ioignerie, was it not convenient
for him, to instruct his Prentice Vitels often in those things, whereby he
might get his living in time to come? and was it not Vitels part to carry his
masters Art, and his instructions in his memory and understanding? else if he
had not remembered his masters precepts, how should he hau^ compacted that
great knowledge, neither have got the singular commendation, for to be so
skillful a Ioyner as his Family does report of him that he is, albeit for
greater matters sake he has left that his trade and now professes him self
a teacher, in that his Lovely Family? What Schoolmaster unto his Scholars
would so often take pains to inculcate, and repeat the self same principles,
with great labor unto the one, and vnpleasauntnes unto the other, if he
thought it not expedient that it should be of him remembered? And blessed Esaias
says Precept must be upon precept, Esa. 30. v. 10.
and line upon line, here a little and there a little, to the end that by often
iteratyng the same thing, it might the better be remembered.

But seeking to convince HN. by the inevitable and most certain rule of
reason, why do I allege Scripture, seeing that the excellent Philosophers
Themistocles, Simonides, Carneades, Sceptius, Metrodorus, are singularly
praised in profane writers, for the worthy remembrance which they had in
Philosophy and other Sciences: Psalm. 19.11.
and shall we think that seeing by the keepyng of Gods commandments there is
great reward ought we not to remember those things for the remembrance
whereof, we shall receive a reward? or how shall we keep them if we do not
remember them?

True it is that is wisely remembered by a Heathen Orator. Memoria non modo
Philosophiam, Cicero. 2. Acad.
sed omne^ vitae vsum, omnesque Arts vna maxim continet. Remembrance does
not only contain Philosophy, but also the whole practice of man's life, yea,
she alone comprehends all other Arts and Sciences whatsoever.

But what should I oppose the judgment of the wise against him that is witles,
and the Scriptures divine testimonies against a profane and godles Atheiste?
HN. svvarueth to poperye.
Whose scope justly iu^peth with the Romanistes in this, to forbid a particular
knowledge in matters of salvation, and to teach that if men believe as the
Church believes they can not do amiss. In the confutation whereof seeing that by
these threefold testimonies I have thoroughly convinced HN. his Assertion for
this 8. Article, and all the parts thereof let this be sufficient.

ARTICLE. 9. HN. Of Revelations.
FOr unto the Elders and Fathers God has reveled his word in this day of Love.
and. HN. 9. Error. 1. Exhor. cap. 6. sent. 21. f. and cap. 14. sent. 54. h.
Euang. cap. 2. sent. 1.
Publishyng of the peace. cap. 1. sent. 12. 6.

The Lord has reveled the true being unto me out of Sion and Jerusalem. Esaias.
2. a. Mich. 4. a. 2. Pet. 1. b.

HN. says the mystery of the kingdom of God. Math. 25. d. Acts. 16.17. d.
Jude. 1. b. his righteous judgments, and the coming of Christ now in the
last time in the resurrection of the dead. Ezech. 37. b. John. 5. e. Romans 8. b.
Phil. 3. HN. speaks with god mouth to mouth. and. sent. 8. Sent. 11.
b. is declared unto him as unto an elect vessel: house or dwelling of God
from the mouth of God himself.

HN. says he will declare the secret mysteries of God: and make relation of
things that are hidden from the beginning of the world.

William Wilkinson.

Unto many it may seem strange, and scarce credible unto some, that there
should live a people upon the earth, which not holdyng them selves content
with the written word of God, would add unto it some trick of their own
devising: which although they agreed as evil as a new piece of clothe unto an
old garment, yet feign would they their toys were pewefellowes with the sacred
truth of God, not only to match, but some times to give a checkemate unto the
same.

Yet unto him that equally considers all things with an impartial eye, it is
easily to be seen, that it was not only the practice of the Popish Prelacie,
so to outface the simplicity of the Scripture, partly with the bringyng their
blind and unsavory traditions, partly with the burthenyng of the church, with
the intolerable yoke of their unwritten verities: but the dealyng of the
Anabaptists and Libertines, and all other like Heretics has agreed in this
accord, that when the touchstone would not serve, and a naked truth would not
so much hide as unto all me^ declare their misbehauiour, straight with the
presence of the spirit and cloak of zeal they have labored to shroude this
so great impiety.

For hereupo^ it ensued that the Romanistes so cloyed the church with their
fond festiuals, lewd Legendes, and so stuffed into the service of God such
store of idle revelations, and unnecessary visions, that by the reading of them
openly in the congregation, the holy and canonical wrightinges of the holy
ghost were wholly abandoned and clean cast out of the doors. And this was that
which the Anabaptists, and other heretics have practiced, which when they
had no witness or warrant from the written word and approved truth of God, they
forged strange evidence, and that which with blasphemy they invented, they
uttered with untruth. For being demanded the ground of their misdemeanour,
they answered: The spirit thus commands me, Bullinger. 2. book. 1. cap.
leaf. 35. 36.
and thus the Father has said: so that when they wanted the word they boasted
of the spirit, and affirmed that they had their doctrine from heaven revealed
unto them. This might by the inducing of many examples be proved to be true,
and the historyes of them who have noted their behavior are many and manifest.
Only the testimonies of those learned men, Bullinger. 1. book. 1. chap. and.
2. book. 1. chap. Zuing. page 35. 77. 89. 100.
which were acquainted with their dealinges shall unto the indifferent reader
be sufficient, for proof of that which we have in hand.

Unto the which assertions of the Papists and Anabaptists, with the
Libertines likewise, if Henrye Nicholas should be added which in plainer words
utters more pestilent impietye, their mess shall be the fuller, and the
conuenticle of them more convenient upon the which the judgments of God should
fall in greater measure: seeing they all have been partakers, fellow laborers in
forging so great a heap of confusion, to set up the same against the truth of
God.

To prove that HN. is guiltye of the indictment wherewith I burden him. vz.
That he is a coyner of revelations, my allegations are two: first his own
words vz. That the Lord reueiled it unto him out of Sion, and declared it out
of the heavenly Jerusalem. Secondly the places of Scripture by him misaleaged
to quote and confirm this his dotage, wherein he will not only be offensive
to men, but to the Lord also very wickedly injurious.

As for his words the which are prefixed before this Article therein he
claims unto himself a more notable prerogative the^ any man living durst
ever think or once imagine of. For whereas it has been an only especial
thing which properly appertained unto such as have been singularly beloved of
the Lord, and unto whom God has showed himself in more notable measure, Genesis
28. Exodus 3.12.3. Ios. 5.13.
as unto Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Esaias, Ezechiel, and the rest of the
heavenly prophets, Judge. 6.37. Esaias. 1.1.2.10. Ezech. 1.1.3. Math. 17.5. a.
and holy Apostles of Christ whom the Lord had before adjoined to more
excellent functions, and put them aside for some notable and extraordinarye
ministration, unto those the Lord has more clearly discovered himself and
revealed his countenance, and in a greater measure opened and set abroad the
brightness of his glory, yet unto none so far at any time, as HN. boasts of
has happened unto him that he should be codeified with God in the spirit of his
love, Euang. cap. 1. sent. 1.
made heir with Christ in the heavenly treasures of the riches of God. The
which great and wonderful claim as it far surpasses all that ever any of
the Prophets durst challenge unto themselves, so does HN. herein very impude^tly
boast, and blasphemously arrogate more unto himself then ever belonged unto
any mortal man, the son of God excepted. The which his vain challenge as it
is taken on by him with an harlots forehead, so has he no specialtye to show
that can warantiz him therein, but only the ungodly behavior of the au^tient
heretics, which by their furious fantasies and vain imaginations have made a
divorce betwixt the spirit and the written word of God, Esaias. 59. v. 21 d.
Ose. 12. v. 10. John. 16.13. Act. 10.6. 1. These. 5.19.20.
which always are enlinked together: so that the one of them is never separate
from the other. In the which point as he has dealt very unlearnedly, and
unskillfully before men, so has he behaved himself very unthankful toward
the word of God: which before might have been unto him a sufficient caveat, for
that it terms such revelations and Prophesies as his are, 1. Sam. 28.15. 1.
King. 13.18. 2. Cor. 12.1.
but lying visions whereof none have so much bragged as the false Apostles.

But if here HN. his disciples shall reply, that their Eldest Father does
confirm that reuelatio^s are sent from God to him by the written word of the
Canonical scripture: then I answer that herein rests the trial that HN.
is a lying seer, and a seducing Prophet, which may more easily appear, if the
places which he alleges for the proof of his fained revelations import no
such thing as he does father upon them.

As for the first place which is, Exhort cap. 16. sent. 21.
To the which Elders and Fathers God has reueiled his word in the day of Love:
There is not any one place quoted for confirmation of it, neither with Gods
people will a man's bare word be of sufficient warrant to countenance and
confirm any thing. Scripture it is that is the true rule, and even ballaunce,
wherein Gods merchandise must be peised. This self same thing A godly and
learned Father has soundly proved when he says: Let it not be said, August.
de pastoribus. cap. 8.
this say I and this thou say: but this the holy Ghost says. And again
Taceant voces humanae loquantur diuinae, ede mihi vel vnam scripturam pro part
Donati. Let men's words be silent, let Gods voice be heard, show me but one
text of scripture which defends Donatus assertion. Right so say I, set aside
the persons of the speakers, let us sift and examine that which is spoken, show
me but one text of scripture (truly cited) for the proof of HN. his doctrine.
As for this proof, affirmations without ground, Euang. cap. 1. sent. 4.
and miracles without the word, as HN. does commonly use the^ so is his use
not commendable.

The second place testifies that God has revealed his true being unto HN. out
of Sion and Jerusalem. Esa. 2. Exhor. cap. 14. sent. 54. HN.
a. Mich. 2. a. 2. Pet. 1. b. Wherein he depraueth the sense of the holy
Prophets in wresting that into an allegorye of the Celestial Jerusalem: which
is meant of the Terestriall and earthly but this his fond exposition is more
plain in an other place in these words.

HN. does declare the same mystery of the riches of God again upon the earth,
Euang. cap. 2. sent. 1. fol. 6.
and minister the self same living word which is the very true light have out
of the heavenly Jerusalem, to a testimonye of the truth received from Gods own
mouth. etc. And in an other place he says that this opening of Gods mysteries
is come unto him, out of the highest heaven. So that here it is very plainly to
be seen that he abuses the scripture, and peruerteth the sense thereof by
turning the truth of a deed done in a place material, into a heavenly and
spiritual vision, whereas the sense of the place is, that first the Gospel
should first begin to be preached at Jerusalem, Ierem 31. verse. 31. Psalm.
110.1. a. Luke. 24.47. Math. 15.24. c. Ephesians. 2.17. c.
the which being long foretold, was by the Apostles of Christ most
plentifullye fulfilled, as we all at this day are witnesses.

Secondly HN. and his heir Vitels, being great posts in his new found
Family, herein do not agree, for Vitels expounds Sion to be the Family of
Love. HN. calls Sion heaven, so that here it may be affirmed of the one of
the^, which some time the Papists affirm of their schoolmen: hic magister
noster non tenetur. Herein our masters saying is not auouchable for to be
true. Furthermore whereas HN. quoteth this place Allegorically, it seems that
his Revelation came by the way of an Allegory also, and he would have his
Scholars fed with empty Revelations, so that thereby the hunger they have
should be satisfied as the virgin Mary mentions. 1. Luke. verse. 53.

Scripture falsefied by HN.
Finally the third place which cited out of S. Peter the 2. Epistle. 1. chap. is
wholly falsefied, for that there is no one word in all that place, which makes
mention of any Revelation, or of the declaryng of the word of God to any person.

The third place which I alleged to prove, that HN. boasts of Revelations is
taken out of the Euangelie cap. 2. sent. 1. and it contains these two
especial parts. The first is of things reueiled which are four in number:
Things reueiled.
the first is God has reueiled unto HN. his kingdom, the second his righteous
judgments, the third the coming of Christ in the last time, fourth the
Resurrection of the dead.

Math. 25. verse. 31. d.
For proof of the first he alleges Math. 25. d. where is showed in what manner
Christ shall come and reward every man according to his works, in the last day
of the general Judgment. Now if this has been reueiled unto HN. then belyke
that of Christ's coming was then reueiled when Christ came, but Christ's last
coming in his glorious kingdom (whereof S. Matthew makes mention. 25. verse.
31.) is not yet come: for if he were come our mortal should put on
immortality, and our corruptible be without corruption. etc. Cor. 15. verse.
52.53. But as yet we have not made this change, neither is death swallowed up
in victory, which shall then come to pass says S. Paul verse. 54. Therefore
HN. has vaynly affirmed that he has seen Christ revealed in his kingdom,
unless it be possible that the resurrection be already past: which if HN. does
confess then shall I tell him further. But if it be not passed (as by S.
Paul's words Then shall that come to pass which is written. etc. it is surely
witnessed that it is not,) then HN. has a quick eye sight, which ca^ see
things so long before they are able to be seen.

The second place by him cited is taken out of the Acts the 16. chapter, Act.
16.17. d.
where there is nothing that tends that way. The 17. chap. d. verse. 31. there
is, that all the world shall be judged by Christ, because he was raised up from
the dead to that end. The meaning of this place is all one with the former:
this place is by HN. abused in that he applies it to him self, that he is
raised from the dead to judge the world. etc. This often times he wresteth in
diverse of his books to this end. First in his Exposition upon the Belief
sect. 28. publishing of the peace. 1. cap. sent. 16. D. 11. Epist. cap. 1.
sent. 9. c. and ibid. cap. 5. sent. 10. c. and Euang. cap. 3. senten. 5. and
cap. 28. sent. 3. and cap. 34. senten. 1, and cap. 35. senten. 14.

The which Assertion being grossly wicked in that it robs Christ of his
honor, having somewhat touched it before, I spare to speak further, referryng
the Reader both for the sense of the place and the confutatio^ of HN. his
error grounded thereon, Fol. 2. b. Fol. 61. b.
unto M. Knewstubs Confutation. Where the same is fully satisfied.

As for the place alleged out of S. Jude, it goes most commonly in all HN.
his books, which I have seen, with the 17. of the Acts and Math. 25. so that
place is altogether very unskillfully cited and only is brought in like a mute
upon a scaffold, which departs dumb. When I shall perceive the application
thereof, I shall answer more at large.

Now for the second point of the first part. vz the righteous judgments of God
are declared unto HN, he avouches no proof to verify it, and albeit God
reueiles his judgments that is both his word to instruct, as also his
judgments against the wicked, Psalm. 119.164.
that is his sword to devour, if HN. were one that were meek the Lord would
guide him in judgment Psalm. 25.9. But because his speeches testify that he
fears not God, therefore the Lords secrets are not reueiled unto him. verse.
14. e.

The third point, of HN. his Revelation, vid. the coming of Christ in the last
time, is all one agreeyng with the first. His last and fourth note videl. that
the Resurrection is revealed unto him is not so evident as he thought to have
made it. For the places by him alleged out of Ezechiell. 37.9.10. verse. b.
prove that the Israelites should certainly return out of Captivity, and this
was confirmed unto them, by the visible sign of the raising of dead bones,
that God was able to do the one, as the other. Howbeit yet I see not how
hereupo^ HN. would conclud his Revelation concerning the Resurrection, for that
this place has not any such meaning. The place of John. 5. c. verse. 28.29.
truly proves the Resurrection, yet it mentions not one word of Revelation.
Romans 8. b. 11. verse. proves that as God was able to raise up Christ being
dead, according to his manhood, so is God able to raise us up that be his
Children, both in soul and body to his eternal kingdom. The Philipians. 3.
b. 11. verse. S. Paul shows to attain unto the Resurrection of the dead was
his great desire: where these words the Resurrection of the dead, are not
taken (as HN. would seem to allege by his knittyng them with them which went
before, conteinyng the same matter) for the Resurrection of the body before
everlasting life it self, and the participation thereof after the Resurrection
with the chosen Saints of God. 1. These. 4.17. d. and 1. Cor. 5. verse. 4. a. So
that HN. very unskillfully has alleged this place for the Resurrection which
albeit it were by him rightly quoted, yet see I not how thereupon his
proposition concerning the resurrection of the dead is reueiled unto HN. should
be rightly concluded.

The second part co^teineth the person unto whom this Reueilation was declared,
Unto whom reueiled. Vz. unto HN.
where HN. because of evil neighbors is forced with shame enough to blase his
own commendations, videl. that he was an elect vessel. Romans 1.1.
it is read of S. Paul yt he terms him self to be put a part to preach the
Gospel of God. This was affirmed of him, first because his calling was
miraculous and extraordinary, as also because the son of God in the Acts
gives him the same title, he is says he, Acts. 9. v. 15.
unto me a chosen vessel. etc. now when HN. can justify his calling to have
been such as S. Paul's was, then he shall prove some what, in the mean time
our skill is not so mean as whenever he uses to allege Scripture for the
phrase that by and by it must materially be understood as he will have us take
it, or else all is marred. In the same sort he abuses a place taken out of S.
Paul to the Corinthes Cap. 3. verse. 1. Cor. 3.15. Euan. cap. 1. sent. 1.
But these his vain payntynges of his margent, shall hereafter make his cause
more odious unto them, which will diligently labor to take him haltyng in the
alledgyng of the Scriptures: for to what purpose is it for an Archer to do as
HN. does to set up his marks and never coming at them, to raunge up and down
the fields at rouers. But of this somewhat before being spoken, shall herein
stay my labor concerning that matter.

Unto the which also HN. adds where he heard these his Reuelatio^s, videli.
From the mouth of God him self. 3. From whence it was reueiled.
Wherein he does open unto the world his shameless and vain boasting, believe
him he that will. Exodus 20.19.
And if it be truth that ye Israelites were so terrified with the voice of God,
and that Christ's voice drove S. Paul to the ground, Act. 9.4.5. and
22.1.2.26.14.
with the wonderful majesty thereof and the brightness of his countenance?
Which voice also did smite the soldiers to ground: John. 18.6.
The force and the working whereof, and how mighty the operation thereof is,
Psalm. 29.
holy David declares at large by many effects in the 29. Psalm through out.
Now then if this be true that God in his law has thus thundered, thereby to
keep us in obedience to be wholly subject unto him, how can HN. avouch it to be
true, that he affirms he has heard these his Revelations, From the mouth of
God him self. We know very well (as many I mean as are the beloved of the
Lord) that Reueilatio^s have been of old, Heb. 1.1.
but they are not needful. God in times past in diverse manners spoke in the
old time by Miracles served the Church in her swadlyng clothes, but now faith
is sealed by the death of Christ: and to cry for further miracles were to
crucify the son of God a fresh, and to make a mock of the Savior of the
world. Has the earthly father an inward care to leave his son his will
sealed with his own seal, and subscribed with his own hand, to avoid
contention, and to cease strife: and shall not Jesus Christ the son, of the
most wise God, which son to testify his love toward us, often calls him
self the son of man, shall not the love of his manhood and the unspeakable
wisdom of his Godhead provide for the safe and quiet government of his own
house, which so dearly with his heart blood he has purged and made clean?
Thus then we see that HN. his bragges be but bables, and triffles that he
boasts he will declare the secret Mysteries of God, and make relation of
things hidden from the beginning of the world. Satan albeit he has taken
upon him the shape of an Angel of light, Gal. 1.8.
yet if he in the likeness of the most glorious Angel in heaven will teach
us, or shall preach unto us any other Gospel, then we have received, be he ten
thousand times accursed. But this doctrine, as it always has been peculiar
unto the Papists, Libertines, and especially the Anabaptists, for that they
are mighty in such kind of proofs: as for the true Church, it neither uses,
nor allows any such doctrine of Revelations, as HN. in this place dreameth
of: only it is sufficiently instructed in the truth of Gods word, without any
further search after fond and curious visions, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. a. and 30.12.
Esaias. 8.19. Acts. 10.5. Luke. 16.30. Gallat. 1.8. Apoc. 2.25. Romans 1.16. 2.
Tim. 3.17. d. Iam. 1.21.
which are expressly forbidden by the written word of God, and holy Scripture,
which only is the power of God unto salvation to save the souls of Gods
people: But of Revelations, and extraordinary declarations of Gods word
hitherto, for the 9. Article.

ARTICLE. 10. of HN. Of Shrift.
ANd unto their Elders (privately) must they confess all their sins, and
make their life naked, 1. Exhort. cap. 13. sent. 12.
and bare before them.

Theophilus.

FOr how should they otherwise receive counsel, to avoid the same? and
thereto it is spoken, as read forth the text, and leave your private addition.
(as privately.)

William Wilkinson.

THe most convenient method to deal with this, as with all the rest of HN. his
erroneous, Brief rehearsal of the Family, page 2. lin. 3. 1. Guilty by their
own vvritynges.
and absurd Paradoxes in my judgment is, first, because the Famblers use to
cauil, that they are falsely and unjustly burdened; neither can that be proved
by them wherewith they are charged, by their own wrightinges to convince them,
to be guiltye of that which is laid against them.

Secondly to examine their grounds and proofs, 2. Proof of grounds quoted
by the Fam.
whereby they labor to avouch their heresy to be the truth.

Thirdly to show what parteners and fellows they have of other heretics, 3.
Fellows to the Fam. in their heresy. who?
which have either held ye same heresy or having held it, have maintained it
by the same profes, that they do.

The Fa. wherein they svvarue from the Scripture.
Lastly to show wherein they in their opinions do disagree from the holy
scriptures, and the judgment of some wrighters concerning the same, which
order he that well considers the former Articles, shall see has by me ben
observed heretofore.

For the first point that HN. and the Family hold an erroneous confession of
sins, and a kind of shrift more then Popish, shall not need any long
probation out of their wrightinges. For that the Elder Theophilus, confesses
the same boulstering up his asseueration with this interrogatorye. For how
should they otherwise receive counsel to avoid the Fami. etc.

Yet will I add a place or twain out of HN. to make ye matter more clear,
that hereafter it be not doubted of.

1. Exhort. cap. 11 sent. 7. b.
Let all your counsayles, enterprises, purposes, will, and deeds, (whether they
be then secret, or manifest) appear at all times naked, and bare before your
Elders. Eccle. 4. etc.

Ibid. cap. 11. sent. 20. d.
But if ye chance to offend in committing any misdeeds yet bind not in any
case your heart thereon: (Eccle. 5. a.) neither yet fear you to be ashamed
(Eccl. 4. Esaias. 29. falsefied Ierem. 23.
c.) to confess the same before God. (Pro. 28. b. Esaias. 29. b. Ierem. 23. c.
and Esdras. 16. g.) and the priests your Elders, but let it appear
apparauntly before them. etc. sent. 21. 22. 23. 30.

Ibid. cap. 13. sent. 12. c. fol. 31
Fourthly it is expedient that they should (Prou. 28. b. Eccle. 4. c. and 17.
b. Iam. 5. b.) make manifest their whole heart, with all their counsels,
minds, wills, and thoughts, together with all their doings, dealinges, and
exercises, naked and bare before the Eldest in the Familye of Love: are not
cover (Esaias. 29. b. 4. Esdr. 16. g.) or hide any thing (be it what it is)
before him. Also whereunto their inclination, kind, and nature draws them
and all therewith they become tempted or assaulted in their hearts.

The like place is in his Documentall sentences. cap. 4. sent. 3. fol. 9. b.
and cap. 13. sent. 18. fol. 28. g. and cap. 15. sent. 6. fol. 33. g. and cap.
16. sent. 4. fol. 36. b. the young Famlers must make manifest themselves, and
their whole hearts dealing and inclination to the Elders in the Familye of Love.

That there is a confession in the Family of HN. more straight then ever was in
the time of Popery is manifest, for that the one (namely the Fami.) requires
the very thoughts, and natural inclinations, which no man is able to
express, for that he knows them not. Psalm, 19.12. but the other (Videl.
Papistrye) demands but a confession of the outward act committed, which in
respect of the other is more easily to be performed, though in respect of the
written word both are false, and utterly absurd, as by HN. his own words
has been sufficient plainly declared: now by what grounds and engines he
would build up this his heap of confusion, that remains briefly to be
considered.

His profes which he uses are all drawn either from the scripture Canonical,
or Apocripha. For the last, Profes Apocripha.
in ye judgment of all learned men it enforces not any necessitye of
doctrine, 2. Match. 12.44. and 14. cap. ve. 41.
either by precept or example therein contained, as may by exceptio^s taken at
diverse places thereof be substantially confirmed. Yet least our Familye should
boast they cannot be answered to the first place. Eccle. 4.26. d.
shame not to confess thy sins, etc. that is, if any man that is a brother
walk inordinately, and be thereof admonished according as Christ our Savior
commands, or if he be an open enemy and have dew admonition, Ephe. 5.
with such an one we ought not to be co^uersau^t, neither to have fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather we must reprove him, John.
9.34. Math. 14.4.
and he that being so reproved is ashamed and amendeth not is a wicked man, as
in the Gospel is to be seen by the example of the pharisees and Herod.

The second place Eccle. 17.18. 2. place answered. Eccle. 17.18. b.
b. proves nothing to the purpose. For it shows that God sees all our sins,
it speaks not a word of confession unto any man, the which place he borrowed
of Peter Lombard, Lib. 4. distinct. 17. a.
but erred in this that neither he himself nor the Papists whence he had it,
does apply it to the purpose.

The third place which he cites out of the Apocripha Scripture has these
words. 4. Esdr. 16.57.58. g.
When your sins are brought forth before men: ye shall be confounded and your
own sins shall stand as your accusers in that day. HN. when he finds these
words sins shall be brought forth before me^, thinks there is no remedy but
needs it must be understood of Auriculer confession in his Lovely Fami. Verse.
58.
The which sense the very next words verse. 58. improve, showing the former
reueiling of sins before men to be meant of the opening of sin at the day of
judgment, How will you hide your sins before God and his Angels. which thing
is also to be noted in the same sense. Apoc. 21. b. 12. Math. 25. v. 31. The
which places albeit he draws them by the puddles wherein the Papists have
defiled them, yet he using them in his books very often ouerseeth himself in
that there is no such thing to prove by them for the which he does allege them.

HN. his Canonical proofs. Prou. 28.13. b.
The profes out of the Canonical Scripture are in number 4. the first out of
the Proverbs which says: He that hides his sins shall not prosper, is to
be expounded by the place of S. John. 1. John. 1.8.9. Prou. 20.9. Eccl. 7.20.
2. Chron. 6.36. 1. King. 8.46.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves. and by many other places of
Scripture that no man is void of sin, wherein HN. shows that he is
wonderful bewitched alleging that for him which is directly against his
doctrine of perfection whereof the Fam. boast so often.

2. Epist. to M. Rogers. page 86.
The second place out of S. James. 5. chap. 16. v. b. Confess your sins one
to another. Where the illuminated Elder in the Love, must likewise confess his
sins to the single minded ons, and to those which stand welwilling unto his
instructions as well as the simple disciple must confess to the Elder in the
Family. But the Elder sins not, therefore the young minded ones ought not
to confess unto the^, HN. borrows of Popery.
for that such confession is mutual and from either to other, but this place
is likewise taken from the Romish Clergy. For they long before HN. was borne,
M. Sentences. 4. book Did. 16. a
abused it unto Auriculer shriftes and Lenton confession. Wherein also they
argue not amongst themseles. For D. Scotus says: Ibid. Distinct. 17 Scotus
quaest. 1.
(upon the same place from whence HN. has filched this text.) Nec mihi videtur
hoc praeceptu^ dedisse Iacobus, nec a Christo acceptu^ promulgasse. In my
judgment James gave not this commandment, neither had he from Christ any
such authority: and the M. of the sentences, albeit he had alleged it before
unto ye same purpose, yet in the conclusion he puts a great doubt thereof.
And Gratian says: De Poenitendis. 1. quamuis plenitudo. M. Hardyng. fol. 71. a.
speaking of the observing or not observing of this confession. Whether of
these two opinions it were better to follow, it is left to the discretion of
the reader, for either side is favored by wise and godly men. Also M. Harding
a great proctour of such popish palterye affirms that the express term of
secret confession is seldom mentioned in the ancient Fathers. Thus we see
wherein HN. and the Papists agree in the alledgyng of these two places as for
the other two places. Esaias. 29. b. and Jeremy. 23. HN. falsefieth the Scripture.
c. they are utterly falsefied, for they have not any one word which HN.
quoteth them for.

But strange doctrine will have strange doctors, and children not legitimate
when they come to claim inheritance as they bring forged evidence, so must
needs their seals be counterfeit.

Lastly to show whence this doctrine of Confession of sins enseweth, as it is
very easy, so need we not in this part to use any long or tedious
circu^staunce. The Appollogie of the English Church refuses it for Catholic.
Cap. 2. diuis. 2.
M. Harding fights for it with tooth and nail, to the which if the diligent
reader will have recourse for his further instruction he shall find this
question handled at large, Bysh. of Salisbury defenc. of the Apollog. page 167.
168. 174. 175. 180. 181. 187. 188.
and learnedly debated.

ARTICLE. 11. HN. Gospel a litterall service.
Lam. com. s. 7. 1. Exhor. cap. 16 sent. 17. and sent. 3.4.
THey mislyke of the ministrye of the word and term it a ceremonial service
invented by man, a false Gods service a service, of the letter.

Theophilus.

THat is untrue, read the lamentable complaynt, sent. 6. 7. and the rest also,
and consider better thereof, least you utterly shame your self.

William Wilkinson.

WHether there be any truth taught without the Familye of HN. and of the
calling of him, that has or shall teach any thing which the Fami. shall not
like of, I have somewhat before touched, the which that it yet may be more
manifest both for the thing taught and the person that is the teacher, in this
and the next Article is to be handled more at large. And though that those
which know not Theophilus bringing up, may by unseemly and uncivil speech,
think it to have been very rude, in that at the first stop he breaths out
into this homely phrase, that is untrue, and ye utterly shame your self, yet
being somewhat acquainted, and having as his phrase is an experimental
knowledge of his modesty, I took him better then he means, not measuring him
by his own elwand. For I wot well it always will be truth that the old
Orator says to his friend Qui semel vericundiae fines transiliuerit etc. He
that once has raunged without the listes of honestye, he without all hoe must
needs be impudent.

To prove that I have understood amiss, and falsified HN. his meaning in my
places which I have set down: Theophilus refers me to the Lamentable
complaint. to the same sect which I quoted before, thinking (belike) ye if I
looked again I should find it otherwise in the section 6.7. The words yt I
misliked in that place are these.

Even as partly that same is well known and become manifest unto us of
certain, namely of those which are the auncientest in the scripturlearnednes
or principallest in the Ceremonye service, which have made up themselves
against the truth of Gods testimonies, and his promises against the holy
spirit of Christ, and against the Love, etc. This place whom HN. in plain
words avouches that ye Auncientest ( that is the Bishops, and reverend
Fathers, Ceremony service.
and preachers of the word) in the Scripture learnednes the principallest in
the Ceremonye service etc. is that wherewith I charged him.

The same is more evidently also to be seen. 1. False God service.
Exhor. cap. 15. sentence. 8. and 10. c. which is a slanderous and a
blasphemous section, which because it is tedious I refrain to set down
verbatim after HN. his copy.

And Chapt. 16. sent. 3. HN. 1. exhort. cap. 16. sent. 3.
For certain take in hand and use out of the imagination of the knowledge
whereon they set their hearts at peace, Col. 2. b.
false God services which they notwithstanding institute or bring in for true
God services, Religions, Laws, and Commandments of God: and plant the same
knowledge into the people as though they ought of right to be obedient
thereunto.

And sent. 14. Dare any man teach or set forth any thing through the
imagination of the knowledge (whether he then have taken on the same out of the
learnednesse of the Scriptures, or out of his good thinking wisdom as a word
or Commandment of the Lord? or yet to institute any services out of the
letter of the Scripture according to his good thinking, HN. makes the Gospel
cause of discention.
and so to pluck or make subject the hearts of men, to dissension thereunder?
etc. sent. 15. 16.

By all the which places it is manifest, what opinion he has of the preaching
of Gods word, that it is but an institute knowledge invented by man's wit, to
the bredyng of discord and disse^tion, then the which I say not what Papist,
what Atheist, or Macheuile in the world could write or invent any thing more
ungodly.

Besides this I am able to avouch by mine own experience that some, with who^ I
have conferred, which have affirmed, that the Scripture is to hard for a simple
man, and therefore the books of HN. do make a more easy passage, and give a
readyer way to the understanding thereof. In so much as when that the Elders have
persuaded any man to become their sectarie, they have for a time taken all the
books of holy Scriptures from him, and all other books altogether and give
him the books of HN. to meditate, and be exercised in, and this is that which
HN. him self exhorts them after this sort. 1. Exhort. cap. 1. sent. 39.
Glass your being and mind in the glass of righteousness Iam. 1. c. and
behold therein how many spots and wrinkles there are yet in you. Wherein he
shows that he prefers his book, which he terms the Glass of
righteousness, HN. prefers his own books before the Scriptures.
before the word of God, in referryng them thereunto for to espy the spots of
sin, clean contrary to ye word of God, which teaches us that the knowledge
of sin comes by the law. Romans 7.7.
And this he does not in this place alone but also almost at the end of every
Chapter in his Euang.

This horrible treason against God and his word, as it would make any Christian
heart to melt, so is it not for the manifest impiety thereof by many arguments
or places so much to be confuted, as by the loss of the lives of such
graceless Atheistes to be chastised, which the sooner shall stay, if those to
whom the Lord has committed the care of his Church, and governance of this
common wealth, shall by some weight of severe, and sharp laws keep under so
horrible impiety and blasphemy against the son of God. For herein is the
infection more pestilent that the books of HN. being made of equal
countenance with the word of God, the writings of HN. are received as a
plain and easy truth, the word of God either wholly abandoned, and set aside,
or else read by the oversight and allowance of their Elders, who often time dust
the beams of the truth, by their vain Allegories and idle Expositions.

But this is the judgment of God, which is justly in great measure come upon
us, that whilst diverse of the ministers of the word have not preached the word
as the word of God, and the people have heard it as the word of man, it is come
to pass I say that our eyes are blinded least we should see, and our ears
waxed deaf least we should hear, our hearts are waxed dull least we should
believe, and so the secret though just punishment of hardness of heart is come
upon us: so that thereby every day we are nearer hell then other.

For what wickedness can be compared with this, or what blasphemy has the
world ever been witness of the like, that the fond nature of our flesh as a
swift stream has carried us to the depth of such impiety, that we should
load and burden the blessed word of the eternal God with such intemperate
and graceles tauntes, as to doubt whether the truth be the truth or no. Well, I
say no more, but he that is filthy let him be filthy still. And that Argument,
which S. Paul thinks to be of such weight to prove his preaching to have
been the undoubted truth of God, the same would I use to persuade all such as
waver in ye truth thereof, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith, examine your selves, know ye
not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be cast awayes?
etc. Wherein S. Paul appealeth unto their own conscience to approve the
certainty of his doctrine and truth of his Apostleshyp: Right so say I unto
the Family of Love, that whereas they affirm we teach nothing, but our own
good thinkyng, I demand of them when they hear the word of God preached, and
their consciences shaken with the terror thereof, if all their glory in their
perfection (whereof they rather boast in word, then in deed are partakers of)
if all the fig leaves, which they have so fondly sewed together be able to
guard them that they quake and quiver not, when the Lord out of the mouth of
his Ministers begins to menace them. If they tremble at the preaching of the
word of God, why then do they make account of it, but as a vocal word, and
outward sound? Why acknowledge they not that the workyng thereof is mighty,
that it pearceth like a two edged sword and enters into the deuidyng of the
soul and the spirit. 4. Heb. 12.
If they have no feelyng of ye word, 1. Corin. 4.3.4.
when it is preached unto the^, then is the Gospel therefore hid unto them,
because the God of this world has blinded the eyes of their minds, that the
brightness of the son of God should shine unto them: but in this world in some
measure the darkness of the world to come is begone in them, wherein is weepyng
and gnashyng of teeth: being farther gone in this life in their impiety then
Foelix the profane Deputy of Iudaea, which when he heard S. Paul preach of
righteousness, Act. 24.26.
and temperaunce, and the judgments of the world to come, he trembled and
was affrayde. Which tremblyng and quakyng of him which was an vnchristianed
Heathen man, shall condemn the lose hearing of Gods word in them, which count
them selves Christians, and yet perform nothing worthy of the servants of
Christ.

Well let us learn hereafter to hear Gods word with a more hungry and thirsty
soul, to live and dye thereafter: and as many as rue upon the state of the
poor seduced souls, made droncken with the dregs of this so fond a Family,
let them desire God that as many among them as are appointed to be of Gods
flock may leave to wander in the wearynes of their own souls, and laying the
law of God to their hearts, may by the candle of his truth see from whence they
are fallen, and so at the last return back again to the Archshepheard and
Bishop of their souls. Amen.

HN.

1. Exhort. cap. 16. sent. 14.
THey say the freedom which comes by the preaching of the Gospel, there is
not a more wickeder, falser, nor an absurder, seducynger, arroganter,
horribler, against God and his upright service, nor yet damagefuller nor
destructionabler to the children of men then this. etc.

Which freedom also he terms, Ibid. sent. 13.
a spiritual pride (Apoc. 17. a. 18. a. 21. HN. quoteth scripture in vain.
b. there is no such places that has any such word as he does allege them
for) a presumption, a great blasphemyng of God.

Theophilus.

NOt so. But that which is taken on presumptuously out of the learnednes of the
letter, or out of the imagination of the knowledge, by the unrenewed man for a
word or commandment of God, to a breedyng of dissension, and captiuatyng of
men's hearts, unto men's good thinking or imagination, is the worst or falsest
fredome, as true it is. etc. and blaze your self therein.

William Wilkinson.

HN. As in the former part of this Article, very ungraciously has reproched
the Gospel, by termyng it a ceremony service invented by man, and a service
of the letter: So in the second part of the same Article he and his lewd
Scholar Theophilus lay diverse accusations against the same, prouyng that it is
not the true light which we preach, neither the Gospel of the Lord: first,
because it brings forth a most false, absurd, seducyng and arrogant fredome,
horrible against God, and his upright service bringing danger and destruction
unto the children of men. Unto the which Theophilus adds a reason of his
master HN. his Assertion that therefore it is false. etc. because that we being
unrenewed or unregenerate, out of the learnednes of the letter, and imagination
of our own knowledge take it upon us, because it breeds dissension and
captiuatyng of men's hearts unto men's good thinking therefore also is it the
falsest fredome or liberty, and I must blase my self therein, videl. to be a
false Libertine or Freeman. These be the chiefest notes of the second part of
this 11. Article.

The Gospel engenders a false freedom says HN.
The first crime wherewith HN. charge the ministry of the Gospel is, that it
engenders a false freedom or liberty. The which his accusation albeit it is
slau^derous and Godles, HN. rayleth without proof.
yet had it been more glorious in the sight of men if in the approving thereof,
as he otherwhiles does, so in the confirmation also he had pretended some cloak
of Scripture, that thereby also his meaning might ye playnlier have been
understood. But seeing that neither in 14. or 15. sentences he cites no proof
for any such matters, let us examine his words, to see if his bare word be
sufficient with proof to be our warrant that his saying is true.

The string that he harpeth on is the same, that all heretics and
schismatiques have been busy withal, thereby to draw (by a plausible doctrine)
many Disciples after them, videl. liberty, freedom. etc. And least HN. should
seem as gross as his brethren the impure Anabaptists in protestyng to the
world an open and carnal liberty, Bulling. 2. book 2. and 3. chap.
by a cunnyng conueighau^ce he covers the same, showing us in two dishes one
meat, and only tells us that they be twain because he sauceth and sets
them forth after a diverse fashion.

1. Exhort. cap. 15. sent. 26. HN. his liberty what it is.
The liberty which he broacheth, he defines after this sort, when through the
ministration of the gracious word under the obedience of the love, man forgoeth
or vnbindeth all taken on knowledge, with the purging of heart, spirit, and
mind is purged or purified from all wicked nature (Romans 6. c. 8. a.) which
has reigned over him, that there dwell nothing in man but the true Godhead
with his Lovely being of the upright love: Sent. 28. HN.
this he terms a definition the which he darkneth with many varying and
diffuse terms, but how like a deffinition it is being a hotch potch without
form or matter, to him that knows what a deffinition is may easily be
disc^^^ed.

HN. definition. of liberty discussed.
The parts whereof HN. his definition principally does consist are in number 2.
In the first he requires an vnbyndyng and forgoyng or as in an other place
more fitly he terms it an vnlearnyng of all knowledge. The which clause of
this definition is flatly a Papisticall dotage which teaches Ignorance is the
mother of devotion already confuted in this book 8. Article. The second part
of his definition videl. a purging of the spirit from all wicked nature,
Bulling. 1. book 21. cap. leaf. 26. b.
is also plain Anabaptisticall which dreameth that it is possible in this life
to come to that perfection that me^ should not sin: which also our Family
mightly do maintain by their open letters to M. Rogers in the quarrel they
move against his display. Epist. of E. R.
The last clause which does after a sort expound, this purging of the
spirit. etc. contains this palpable absurdity that the true Godhead does
dwell in us. Which was the heretical fantasy of the Manichies, whereof I have
spoken somewhat before: of ye which his definition since already every part is
confuted, it shall in this place spare me a further labor. In the definition
(as he terms it) there are contained diverse out-roades and extrauagant
varying of phrases, altogether repugnyng unto Art, which wills that every
deffinition be as brief and plain as possible may be, yet is HN. his
definition so compacted together as if the one part of it stood at Collen and
the other at Amsterdam: but herein rather pity we his folly, then envy his
learning and dexterity in formyng a fit definition.

But seeing we have found fault with HN. his definition, of the upright
fredome, The difinitio^ of Christian liberty by the Scriptures.
let us see if there may a more plain and pithy definition be drawn then erst
he has set down. Christian liberty is the forgiveness of sins. Psalm.
32.1. a Romans 4.8. Purchased by the death of Christ, Romans 4.25. d. Ephesians. 1.7.
b. Preached unto us by the Gospel. Ioh. 8.32.2. Tim. 1.10. c. sealed by the
use of the word. Acts. 13.26. d. Romans 1.16. b. and Sacraments. Romans 4.11. 1.
Cor. 11.26. The which definition I reale to amplify, or to prosecute the
parts thereof, because the testimonies of the holy Scriptures shall be my
sufficient warrant in that behalf.

Second crime laid to the Gospel.
The second crime that HN. burtheneth our Ministry withal is that those that
preach are unregenerate, unrenewed: which, that it hinders not the truth of
doctrine in that it is taught by a wicked person, is apparaunt by the
testimony of our Savior, who bids the Disciples and the people obey the
doctrine of the Scribes and pharisees, Math. 23.3.
which sit in Moses chair, but do not after their life: which he would not
have done if the Pharisees evil life had made void the truth of their
doctrine. But this is touched more in the 5. Article, where it is impugned by
HN. that a man lewd in life can not speak the truth in doctrine.

The third crime of preaching out of the learnednes of the letter we shall have
a fitter place to touch it afterward in the next Article.

The fourth crime which HN, obiecteth is coalewortes more then ten times
sodden, and yet being refused by us, eftsone is in the next service set down.
For how often does he in his woeful exhortation still heat upon this a
ceremony service that maintayneth dissension: 1. Exhor. cap. 15. sent. 8. and.
10.
and again which stretches no further, but to the breding of schism,
partialitye, and sedition among the people, quoting Math. 24. a. 5. ve. and b.
24. v. Where Christ says: Many false Christ's shall arise and deceive many.
HN. expounds it of those which profess religion without his loathsome and
schismatic Familye, and in the same place he quoteth 1. Cor. 3. a. 3. Iam.
3. b. which contains a description of the intemperancie of the tongue being
abused, he vilanously does aply it to those preachers which reuere^tly handle
the pure word of God without his heretical secrecy, and frentique
conuenticle, and in the same 15. Chap. of HN: The simple and vnlighted people,
Sent. 12.
(Ierem. 23. c. d. Ezech. 13. b. ver. 8.9.10. etc.) become therewith seduced
and beguiled. Math. 24. c. 2. Tim. 3.4. 2. Pet. 2. a. Jude. 1. b. still HN.
applies those places to the preachers of Gods word which are meant of him and
such like bedlem heretics, as he is as also captiued with many diuises and
sects: the which knowledge of the word that the same preachers have, HN.
terms in the same blasphemous and schismatic chap. Variaunce renting or
division bringing forth discordable disputations about unprofitable arguments.
Romans 1. d. Galla. 5. c. 1. Tim. 6. Sent. 10.
a. Titus. 3. a. Iam. 3. b. then the which what can be uttered with more
malice, or set abroach with more cancred hatred: and yet will HN. needs be
counted the Father of the Familye that in it has nothing but love and meek
mindednes.

The which accusation of his as it is most pestilent and full fraught with an
heart wholly resolved to rail and backbite under the cloak of calmenes, so is
it a thing that continually has been objected against the Church to infring the
truth thereof after this sort. There are in such and such particular Churches
disagreementes in some points of doctrine and varietye of judgments. ergo,
there is no truth in those Churches. This I say is an old Argument framed
first by heretics, used by the Papists as an Iron flayle, and now again
furbushed and being new fethered is shot again clean besides the white, and
the butt also. Staphilus 3. treatise from page 78. etc. to 115.

Defense of the Apol. 3. Chap. 1. diuisi. page 378 379. 380. and Reply. 15.
Artic. 12 division. page 536. 537.


For the ancient Fathers having it often objected to them, and friar Hosias,
and the graceles runnagate Staphilus, and M. Harding himself has often turned
this stone which so is fastened by the Father of blessed remembrance the
Bishop of Salisburye, that if all the Famblers of Love and heretics in the
world shall set their shoulders unto it therewith to ouerwhelme the truth, they
never shall be able so much as once to stir it, and yet if they should, they
must take heed that in the rembling thereof they crush not all their bones in
sunder: to their utter confusion. But that this gappe may finally be stopped
that hereafter HN. never with his fellow heretics break in to disturb the
peace of Sion let it be remembered that is written. Genesis 13.7. b. and 27.11.
Luke. 22.24. c. Acts. 15.39. f. 1. Cor. 1.11. b. Gal. 2.11. c. that always in
the Church of God there has been iarres as well in manners as also in religion.

And thus much brieflye for this second part of HN. his doctrine of the
dignitye of the word, and the opinion of the truth thereof. As for Theophilus
who friendly gives me counsel to blaze my self in the former definition of a
Libertine, I do him to know, that such liberty as is to be claymed by mercy
and imputation of the death of Christ, that liberty from sin I look for and
none other, and this is that which (in my poor judgment) all the children of
God do look for. Romans 8.20.21. both in this life, as also in the life to come.

As for his Rhetorical term of blazing and Blazonrie, I wish him to spare it
tell he come in place where he may have occasion to use it: for unto me if he
be that party whom some that wish well to the Familye report to me that he
is, he should not have needed to have shadowed him self by a term of
heraultrie, but if I were disposed to blase his coat, perhaps if I should say
that he were like to be that E. R. which ouershot himself in his Epistle to I.
R. I might so dissipher his personage that the vizard of Theophilus should not
be sufficient to save him that he be not known by blushing: but it is good for
him to keep him to that which he is called and rather to learn the principles
of the Catechism and the first grounds of Gods fear, then to busy bimselfe
in that which he has no skill of, to the hurt of the Church, the offense of
the weak, and endamaging of his own soul in the day of the Lord. And thus
much of the 11. Article hitherto.

HN. his 12. Assertion. 11. Epist. of HN cap. 5. sent. 13. 34. 1. Exhort. 15.
sent. 7. 1. Epist. cap. 2. sent. 8. 5. 1. Exhort. cap. 15. sent. 8.
The 12. Article what HN. thinks of all preachers that be without his Familye
of Love. 1. Sent.
OF the preachers themselves HN. says they are false hearts of Scripture
learned, vnilluminated and unsent preachers, vain praters through an
imagination of knowledge, false hearts, and unregenerate scripture learned,
bold, presumptuous, selfewise, Euang. cap. 4. sent. 4.5.6. Pub. of the Peace
cap. 1. sent. 2. and sent. 6. 20. 24. 27.
and good thinking wise, doctors of the letter. Lament complaint in the title.
which are yet fleshly minded and sow nothing else but noisome and corrupt seed
among the people.

Theophilus.

HE only speaks of all such false hearts of the Scripture learned and unsent
preachers, which turn away from the true doctrine that serves to the unity
of the heart in Love, which being fleshly minded giving forth themselves
(through the false light) to be teachers and ministers of the word, etc. look
better to the text before recited.

HN. 2. Sentence.

WHose mind (vz. of the preachers) or being is the devil, the Antechrist, the
wicked spirit, 1. Exhort. cap. 15. sent. 17. fol. 38. D.
the kingdom of hell, and the majesty of the devil himself.

Theophilus.

MEaning such preachers as are before expressed.

HN. 3. Sentence.

THerefore it is all (assuredly) false lies and seducing and deceauing
whatsoever the vngodded, 1. Exhort. cap. 16 sent. 17. Scripture profanely
quoted.
or vnilluminated man. (Ier. 23. c. 10. and 29. a. 8.) out of the imagination
or riches of their own knowledge, and out of their learnednes. 1. Cor. 1. b.
11. of the scriptures, bring fourth, institute, preach and teach. Ierem. 8. a.
27.9. verse.

Theophilus.

BEcause they are not taught to the kingdom of heaven, in humblenes and
lowlines of spirit, but in all arrogancy of heart, neither have they received
the word of life from the living God. etc. read 1. Exhort. cap. 6. sent. 16.

W. Wilkinson.

WHen as there is no such sent. in the Chapter as Theophilus eyes will bear me
witness.

HN. 4. Sentence.

1. Exhort. cap. 16 sent. 18.
THey preach indeed the letter and the imagination of their knowledge (Ier. 5.
b. 4. and chap. 6.8. Ezech. 13. b. ver. 6.7.8.9. and chapter 34.) but not the
word of the living God.

Theophilus.

CAn any man preach more then he has by him?

William Wilkinson.

Iam. 3. ver. 11.
IF it be true as no doubt it is very true, that in the gospel our Savior
Christ says by the fruit the tree is known, and S. James also testifies
that the same fountain can not send out sweet and bitter water: yea and if HN.
himself be to be believed, when he says: The perfect man can not give forth
any thing else from him but all humble and meek virtues, Docum sent. cap. 1.
sent. 7.
and righteousness which flow out of perfection, surely if these be the fruits
that HN. his Lovely being does afford, what root is it from whence such a
stream of frentique and furious eloquence does abound? truly if these
poisoned speeches, and tarrye Rhetoric wherewith he bra^deth Gods ministers be
as he says, HN. his perfection, and the fruits.
his humble and meek virtues flowing from all perfection: When HN. shall ebb
in his perfection, and his high tide of his upright fredome become to a falling
water, what ougly deformityes shall we see, when he is left naked? or being
extremely evil how monstrous shall his impietye surmount it self, when being
at his hiest pitch of perfection ye take him thus tardye?

But even such perfect wightes were the Anabaptists which boasted that they
kept the law, and lived sinles, and yet railing on the preachers of their age
they called them Lutherans. fol. 254. False and carnal gospellours 255
erroneous and unskillful preachers. 256. a generation of vipers and hirelinges
257. b.

And such upright Christians are our Romish Catholics, Bulleng. fol. 260.
Anabaptists fulfilling of the law and the fruits thereof.
which boast so much of their good works (which it were to be wished in many
of the^ were much better) and yet when they come by pen to proclayme, what
hearts they bear in their bosoms, and how wholly they are mortified: their
written treatises bewray the malice of their minds, and wholly discover their
cancred stomachs, when as speaking of the state of the Church of God in the
country whererein they were brought up they term it the Synagogue of
Antechrist and Lucifer, Papists good words and works, and a pattern of
the^. Acts. 9 5.
Harding confut. 212. b. The tower of Babylon. confut. 42. a. and the preachers
of the same they call the limbs of Antechrist, confut. 202. a. Lecherous
lourdaines. confut. 75. b. Chains brood. confut. 114. b. Pulpet buzzers. R.
pref. Unto the which terms both of the Anabaptists, and Papists, whether HN.
in the same vain be behind the^ both or no, I leave to be considered of them,
that shall equally way all their speeches and the manner of their delivery in
the same ballaunce.

Unto all the which their immodest and unseemly snuffes and tauntes, truly be
it answered that was said unto S. Paul, when he was pressed to persecute ye head
in the members, and to pursue the father in the children, it shall be hard for
them to kick against the prick. Math. 13.25. Esdr. 4.38.
The children of darcknes may scatter cockle, heretics when men sleep may
sow tares, yet can not any schism be perpetual, for great is the truth and
prevails, Math. 24.35. Psalm. 119.89. 1. Pet 1.25.
heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of God endures for ever.

The meek manner of HN. his reprehending ye preachers of Gods word, and whom
he imitateth therein has already ben declared: now rests it yet further to
be discussed what accusation that should be, wherewith, he charge them, which
is, they are vngodded men, vnilluminated, unregenerate etc. The which his
slanderous accusation if it be by him understood of all preachers, then is it
manifestly untrue, so needs it not any answer at all, but if it be as
Theophilus HN. his disciple says: (who explayning his masters meaning) that
it is only to be understood of those Which will not receive his lovely
doctrine. Then have I further to answer that albeit the persons were evil
men as he misimagineth they are, yet to report that their being is the majesty
of the devil himself the Antechrist, the wicked spirit etc. This is not so
lovely a phrase, neither does it so well become the father of the Familye of
Love as he weneth that it does.

But HN. his reason in this place as it is very weighty, (for so he takes it)
so he that shall consideratly weigh the 2. several propositions gathered upon
the 2. first sentences by me in the forefronte of this Article set down, and
thoroughly look upon the Therefore, which he in stead of a conclusion labors
to infer, shall see his argument briefly knitte together after this sort.

Those which preach this or that doctrine are vngodded and unregenerate.
Therefore the doctrine it self is untrue. The reason framed Schoolewise is
this.

1. Exhort. cap. 16 sent. 16. fol. 34.
What soever the vngodded and unregenerated man does bring forth, institute,
preach and teach, is untrue. But the Godded or unregenerate man teaches there
is This particular stands for any general proposition though HN. expoundyng
the.1. Cor. 15. verse. 53. says that it is not meant of any creature of earthly
flesh and blood. Docum. sent. cap. 6. sent. 3. fol. 13. b. line. 15. 1. Exho.
cap. 16. sent. 17. page 2. lin. 5
a Resurrection of the body, imperfection in the best works of the godly, and
that heretics must be put to death. etc.

Therefore it is assuredly all false and lies and seducyng and deceitful what
soever. etc.

The reason, is framed out of HN. his own words, the which is both mere
Anabaptisticall, Bullin. 3. book
and also flat Donatisticall by Fulgentius objected unto S. Augustine, 3. chap.
D. August. contra Fulgentium Donatist. Job. 14.4.
My Church is spotles, therefore the true Church, says the Donatist, to the
which S. Augustine au^swered. Who can bring, any clean thing out of filthynes?
Because that as long as the Church is visible, in doctrine and life every part
thereof is attainted with ye dregs of imperfection. But the Donatist urges
Agge. 2. cap. b. 13. for proof. S. August. answers: Show me where Agge
departed from the midst of that people least he should be defiled amongst
them. And a little after in ye same place follows. We must depart from the
company of the wicked with our minds, not our flesh: with our works, Ephesians.
5.
not with our bodies. Communicate not says S. Paul with the unfruitful
works of darkness, he forbids them their works, not their exercises in
Religion, not their Sacraments.

And in an other place most plainly to the point we have in hand, he says.
August. against the letters of Parmenianus. 2. book. 8. chap.
No marvel it is if good words which are uttered for the people by the
Bishop in prayers are heard, for it is not because of waywardnes of the
Prelate, but for the devotion of the people.

And as learnedly so truly says Nazienzen, even as the printed form that is
engraven in any metal, be it lead, or iron, brass or gold, the thing
imprinted is still the same, and is not empayred by the baseness of the metal:
but always it retains one form: and as a sealed letter is not prejudiced
by him that does deliver it, if it be delivered in such order as he receives
it: so the message and proclamation of Gods truth is always the same to them,
that hear it, what soever he be that utter it, neither is the excellency of ye
thing adnihilated by ye wickedness of the person. For it were an incredible
thing that ye abuse of any thing should make ye thing it self to cease to be,
Exodus 3.10. Ierem. 1.10. Esaias. 6.9. Amos. 7.15. Math. 18.18.
and the holy and divine Ministry of the Lords word and Sacraments, as first
it was by him instituted, so therefore is it the more glorious, both for his
sake that first founded it, as also for our sakes, and the safety of souls,
whom the Lord in that behalf has most graciously provided for. Exodus 20.12.
Galath. 4.19. 1. Sam. 8.7. 2. King. 1.11. and 2.23.
So that we must beware that we defile not the Lords Testament by our
wantonness, nor carelessly contemn the ordinance of the Lord by our
misdemeanour: for he that thought in his secret counsel these to be the
sit way for our welfare, if we shall make account of it, as worldlynges do,
as of some common trifle or mean benefit, or with HN. rend them that deliver
the Lords pearls unto us, albeit they come, but in earthen and tree vessels,
yet shall he invent in his justice such a plague to scourge us with, that both
as many as hear it their ears shall tingle at it, neither shall ye star
thereof be forgotten of all posterity.

As for many that stumble at Christ, for because they know him not, or
happlesly contemn him, because the day star as yet is not risen in them,
Cant. 1.4.
or think but basely of his bride, because she is but brown of coullor, yet
they must know (if already they have not learned it) that the corn must not
be contemned, Math. 3.12. Math. 13.48.
because it lies hidden in the chafe, that net must not be neglected for the
fish that is unprofitable, 2. Tim. 2.20.
the great house must not be slaundered, because there are in it vessels of
dishonor, the air not to be refused, nor the sun thought lightly of,
because the wicked, and the godly do equally enjoy them. 1. Corin. 2.2.
Galath. 1.2. Ephe. 11. Apoc. 2. The Church there spotted in every chapter. 1.
Corin. Gal. 3.1. Apoc. 2.6. Apoc. 14.15.
Diverse Churches have been the Lords sweet sheepfoldes, and yet have had
their wantes, and he that will leave the company of the godly, because of the
wicked and would go out of the world for the wickedness thereof, must tarry yet a
while that he may have his way straightened, against the time that the Lord
shall come to call him.

Even as HN. in the former 3. Sections with great disdain and despite has
slaundered the Preachers, in affirmyng that they could not preach the truth
because they are not regenerate, wherein first he uttered an egregious untruth
against their life, secondly against their doctrine: so in the 4. Sentence, or
Section, he preuenteth an objection that may be made by us concerning the thing
that is preached, HN. Iam. comp. in the title of the book.
which he in plain words affirms to be but the outward letter, and therefore
otherwhere he calls us Doctors of the letter. The witness whereby he thinks
to convince us and to prove the allegation to be true, is taken out of Jeremy,
and it is the slander, Ierem. 5.13.
wherewith the Prophet was reproched by that people: for they termed his
doctrine, which he did deliver unto them from the Lord, a doctrine of wind.
etc. the which their slander the Lord threatens in that place shall be
mightly recompensed by the Babylonians. Verse. 15.16.17.
As then Jeremy was slaundered by the^ whom he calls an adulterous people.
verse. 7.8, so does HN. slander the Gospel preached in these days without his
Family termyng it a letter, so that herein he notably shows him self to be
a shameless railer, using even the same accusation against us now, that was used
against the Prophet then. And if the people were scourged with the whippe of
bondage then, for vtteryng this graceles speech, does HN. and his Family
think for renuyng the same slander that he shall escape punishment? As for
the other places which follow. Jeremy 6. and 8. there is no such thing in them
to be found as HN. does dream of. Ezech. 13. chap. verse. 7.8.9. declares
nothing, but the shameful abuse of the word by the false Prophets of Iudaea he
calls their prophecies vain and lying visions. The which if HN. do allege
generally to all Preachers, it is a shameless accusation, and he alleges his
Scripture without discretion. For whereas he often stumbleth upon this term
the unregenerate Scripture learned, he that marketh HN. well, shall find that
he quoteth most of his places for the phrase and manner of speech only, and not
for any matter or note to be found in the place by him quoted: so that he
which blames other men unworthily, may herein most worthily be termed A
Doctor of the letter.

Neither is HN. the first that reuileth ye Gospel with this his most
opprobrious reproach. HN. a doctor of the letter.
For he does but renew the old slanders, which have by heretics been
hat^hed long heretofore. Hosius de verbo Dei expresso. Illiricus in norma
concilij. 3. book of the Hierarch. 3. cap. leaf. 103. and controuer. de
Eccle. 3. Kemnitius exa^. of the Trident counsel. page 32 Staphilus Apol. fol.
65. b. Bulling. 1. book chap. 3. and 2. book cap. 4.5.
Hosius an Archpapist uses the like vnreuerent speech termyng the Scripture a
bare and dead letter. Jews a Canon of Lateran in Rome calls it dead ynck: so
does Piggius wretchedly blaspheme, saying: it is, a nose of wax, a dumb judge.
Eckius very gracelesly says it is but a black Gospel and incken divinity.
Staphilus says it is a new Idol, set up in the heart of man. Zwinckfeild said
it is but a bare and dead letter, not profitable say the Anabaptists, for we
are all taught from God. The Messalians said it was not necessary neither yet
the Sacraments: and so said the Family of Love: for in diverse places ye shall
see them make small account of Sermons, so that some of them, will sit in the
streets in the time that the word of God is preached. Yet all these agreeyng
among them selves, are at jar with the holy Ghost, who in the whole course of
the Scripture, Luke. 5.1. Luke. 10.39. g. and 15. 1. Math. 7.24. d. and. 13.20.
c. Mar. 6.20. c. Romans 10.14.17. c. 1. Tim. 3.15. d. Col. 1.6. a.
does singularly commend the hearing of the word, but especially S. Paul to
the Romans, which makes it the mother of Faith, which faith is the hand,
whereby all the promises of God are apprehended and taken hold of: and without
the which it is impossible to please God. Hebrews. 11. chapter. 6. verse.

Much more might be said against this horrible heresy, but because even the
repeatyng of it does strike a horror and quakyng into the children of God, to
think how wicked a thing it is for a mortal man to mislyke that, which the
Lord has ordained as a means whereby he will have the sparkles of his grace
continually to to be kyndled in us, the only remembrance shall rest herein,
considering that the more myer is stirred, the savor is the noysomer, and
hurtefull to those that are standers by.

ARTICLE. 13. of HN. Of dissemblyng and concealyng Religion.
HN. Says it is lawful for one of his Family to dissemble and conceal his
Religion, contrary to his own doctrine. Euang. cap. 3. sent. 8. and. cap. 25.
sent. 6. and. 1. Exhort. cap. 6. senten. 8. where he bids them confess it
before all men: amongst the adulterous, and sinful generation. sent. 1.

Theophilus.

THe adulterous and sinful generation of the ignorant world, if they repent
and turn, may find mercy, but to the enemies or envious of the love of Christ
and to the obstinate which turn the^ away there from. There is no mercy
promised, look the text.

W. Wilkinson.

THeophilus being demanded of Onions, Theophilus au^swereth not to the point.
answers of Garlike, for the question being, whether a man may hide his
Religion, being demanded of it, either openly by the Magistrate, or privately by
his Christian brother, he answers that there is no mercy without the
Family, which is nothing to the purpose. Therefore it were to be wished that
his wisdom would be ruled by his own counsel videl. look better o^ the
text. 2. sent.

Theophilus.

HE bids them confess their belief among the sinful generations and false
hearts of the Scripture learned. etc. and not to reueile the secrets of God
Math. 7. chap. 6. verse. to the blood thirsty ones, and adversaries to all
truth, which lie in wait to devour the^: more then a true man is bound to
confess his treasures to a thief or a murderer.

William Wilkinson.

FIrst, I will answer unto HN. his Article, and secondly to Theophilus
Exposition.

Concerning the certainty of this Article, our Famblers will in no wise admit
the same, albeit Theophilus in this place acknowledge it to be true. So that
diverse that are said to be welwillers that way have (being openly called to
account before a Magistrate) set down their hands in a certain schedule, the
copy whereof I have, wherein they affirm it altogether unlawful to speak one
thing with the mouth, and think the contrary with the heart. So that herein
they and their Prophet HN. are at variaunce, for he as is before declared to
avoid trouble wills them to conceal their faith, as also Theophilus proves
by his theeuish similitude.

This I know to to be true by the report of a worshipful friend in Cambridge
that whereas one Allen a weauer being committed for the opinions of the Fami.
and HN. he contrary to his promise made departed and fled away, and being
afterward met by a justice of peace which knew him by sight, asked him his
name, and he said his name wrs Allen, the justice demanded if he had about him
no books of HN. he answered, no, the Justice alighting from his horse
searched him, and found diverse books about him. Now let the Famlers, and Allen
himself confess whether that herein he did dissemble or not, Famblers
dissemble.
and whether by HN. his doctrine that art of his was lawful. I could by many
living witneses prove this to be true, and show wherein diverse of them have
dissembled, but I cease. And least the Familye should affirm that they are
slaundered in this Article, HN. his own words shall speak for himself after
this sort.

11. Epist. cap. 6. sent. 3. gag. 24. lin. 3.
Show not your selves in any wise bare before the enemies: let them not see
you: be now by them, whilst that the wicked world bears rule, even as though
ye were dead and were not, and had no speech in your mouth. Psalm, 38. b. verse.
13. and walk eue^ so as invisibly and unknown before all such as are without
the Family of Love, and make manifest themselves as enemies there against: as
also before them that turn the^ away therefrom. And in his documentall
sentence HN. exhorts his Fami. to the same thing, in the same words. Docum.
sent. cap. 16. sent. 18. fol. 40. a.
Thus have not much prate or disputation with the strangers, or with them that
fall away from the service of Love, nor with the unwilling ones and resisters.

The which places being thoroughly waied, no man can be ignorant that HN. gives
leave to his Family to dissemble, To dissemble what it is.
if to dissemble be as Salust does define it Aliud in linqua aliud in pectore
clausum habere: that is to have one thing in the tongue, and another in the
thought. But the proof of the truth of this Article, I leave to the commen
practice of the Fami, and to the knowledge of those men that have had to deal
with them concerning their Lovely doctrine: albeit I must and will confess,
that I have met with a few which have dealt more plainly herein then they are
commenly wont to do: wherein I do give them some better lyking in that they
deal truly.

Now if any man be desirous, to understand further of this heresy, let him
read the excellent learned man, M. Lambert Daneus in his comentaries upon S.
Augustine, Eusebius history. lib. 4. cap. 7. cap. 70.
de heresibus ad Quod vult Deum, where the same is learnedly handled and art
large, who reports among all the opinions of the Priscilianistes this was not
the least that they held, a man must not open t^^ secrecy of their sect as
appears by this verse.

Iura perinra secretum prodere noli: Swear and forswere hid things do not
declare.

Of this heretic did that monster of mankind and wild heretic David George
learn this opinion, of whom somewhat is said before, and of him it is very
like to be true that HN. learned it, as he did diverse other points of this his
lovely doctrine, and from HN. his filthy pit drew Vitels that poisoned water,
wherewith he infected diverse honest and godly men in the troublesome time of Q.
Marye by persuading them that they might keep their consciences to themselves,
Family may be present at Mass.
and be present at the mass, and other idolatours service, against the which
ungodly opinion, that excellent Christian and blessed Martyr of God M. Bradford
writ being in prison, M. Bradfordes treatise against going to Mass.
as in the books that he published is to be seen at large. The which blind
opinion of HN. is most clearly confuted by his own books in the places by me
before quoted, as also by the holy scripture in diverse places, which I refrain
to set down for that I will not be tedious, as also desiring the reader to view
these few places by me quoted in the margent for proof sufficient: Job. 13.7.
Dan. 3. Math. 10.33. Mar. 8.38. Luke. 9.26. and. 12.8. 1. Cor. 10.21. Ephesians.
5.11.
as also let him read further of his question. M. Bulleng. against the
Anabaptists 2. book 5. chapter. But to return to Theophilus who laboreth to
salve this sore and stop up this breach with his headles distinction betwixt
the belief and the mysteries of God: I would that he knew that neither this
wound will be cured with this salve, neither this breach stopped up with this
his untempered head mortar: For mightier is the shot which the Lords pieces
affourd them with so small a shelter they may be succored.

For whereas he would seem not to have spoken at adventures, but to have added
his answer upon a witty, and sober deliberation, albeit the other his
expositions are very fond and fantastical: yet this his distinction wherein he
thought to have won his spurs, is so frantique that t^^^ein he has both
ieoperded the horse, and lost the sadd^e. For whereas in a good and artificial
distinction, neither part can be affirmed of the other: yet in this division
made by Theophilus both parts are but one, neither is there such difference
betwixt them as he would bear us in hand there is. For where as he
insinuates, that the belief, and mysteries or secrets of god, cannot be one
thing S. Paul handling that part (the changing of our bodies in the
resurrection) the belief, adds these words Behold I show you a secret thing,
1. Cor. 15.51.
we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Here he knitteth
together the Article of our belief and a secret thing making the^ but one
which Theophilus makes two. And speaking in an other place of the union
betwixt Christ and his Church, when 1. half especial parts of the belief
consist, straight he adds This is a great secret: Ephesians. 5.32.
Still coupling the^ to one which Theophilus will have twain.

But whereas Theophilus his deep judgment allows that he will not have the
secrets of God reueiled to the enemies, he deals with us even as he does with
his own fellow Famblers: for he does not deliver unto them all the secrets of
God, but the belief only at the first wherein he discrieth himself at
unawares to be one of those of whom it is said by M. Calvin the chief and
Rabbis do always keep back some point of their principal doctrine, Calvin
against the Libertines.
that they may the better maintain the opinion that their hangbies have of
the^. This also is the judgment of Staphilus in his Appollogie, Fol. 76. and.
77.
that he would have the word God which is the bread of the souls of Gods
people to be cut out and delivered unto them by peecemeale.

The scripture that Theophilus cites to strengthen his assertion is the same
that the Anabaptists alleged to the same purpose, being written in S. Math.
cap. 7. v. 6. Bulling. 6. book cap. 8. fol. 227. a. and. cap. 9. fol. 229
Give not that which is holy unto dogs, Dogs in Scripture who.
neither cast your pearls before swine. By dogs in scripture are meant those
that are not contained within the hedges of the church. Math. 15.26. c. and
open e^^mies which of set purpose persecute a known and manifest truth, which
as yet Theophilus has not proved ye doctrine of his Family to be: Swine who.
And by swine are meant those that being once washed return eftsoon to their
filth again, and making no account of the Lords truth, become more beastly in
life, then they were before. 2. Pet. 2.22. Pro. 26.11. b. the which place also
of S. Math. before alleged may thus be understood that the word of God ought
not to be preached unto them which sin against the holy ghost. Heb. 6.4. and
10.26. For that their sin is so great in the sight of God that is not to be
prayed for. 1. John. 5.16. of the which sins if Theophi. will say they are
guiltye which withstand HN. his Fam. I desire him that he jude not neither to
hastily pronounce the sentence til we have hard the evidence red whereby he
would that verdict should be gathered, which shall pass against us.

Furthermore whereas Theophi. by the way of blind similitude gathers that
those which seek to suppres this their scismaticall sect are thieves by the
high way, and therefore ought not the treasure of Gods word to be opened unto
them, I answer, that this reason is not so much to be confuted with words, as
with whips, was it ever had, or being heard, was it ever suffered, ye Christian
magistrates, into whose hands the sword of justice is committed, that they
should cut down such weeds as trouble the growth of good trees in gods
vineyard, and preachers which have the sword of the spirit to cut down
schism, and heresy, was it ever hard that a graceles heretic as this Theop.
is, durst term the^ Thieves by the hyway as Theophilus does in this place? God
grant all magistrates to look to this betimes, least under this counterfeite
cloak of Love, that subjects be drawn away from the obedience of their
lawful prince, when such rebellious words as these be blown abroad in
corners by such heretics and their fellows.

ARTICLE. 14. of HN. Of Liberty to Sin.
Cap. 13. sent. 8.
HN. In a certain book of his entitled Dictata per HN. upon the 22. chapter
of Deutronom. verse. 27. which says if a man ravish a woman, and she cry she
shall be free, the meaning is says HN. when sin comes to a man and if he cry
to God, and God help him not, he is free.

Theophilus.

NOw forth whether your chosen out Errors may appear to be in them selves
very good and true sayings, and your partial additions to be mere lies: we
refer that to the judgment of all those which shall read the text with an
vnparciall eye. For he does not say that she that is violently taken. etc.
shall be free videl. to commit evil as you would seem to have it, but she
shall be guiltless of the transgression (videl) for being condemned for the
same.

William Wilkinson.

IN the au^sweryng to this Article Theophilus uses this order. In his first
clause he makes a by speech to the collectour of the Article, in the second he
sets down ye meaning of the same Article. His first note in his speech is
this, that they are my chosen out Articles. which I utterly deny for it
follows not I chose out these Articles or errors out of HN. to be resolved
of the meaning of them by the Fami. or some of that brood as time should
serve, therefore these Articles are mine, this is a reason beyond all reason:
that they are of my chosing out of HN. is truth, but that they are my Articles,
that is untrue for they are as I made the title in the inscriptio^ of my
Articles, which I delivered to the Family, Errors out of the books of HN.
Again if they be true Articles and only my additions unto them be false, how
comes it to pass that Theophilus in his notes upon my title before the
Articles where I say that they are faithfully and truly gathered there he
au^swereth they are unfaithfully, lyingly, slanderously, maliciously or
uncharitably gathered? But let it be that HN. says truth, as for my additions,
which he mentions I deny that I have added any one word, to the text of HN.
whereby it might either be empared, or his meaning and sense perverted, and
herein I refer the whole determination thereof, to him which shall peruse this
my labor with an vnparciall eye. The place whereon I gathered the Articles is
this.

But if they (videl. our old sins and paramoures which we loved: sent. 17.
Docum. sentences cap. 13. sent. 18. fol. 26. a.
) take or lay hold on us with force and violence that the^ although we cry,
there comes not any power nor help unto us, for to withstand them in their
force and violence: and even so ravish us against our will, so are we giltles
of the transgressing, for we have cried to be released from the Tyranny of the
evil, HN. makes an Allegory of the Grammatical senten. of the Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 22. d.
and there is no help come unto us. Of which guitltles transgressing, the law
likewise witnesses, where it says: a woman which is violently taken in the
field, whereas there is not any help, and so ravished (and although she cry
aloude yet gotten no help) she shall be giltles of the tra^sgressing.

Now the proposition, which Theophilus gathered upon these words of HN. is
this, When we cry etc. and have no help we shall be free from that
transgression for being condemned for it. The which interpretation of his is
utterly untrue, for God is not bound by duty to give ought to any man: his
gifts are of his mercy, not of our merit. So yt albeit being prayed unto he
yield not unto our requests at the first, yet is not his withholdyng of his
grace a sufficient warrant to give us liberty to offend. For who shall wring
from the Lord that which he will not give, or if presently he do not enable
us to resist and prevail against sin, who (I say) shall accuse God to be
accessory unto our sins, as HN. and his Scholar Theophilus in this place
flatly affirm. And be it true, as it is most true, that Christ said unto his
Apostles: Math. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you etc. and S. James says, Iam. 5.16.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent, yet because our
prayers are not so perfect, no not in the just man as they ought to be,
therefore comes it to pass that we obtain not at Gods hand because we ask
amiss: Iam. 4.3.
neither did Christ obtain at his fathers hand that the cup of his death might
pass from him, Math. 26. cap. verse. 39.42.
for that it was not so agreeable with Gods will, nor expedient for the
accomplishyng of our salvation. So that when we accomplish not the condition in
our prayers that God has prescribed in his word, we are not to bind or charge
God with his promise, for that he knows better what to give us, the^ we know
what, or how to ask of him.

So that now we see that it is but a vain kyndnes, which Theophilus in this
place threapeth on God, when as either he will have God to bow unto him at
every beck, or else by and by he will make him the author of sin. For what
is this that Theophilus does else burden him withal: that if we pray and not
help come, the^ are we guiltles of the transgression. But to accuse God to be
accessory to our misbehauiour, which thing be far from him. Now if Theophilus
ca^ not comprehe^d this, what, is it not truth, because he can not conceive it?
Gods judgments are always true and just, though often secret, and those
things which we understand not at the first, let us rather reverence and
worship them then wonder at them. God when he leaves us to our selves and
punishes one sin with an other, does that most righteously in him self,
that sinful flesh does see no reason in. Shall the pot reason with the potter,
because he made him not a vessel unto honor? Ierem. 18.
shall the axe extol it self against him that heweth therewith? may God make
his creatures as seems best to his singular wisdom, and shall he not
dispose them as he will, when he has created them? God gives his children
pardon in his mercy, yet he that flies to his mercy, not first fully having
satisfied his justice deceaueth his own soul ere he be aware. So that when
any man shall presume upon repentance and fall in hope to rise, true it is he
that has promised pardon upon repentance, has not promised that we shall
live till to morrow, that we may have leisure to repent, he that is not fit to
day, the Lord knows how fit he will be to morrow.

Now it is also most assuredly true that albeit God in respect of him self,
for Christ's sake, does freely forgive both the fault and the punishment, yet
because he will not have men dally with his justice, upon the open sins of
the godly committed before men, he takes open punishment least the enemy
should have a cause to rail. This is manifest by king David's example, he
sinned openly in the sight of God and before Israel, God freely forgave him
both the punishment, and the fault: yet before men because the enemies of God
had openly a cause to blaspheme, therefore the Lord took away the child that
was borne in adultery. 2. Sam. 24.10.
Furthermore when he numbered the people, and had continued in the same sin,
without any notable repentance 9. months and 20. days, after albeit he
prayed hartly, yet was his sin punished by a great and severe scourge, as is
manifestly to be seen in the place of that History. By which places it is to be
understood that we ought not to offend in hope of pardon, neither that God is
faulty, who will not boulster us in our faults nor so easly be satisfied in
his justice as we imagine of.

But if Theophilus deem that herein he is not fully satisfied, for that this
question is of him that prays before sin committed, Math. 9.4.5.
and both these examples are not sufficiently plain, I further answer him,
that before Judas honge him self, he was sorry and made a show of outward
repentance as by his restitution may easly be perceived: yet God stayed him
not here, but because he should be a notable spectacle of Gods vengeance to
them that were then unborn, that no man be so hardy to sin against his
conscience: he ran so far that he cast himself willingly and wittyngly
away, and yet albeit God did not bow to hear him nor vouchsafe him pardon,
will Theophilus say that he is giltles, for being condemned for that
transgression?

Genesis 4. v. 6.
So may it be said of Caine: before he committed that horrible murder the Lord
did not only frown upon him, but gave him likewise a watchword that if he
stayed not his fury there was a punishment prepared for him, and the continual
torment of conscience should not depart from him. Dare Theophilus affirm that
now seeing the Lord stayed not his hand from heaven in the staying of his
brother, is God therefore guilty of that murder as well as Caine? because the
tongues of them that teach false doctrine, are not rent out of the mouths of
heretics, Nehem. 6.14. and 13. ver. 29.30.
and those that defile the Lords Priesthode are not plagued, is God not just?
yes, Theophilus God will recompense the slownes of his punishment with the
weight thereof, our God shall come, and not stay for ever, Psalm. 50.3. Apoc.
21.27. and 22.15.
look you therefore before hand to your standing, that ye be not cast out of
the holy City, and have your part with those that weep eternally. And thus
much to your Articles and aunsweres.

The sum of the opinions of cercertaine Libertines.
1 FIrst they affirm, that the preaching of the word is not the ordinarye
means to come to the knowledge of the word, but by reason. 2 Secondly, that
no man which is faulty himself can preach the truth to others. 3 Those
preachers which do take in hand to preach the word of God before man be
regenerate, do take the office of the holy Ghost out of his hand. 4 Those that
be doctors and learned, can not preach the word truly, their reason is,
because, Christ says, it is hidden from the wise and prudent and is reueiled
to sucklinges and babes. 5 There is no devil, but such as the painters make.
6 They which have the spirit of God know all things. 7 That we ought not to
give our alms to beggars: for that they live in the consumablenes, and that
there was no beggar in Israel. 8 Marriage is a sacrament, and wonderful
speculation. 9 That there were mysteries and great speculations in the Mass if
they could be attained unto, and that it was a God service. 10 Also, the
service that we have taken for a gods service is not so, and in so taking it,
both they, and we are deceived. 11 That Adam did not sin at all, their reason
is, Adam did not sin, but the woman. 12 There is no man Gods child, but he
that can show his Pedigrue. 13 The martyrs in Q. Maryes days ought not so to
have died: for in so dying they distroyed the temples of God. 14 That whosoever
has Gods Spirit can not sin, and that the Prophet David did not sin after
that time he had received the holy Ghost. 15 That a man ought not to weary his
body in travail, and labor. For say they the holy ghost will not tarry in a
body that is weary and yrksame. 16 Where there is any contention, there is not
the spirit of God: for say they the spirit is not divided. 17 That the witch,
which raised up the devil in the lykenes of Samuel, was no witch, but the
wisdom of God, and the spirit that she raised up was Samuel himself. 18
That Adam was the son of God, otherwise then by creation. 19 That there be
many books besides the Bible which Esdras speaks of, should be revealed, and
come abroad before the end. 20 That the Bible is not the word of God, but a
signification thereof, and that the Bible is but ynk and paper, but the word of
God is spirit and life. 21 That they may not speak the truth bouldly and
openly because the truth will not be heard. 22 That there are Some which now
are living which do fulfill the Law in all points.
William Wilkinson.

ALbeit there be diverse of these Articles which I have not read expressiuely in
their books, yet have they ben confessed by them in conference as it may be
proved by the testimonye of the^ which have talked with them, unto the which
Articles exhibited at the same time with the former of HN. Theophilus
answers in manner as follows.

Theophilus.

NOw forth for your conclusion that you make upon the 22. forged articles,
Theophilus answer to the former Articles. 1. Untruth for they are not forged.

2. Untruth for I would not feign father them.

3. Theoph. common eloquence. Theophilus description of a Libertine fitly
agrees to him self.


which you term the opinions of the Libertines, and you would feign father
the^ on the Family of Love, upon the testimony of some private conference, had
by some of that company (as you say) with such as are as ready as your self
for to maintain their lie, and yet shame not therein: Therefore it is briefly
said: whatsoever accords not with the scriptures of God, therein that same
may well be the opinion of the Libertines. (Whose God is their belly, whose
glory is their shame, and rest worldy minded. Which also with uncircumcised,
and unrenewed spightfull minded hearts, and all evil dedednes, as in contempt
of his word, persecuting of his chosen, following of the fleshly lusts,
forsaking of his cross, seeking all ease in the flesh, by lying and
slaundering of his word and his chosen flock, Many words to no purpose.
do seek to honor the God of life in maintayning of the contrary nature, the
kingdom of Gods adversary the devil, to serve and worship, That is of sin
for the Fam. say that sins only is Antechrist.
the Christ of the same God by maintayning of the life of Antichrist. To
reverence his holy spirit by the upholding of the Belialish spirit of
Antechrist: but surely none of the right professors of the Love, 4. Theoph.
confesses he houldeth some of the Libertines opinions yet dare he not say which
can in any wise maintain any such errors as some of them be. Therefore in
some point Theophilus is a Libertine, and so is the Fam. also.

And by the way it is much to be maruailed at, that any such which take upon
them to profess the Christianitye can with such vehemency contemn the love
of God and her lovely ministration, 5. Untruth for the love of god is not in
HN. his Fam.

6. Untruth all that Gods word requires is not fulfilled in HN. his Fam.

7. Theop. 1. reason whereby he proves his Fam. the true Church.

8. Theop. 2. reason Scripture must judge

9. Untruth god nor his righteousness are not in HN. his Fa. milye.


whilst that all the Scripture enfouldeth all good, and the some of all what
God and Christ requires in his word therein. Unless it were to be granted that
the enviers thereof are utterly ignorant in that which they profess.

Therefore let this professed Love vowed by the Familye of Love, be proved a
false and counterfaite Love, by some evil fruits or deeds, that are in
testimonye of truth, and meekenes, and not by lie and arrogancye: And eke by
the rule of Scripture to break forth and be gathered thereout, or else if
better may be found to be proved by like effect, let it in peace be allowed to
dwell by, and with you: Least ye procure by such a continual inueying against
God his righteousness, God his severe wrath and indignation to fall without
remedy over you.

For it is all in vain to kick against the prick, or strive against the Lord,
10. Theop. 3. reason. Gamaliels counsel abused by the Familye.
for if it be out of the flesh and blood it will surely go under, or fail and
spare you much labor, but being done by the finger of God small will be your
prevailing, and much less your reward. etc.

W. Wilkinson.

THis whole speech of Theophilus may for orders sake be reduced into these two
parts: the first contains his answer to the 22. Articles of the
Libertines, where after his manner he is very eloquent in heaping up phrases to
what end he wotteth best: if it be to describe a Libertine he did very unwisely
in that for breuityes sake he referred us not to the 1. Epistle of the Fami.
written to M. Rogers. page 73. b. lin. 15. where very artificially he defines
a Libertine in few words after this sort. A Libertine briefly defined by the
Fam.
He that knows not the doctrine of HN. is a fre one, or Libertine, thus if he
had done in few words, the^ should his wit and his words have been equal,
whereas now running the furthest way about, it may be verified of him that was
said in the like case of a person not far unlike Theophilus, satis loquentiae,
sapie^tiae parum, Salust of Cateline.
many words but small wisdom. And thus much with the notes in the marge^t unto
ye first part of his division.

Theophi. first reason to approve that the doctrine of HN. is a true doctrine
is taken from the effect thus, Theop. first reason answered.
The effect is good. Therefore the efficient, HN. Fault not the cause put for
the cause.
in the which argument drawn from that proof it is failed when that is put for
the effect which is not the effect, as thus, The knowledge of the scripture is
cause of heresy. Ergo, it is not good that scripture should be known. Again,
Gene. 19. Gene. 38.
The reading the histories of Lots incest, and drunkenness, of Lia, and Rachell,
the wives of Jacob, of Judas and Thamar, etc. be evil examples and yet to be
read in the old Testament. Ergo, to read in the old Testament is unlawful
for hurting of honestye.

This Argument is false from the effect for it puts the reading of the
Scripture to be ye cause of whoredom, HN. his doctrine not cause of godly life.
whereas that is not such a cause, as Staphilus dreameth of, so that herein
then ye see the fault of this Argument, Staphilus Apology. fol. 76. a. lin. 22.
wherein it ceasseth to be so strong as HN. would have it. Theophilus reasons
thus, the effect of the doctrine of the Family is good, therefore the doctrine
it self. To this I answer that Theophilus supposes that whereas diverse live
honestly in the Family, that is brought to pass by HN. his doctrine, that is
to be denied, for whereas they now live and honest upright and Christian life,
this they learned of the preaching of the Gospel, The preaching of the word,
cause of godly life.
before ever they were infected with HN. his heresy, so that thereby they
rather bewtifie it then are bewtified by it. And for proof hereof it is
manifestly apparaunt that the younger nouices me^ be in HN. his heretical
doctrine, The nouices in the Fam. more honest in life, then the illuminate
Elders.
the honester they are in life and conversation, but when they leave once their
singlemyndednes and grow up to the manly oldnes in the Love, and come as they
think nearer to the perfection of the upright being, then the wicked spirit
begins to Lord over them, and sin to have a living and daily shape in
them. So that ye deeper they wade in this mighty stream of ye lovely
ministration and the nearer they come to ye hiest pitch of being altogether
Godded with the nature of their new found Idol, which instead of the true God
they have set up unto them, the greater rule and sway does the wicked nature of
sin bear in them.

The leauyng of Gods word is the cause of all sin.
And why so? truly because that in their childish yongnes of the love the word
of the Lord, is of some credit with them. So that thereby they are bridled
from sinnyng, but when they shall leave that candle and light upon false
lights as the perfect do, when they come toward this perfectness then their
lives are every day more ungodly then other.

Cap. 3. sent. 12.
That this is true in HN. his Dictatis, or Documentall sentences is manifest
where he says. As long as the beleuers of the word are yet young or childish
in the procreation of the seed of the promise, Christ borne in the Fam. upon
the young ones.
that becomes borne in them out of the belief of the world. And are not yet
growe^ up to the Elderdome of the perfect being Ephesians. 4. b. of the word (which
is the appointed time of the father over all beleuers of the world) so stand
they yet (although they believe) under the ordinance of the Lord or his word,
not therefore that they should always remain as subject there under. But unto
the appointed time, to wit, The Disciples of the Fam. not alvvayes subject to
Gods word says HN.
till unto the manly old age in the godly understanding of the holy word, as
there is said, that is, till that the Sins be subdued. etc. The which words
of HN. as they have been the root of all Anabaptistrie and Libertinisme, (For
that these sectaries have boasted they could not sin in their perfection, and
therefore needed neither the word nor the Sacraments) so do they plainly
confirm th^^ whereunto I have alleged them videl. So long men live upright as
the doctrine of HN. is not known unto them, and that HN. his Elders are more
corrupt in life then the simplest in the Family.

Secondly it is offended in this Argument, Religion not proved from the second
table to the first.
because it is drawn from the second table of the Commandments unto ye
first, that he lives honestly before men therefore he is good in Religion
before God. Whereas the reason should be clean otherwise from the first table
unto the second, and this is an usual manner in Scripture, whereby the holy
Ghost labors to discry an hypocrite. Esaias. 58.2.
In Esaias the holy Ghost reasons thus, Ye seek me daily and will know my
ways eue^ as a nation that did righteously and had not forsaken the statutes
of their God: they ask of me ordinances of justice, they will draw near unto
their God, saying: wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? we have
punished our selves and thou regardest it not? Thus they reason as the Family
do, we fast etc. Ergo, we are Religious and godly men: but God turns the
Argument clean otherwise thus. Ye are oppressors. verse. 34. ye are
unmercifully to the poor, verse. 7. ye are oppressors. verse. 3.4. ye are
unmercifully to the poor, verse. 7. ye are extortioners and ingraters. verse. 6.
Therefore are not honest men in Religion neither fear God aright. The self
same reason is used by S. James to reprove the dispersed Jews which boasted of
their upright Religion, they are proved to be hipocrites and dissemblers before
God from the same table as before.

You refrain your toungues but deceive your own hearts, therefore your
Religion is in vain. Iam. 1.26.


And again. Ye visit not the fatherles and widows in adversity. Therefore
your Religion is not pure and undefiled before God.

And thus still we see that the Family reasons not aright for that they
frame their Argument amiss: as also does Theophilus in this place. But this is
not Theophilus reason in this place alone, but in ye Brief rehearsal ye same
is likewise used as an invincible Argument to prove the professed Religion by
the Family is the truth, where he likewise argues thus.

Fam. prove by life before men their religion before God.
The voice of the country where we dwell approves we are honest before me^:
Ergo, our Religion is good before God. Where if the voice of the country did
justify them for honest men, as far as they know them by trading with them,
so far I will confess with them, that I know some few of them to be of an
honest life, yet this proves not the doctrine of HN. which they profess to be
true, for that I know that some honest men of them in life have confessed unto
me diverse heresies in Religion. Again, it is extreme folly to be judged by
those simple men (amongst whom they live) that are truly religious: Fam. put
them for judges of religion which have no skill in religion.
for that some of those whom they desire to have their Judges have no skill in
those points that the Family are charged, with all, so that in vain it were
to bring these men being blind in this case to judge of coullors not being
expert in the knowledge of the Scriptures, which is the light, whereby these
coullors must be seen.

By this then we understand that the Family is not so learned in using so
unlearned a reason, as they bear men in hand they are, for that hereby they
deceive the simple in making their lives before men to be Arguments to prove
their Religion to be true. Mark. 7. verse. 4.
For that in Scripture the Pharisees lived very uprightly before men, using
many glorious ceremonies as washyng of cups and beds, Math. 23. v. 23.
etc. and yet Christ called them hypocrites, and said often woe be unto them.

Math. 7.15.
Many false Prophets shall come in sheep clothing says Christ and they are
rauenyng Wolves within.

Staphilus a Papist handles this Argument at large in his Apollogie, Fol. 37.
a.
where he also confuteth this Argument of HN. and his Familiers: 1. the
doctrine may be good says he and yet the life evil. Math. 23. and many in the
Romish Church live not Catholiquely. Papists lives most contrary to their
own laws. Fol. 38. a.
For they lead their lives clean contrary and repugnant to their own Canons
and Constit^^^^^s (says he) 2. the doctrine may be evil and the life good.
Math. 7. beware of false Prophets. Yea, heretics are of great virtue in
apparaunce as he proves by sundry examples: So that says Staphilus the life
both must be judged to be true by the doctrine, as also the doctrine by the
life both must agree together, therefore it is not enough unless both tree and
fruit be good. Math. 12.
And our Savior says, that his works therefore ought to be believed, John. 10.
Staph. fol. 35. b, August. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
because the doctrine and the life in him went jointly together. And to this
purpose very fitly says he out of S. Augustine: The Argument that proves men's
doctrine by their life is false.

Thus in the judgment of the Families best friends (the Papists whom they
magnify so much) this their Argument is not true.

Furthermore as it is unreasonable to find fault with good seed, because it
is sowed by an evil husbandman, so is not therefore evil seed the better to
be liked of, because that a good husbandman, Origin. in 16. cap. of Ezech.
shall have evil servants that sow it. Very aptly therefore says Origin
concerning this matter In mine opinion (says he) an Heretic of good life, is
much more hurtful and has more authority in his words, then he that does
discredit his doctrine with his life: therefore must we take heed of heretics
which seem to be of godly conversation. God grant all his children may be
ruled by the ghostly counsel of this godly and learned father.

To all the which that hitherto has been said concerning this matter, if the
Famblers will object: that every man does defend and maintain that he lyketh
best, and that here I show my self a proctour of sin as oftentimes they
object, to this I answer that this objection is HN. and Anabaptisticall,
nevertheless I like not to smother sins or to boulster up impietye in any
person whatsoever: and albeit this accusation in some part be true, that many
which profess themselves to be Gospellers, and can talk gloriously of
religion and regeneration, have ^^^e list to live thereafter: abusing the
pretense of the Gospel as a stalking horse to level at others by, A true
Protestant who.
therefore I counsel that no man be accounted an honest man in religion what
countenance soever he would bear, unless he in life express that in outward
dealings which his tongue so often runs of: so that to walk after, not to
talk of the Gospel does make a Protestant and a gospeller, otherwise when God
shall in judgment pluck of our Lions skins, we shall be openly seen who we
are to our own shame and confusion.

Neither are the Papists to boast that the gospellers is but a schism from
the Romish Church, for otherwise it would yeald other fruits: I answer, that
no land albeit sown with never so good wheat brings out only wheat but
sometimes weeds also. And as for the Church of Antechrist (the Romish harlot I
mean) Staphilus in his Apology shall tell her tale, Staphilus fol. 37 38.
Bishop of Salis b. in the Appolog. page 409. 410. 411.
and M. Harding which defends her open whoredom and commen stews shall
bear him witness, that though some gospellers sin, yet many Papists sinck in
impietye, and thus much for Theop. first reason.

Theoph. second reason answered.
Unto Theop. second reason containing a request concerning an upright arbiter in
this matter, as it is very equal (vz. That his doctrine and the heresy of HN.
be tried by the rule of Scripture,) so do I in this behalf thereto most
willingly consent and agree, wherein also I have, as I am able, satisfied his
request: wholly herein aunswering him as S. Augustine in the like case answered
Donatus a man in doctrine not unlike to Theophilus. De vnitate Ecclesiae.
Whether they hold the truth or no, let them show me none otherwise but by the
canonical books of holy scripture.

And good reason it is that every man be heard by him to whom h^ d^^h make his
appeal, seeing therefore he has appeald to the Scripture, to the Scripture
shall he go. Wherein also I promise him very truly that I am rather desirous of
the defending the truth, then to contend with him in ^^^ugning his error. In
the confirmation whereof, if he shall deal soundly, and set down chapter and
verse for his proof, I will as fully satisfy him as I am able, being ever
ready to perform either privately, or openly that which in private letters I
long since did offer him: wherein also if at any time or in any matter I shall
by him be thought not rightly to have conceived his meaning if by any means I
shall have intelligence thereof: and if he shall vouchsafe to deal by any
reasonable proof, I offer my self to do nothing out of evil will, being as
ready to confess mine ouersightes, as he shall be able to convince me of them,
only mine earnest desire out of hearty love is if he mean to deal heareafter
with me any further, that he keep him to the true gramaticall sense of
scripture, expounding the same according to the proportion of faith: this if he
do I shall be heartily glad: otherwise if he do, in quoting scripture for the
phrase, and in Allegorizing the text deprave the sense thereof: I promise him
likewise that hereafter I will not further meddle with him or his: for I like
not to spend good leisure (whereof I have not such plenty) that in speaking in
the air, I both may mispend my time, and abuse the reader with emptines.

The last and least reason whereby Theoph. would prove that no man ought to
deal against the Fam. is taken from the counsel of Gamaliell in the Acts of
the Apostles. Theoph. third reason answered. Acts. 5.38.39.
This reason is as it were by common consent received and alleged by all those
that are any thing at all seen in the Fam. ever in their mouths if it be of
God it will stand etc. Fam. common reason why they ought not to be spoken
against, Caluinus in Act.
The which reason the Anabaptists used very often, and is (by a learned
expositor termed) a reason not fit for any man of wisdom.

First concerning Gamaliels words that they are not always to be taken for a
law, it is manifest neither are they a right rule or contain a general
doctrine, how at all times false teachers are to be dealt withal (neither were
the holy Apostles false teachers, Theop. falsely supposes the Apostles to be
false teachers.
as Theophilus comparison does afford) but he only upon that present occasion
because of that imminent peril that hangs over the heads of the Appostles at
that instant, uttered that speech as a worldly wise and politic man, to stay
the fury of the priests, and set free the Apostles in so great a danger.
Examples without precepts prove not.
Wherefore he that shall stretch Gamaliels words further then he meant them,
and of one private politic action, by and by publish a principle in
Diuinitye, and thereupon ground a general doctrine without an especial
precept to the warrant thereof shall of the like examples in the scriptures
gather many and marvelous inconveniences.

Concerning the doctrine of the first table if this example were general, by
this gapp many heretics would stir coals in the Church, and in the second
tables many thieves, harlots, and godles persons would swerve to the utter
overthrow of the common weal.

Inconveniences of Theoph. doctrine.
The first will not have any man compelled to religigion, and therefore much
less to be put death for the same.

The second is a plausible doctrine to fill the world full of thieves, and
harlots, to the confirmation whereof no honest man will once breath, to the
confutation every man both by the law of nature, and much more by the written
word of God, is bound to agree with all possible resistaunce if he mean to
keep a good conscience toward God, or maintain the duty of Charity
toward his neighbor,

But because the oportunitye and the instance of this place does seem to
enforce a word or two concerning this question by sound and strange reasons
out of holy Scripturres I will approve that a Christian magistrate both may and
ought to punnish by death and otherwise, Heretics both may and ought to be
put to death by the civil magistrate. 1.
those that are heretics against the faith, and blasphemers against religion.

1 The Manachies, Donatistes, and old Heretics were of the opinion, that all
heretics ought freely and without punnishment, profess what they listed, and
not be compelled to faith, but they might embrace what religion best they lyked
without controulement, whom S. Augustine in many places confuted showing, that
a magistrate might lawfully compel heretics to the faith and sharply
punnish false teachers for broaching of their opinions.

And therefore speaking to the heretics he says very well, August de
pastoribus. cap. 16
Recte faciunt imperatores Catholici qui eos cogu^t ad vnitatem, the Catholic
Emperors do very well when they compel heretics to come to unity.

The first reason is taken from S. Paul, Romans 13.4. a.
who reasons That he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the minister
of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Seeing then heretics and
false teachers do evil, in blaspheming the holy name of Christ, after the
which we are named, in making a schism amongst the people, in disturbing the
comme^ quietness of the land wherein they live, and the state of private men
also, therefore it is not to be doubted but they may, and ought to be punnished
of him not only in their wealth and goods, but in their bodies with the loss
of life also.

Secondly, God by manifest precept and commandment, Leuit. 24.14.16. Numb. 15
30.30.
and God in his word has commanded that they should be slain: It can not
neither is it to be thought, that God has commanded that he has not allowed
of heretics: Deuteronomy. 13. and. 17.13.14.15. and. 18.20.22.
Therefore lawfullye may by the commandment of God be put to death by the
civil Magistrate.



Numb. 15.35.
The man that gathered sticks on the Saboth day was slain. Godly kings by
their example have approved the same by their continual practice. 3. Kings.
14.13. 2. Chron. 15.13.
Asa put down his own mother from her estate, because she made an Idol in a
grove, and he destroyed her Idols and burnt them by the brook Kidron.

4. King. 23.5.
Josias put down the Chemerims, he defiled Tophet, he brake down the Images,
and put down the alters, sacrificing the priests of the hye places upon them.

2. Chro. 23.17.
Iehoiada destroyed Baals temple, brake his altar and his Images, and slew
Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.

1. King. 18.40.
Elias put to death all Baals prophets and would not let one of them escape.

2. King. 10.25.
Iehue put all Baals priests to death.

Neither was this only in the time of the law of Moses but after Christ's
assention when there was not a Christian Magistrate. Act. 13.11. Acts. 5.5.10.
S. Paul made Elimas blind, S. Peter slew Ananias, and Saphira because they
lied against the holy ghost.

Lastly in the time of Christian Emperors, namely, Constantine, Gratia^,
Valentinian, Theodosius, Archadius, Honorius, Valentinus, and Martianus. And
many others which by weight of laws did forbid all wicked sects, and
factions, contrary to the word of God. And therefore did they command, to
all their Liuetenants, Proconsuls, and Presidents in all their Empires, that
Idolatrye should be forbidden, the temples of Idols should be shut, that they
should not be permitted to sacrifice in them, that all the heretics as the
Manichies, the Donatistes. the Arians, Apollinaristes, and Euchians, with their
doctrine should not be suffered, their Churches should be spared, and their
conuenticles forbidden. That their heretical books should be openly burned,
that those which fostered them, or received them to house, should be grievously
punished, and the heretics themselves, should be deprived of honors, goods,
yea bodies and lives also, that by some means or other their wicked and
schismatic fantasies might be overthrown. All the which they would not have
done unless (by the word of God,) it had been assuredly lawful, or if the
counsel of Gamaliell had been as a general law to all estates, times, and
persons that followed. The which examples of Christian Emperors and godly
kings and governors both in the law, and the kings of Judah, in and since
the state of the Primative Church, I beseech God to whom the care of his Church
does belong to put into the hearts of all Christian Magistrates to practice
that they may in deed show themselves nurses of the Church, to the
maintenance of Religion and the assurance of their own thrones, and estates,
and to the quietness of their subjects, that heresy may be suppressed, and
sin punished, and that God in all may be gloryfied, in and through his Christ
our only mediator and redeemer. Amen.

Certain profitable notes to know an Heretic, especially an Anabaptist. With
the Opinions, and behavior of them out of (...) Authors.
Out of M. Bullingers book, against the Anabaptists.

Simlerus epist. fol. 1.
Anabaptists fly open conference and creep from house to house craftily and
privily, seducyng the simple and ignorant.

2.
2. Nicholas Storcke in Saxony the chief ringleader of the Anabaptists
boasted of Reueilations.

3.
3. He boasted of a new world, wherein justice dwells.

Bulleng. fol. 1.
Anabaptisme comes always by contentious and troublesome persons, where the
Gospel had been preached before.

Thomas Muncer taught in word and writing. First that the Preachers of his time
were not sent of God, neither that they taught the word of God, but the dead
letter of the Scripture: further that the scripture and outward word, was not
the true word of God, but a testimony of the true word: and that the word is
inward and heavenly and comes immediately from the mouth of God, and that it
ought to be taught inwardly by the spirit and not by Scriptures or Sermons.

Fol. 2.
He denied Baptism of Infantes.

He said that Christ did not fully satisfy for us.

He said God reueiled his will by dreams, which he highly commended as
inspirations from the holy Ghost.

His own sect be termed the elect of God, all that were not of his sect he
said they were wicked and worthy to be slain.

He said that goods ought to be common.

Yea he said that Gedeons sword was given him to abolish all Lordshyps, against
all tyrauntes, to restore the former liberty, and erect the new kingdom of
Christ upon the earth.

Muncer was put to death for his heresy, Fol. 3.
and repented before his death.

At Tygurie some contentious men though not unlearned took part with the
Anabaptists. Fol. 9.


The Anabaptists would not communicate with the wicked.

They said that the Baptism of infantes was invented by Pope Nicholas and
therefore it was naught. Fol. 10.


Anabaptists were hartned by those which desired the overthrow of the Gospel
and the restoryng of Popery. Fol. 11.


Anabaptists were sage men, they sighed often, they laughed not, they were
vehement in reprehensions.

The simple were deceived much by this Argument, Let me^ say of the
Anabaptists what they will I see their sobriety, I hear the^ say nothing but
this, that we must not swear at all, but we must live holy and just. etc.

The Anabaptists complained that all things were done against them by force,
that the truth was oppressed, that simple and godly men which sought nothing
but that which was contained in the word of God, neither could they be hard or
have free liberty to utter out their minds.

The Anabaptists outwardly did lead a godly life, Fol. 17. b.
they spoke earnestly against covetousness, pride, oaths, filthy talk, uncomely
behavior, chearyng and dronkennes, they spoke much of killyng the old man. etc.

Briefly great and manifold was their hypocrisy. Fol. 18.


They said they only were the true Church, wherein Christians delighted and
that their Sectaries might keep company with no Christian Churches of the
Gospellers for that their Church were no more the Churches of Christ, then the
Papists Churches.

They said yt ye Ministers were not lawfully called to the Ministry, nor
ordinarily, because they had not those qualities that S. Paul requires 1.
Tim. 3. e.

They allow of Revelations.

They say that the Sermons of Preach^^^ are of small account, because in them is
taught that Christ only satisfied for our sins, and that men were justified
before God by faith and not by works.

They affirmed the law might be kept, and therefore they blamed the Preachers
for saying the contrary.

They held Community of all things.

They affirmed that the old Testament ought not to be mingled with the new,
because the old was abrogated.

They said that the souls slept until the day of Judgment.

No Christian might be a Magistrate.

Magistrates must not meddle with Religion.

Fol. 9.
The last punishment of Christians is Exco^municatio^.

No man ought to be compelled to faith, or put to death for his Religion.

War (say they) is unlawful for Christians.

Their speeches must be yea, and no, without any oath.

None (say they) ought to be put from the Lords supper.

Cap. 9. Of diverse sects and sorts of Anabaptists. Of Anabaptists termed
Apostoliques whose errors were, Fol. 20.


1. They approved only the bare letter of ye Scripture.

2. They used no weapon, staff, wallet, shoes, money. etc.

3. They preached on house tops.

4. They washed one an others feet.

5. They forsook wives and children.

6. They held community.

Cap. 10. Of Anabaptists Spiritual.

1. They had nothing like the world, to prove it they abused. Romans 11.

2. Fol. 23.
They had rules both for the matter and form of apparel. And affirmed, it
was unlawful to wear silk.

3. They had rules of eating, drinkyng, and sleepyng.

4. They might never laugh.

5. They sighed often and might not come in open asse^blies.

6. They condemn bargainyng and the use of weapons.

Cap. 11. Of Sinles Anabaptists. Fol. 26.


These Anahaptistes said, they could sin. For proof they cited.

He that is of God sins not. 1. John. 3.6. and. cap. 3.8.


He that sins is of the Devil.

Christ's Church is without spot or wrinckle. Ephesians. 5.27.


And therefore did they intermit the 5. petition, Forgive us our trespasses.

They said there was no original sin, neither were infantes by nature
sinful.

The hatchers of this heresy were Nouatus, Catharis, Auxentius, Pelagius: it
is learnedly and at large confuted by S. Augustine, Tom. 7. Against Coelestius
of man's perfect righteousness, in the last end of the book.

Cap. 12. Of Anabaptists, that used to hold their peaces and pray.

1. They said there ought to be no more any preaching, because the door was
shut. Apoc. 1.

2. The world was not worthy to hear the Gospel.

3. Being asked ought of their Religion, they held their peace.

2. Book. 1. Chap. Of Anabaptists Enthusiastae.

They were often in a train and boasted much of the spirit and Revelations.

Their common by word was, The father said it.

They saw by Revelation that the day of Judgment was at hand.

Cap. 2. Of free brethren o^ gro^^^ and impure Anabaptists.

Fol. 37.
1. They had (as they the^ selves affirmed) fleshly knowledge either of other.

2. They said Christ made them free from all laws.

3. They might have no lands, nor pay tithes or obedience or subjection to any
man.

4. They had community of all things.

Cap. 4. Of Libertine Anabaptists.

Fol. 42.
1. They granted that oaths Magistracy, and Baptism might indifferently be
used or not be used.

2. They passed not for Scripture, for say they we are all taught of God.

3. They said Sacraments were needeles, for the faith full having the thing
signified vz. the holy Ghost needed not the outward sign of water.

4. They said it was free for them in persecution, either to confess or
dissemble their Religion.

5. They said it is sufficient for them, to keep their hearts clean although
they do clean contrary in their deeds.

6. No man say they ought to put him self in danger for his faith, for God is
not pleasured by any ma^s death, neither will he have any man leave his wife and
children.

7. For their quietness sake (they say) they may conform them selves to the
Religion of any people, among whom they live.

And of this judgment (said M. Bulling.) was ye beast David George, Fol. 43. a.
and this is the most pestilent sect of all others.

Cap. 6. Of the sect of the Hutties.

They thought they were the Israelites bodily.

They had terrible dreams and visions.

They saw in their dreams, that domes day was at hand, and therefore spent
their goods rioteously.

In continuance of time when all was wasted, they professed w^^full poverty.

Cap. 7. Of the sect of the Augustines, of Augustine a Bohemian.

THey said that heaven is, was, and shall be shut until the day of Judgment.

They thought that neither the good were in heaven, nor the wicked in hell,
until the day of Judgment, but they were put in several places, which places
are unto us unknown.

Cap. 8. Of the Anabaptists of Munster.

1. THey inueyed against all excellency, wealth, and honor.

2. They despised and spoke against the Magistrate.

3. They despised the world and worldly things.

4. Their talk was wholly of ye mortifying of ye old man.

Cap. 13. Melchior Hoffma^ an Archheretique and an Anabaptist and his sectaries
affirmed,

1. THat the Baptism of infantes was of the devil.

2. That Christ took not flesh of the virgin Mary.

3. That our salvation is of our selves.

4. That there is no hope of pardon for those, which fall away after they have
received the grace of God.

Cap. 14. Of the heresy of David George.

1. David George affirmed that all the doctrine given us from godly Moses,
Christ and the Prophets and Apostles is imperfect and unprofitable to
salvation, but said that his heresy is perfectly profitable unto life
everlasting.

2. David George says he is Christ, and the Messiah, the beloved son of God,
borne not of the flesh but of the spirit.

3. David George said he will restore the house or Israel and the tribe of
Levy.

4. David George says, it is he that must forgive sins.

4. Libertines.

1. THey said God made the sin of Cain and Judas.

2. They denied the Resurrection and said it was spiritual.

3. They said the devils and all ye wicked should be saved.

4. They said the old Testament is abrogate.

3. Book. 1. Chap.

THe Anabaptists withdraw themselves from their Churches and Ministers. cap.
2. your Ministers line not well say the Anabaptists: therefore your Church is
not the true Church.

The Anabaptists in joining to the Churches where the Gospel has with much
labor been preached there they stir up tumultes. They say the Ministers are
not rightly called.

Chap. 6. Anabaptists reasons why they refuse to come to Church.

1 THe Ministers refuse and depart from Christ's doctrine.

2 No man ought to be compelled to faith.

3 Ye resist evil, and Moses sword should not defend doctrine but Christ's.

4 Your Ministers live not as they teach, Ergo, their doctrine is untrue.

4. Book 3. Chapter.

THe Anabaptists say we may fulfill the law.

They affirm they are not heard as they ought to be. vz. openly, and as the
law requires, and Nichodemus

They quoted much scripture.

We ought not say they be compelled to Religion.

It is not lawful to defend Religion by the civil sword

The preachers rayled on them, and dealt uncharitably

No man say they ought to be put to death for Religion,

They rayled on the Lords supper, and said it was

They affirmed none ought to be baptized, but they

If any of the Gospellers live godly they call him an Anabaptist.

The reproachful tauntes of the Anabaptists, Lutherans. Fol. 254. False and
carnal Gospellers. 255. errors and unskillfulness of preachers. 256. Succeders
of the Pharesies. 256. Hipocrites, blind guides, Fools, blind serpents,
Generations of vipers. 257. fellows of thieves whom David makes mention of.
Psalm. 50.

They say we hate the^ because they would live without sin. Fol. 260.


They say we may keep the law, to the proof whereof they abuse much scripture.

The preachers (say the Anabaptists) would have us profess openly because
they would have the Magistrate persecute us.

FINIS ex Bullingero. Out of Calvin against the Anabaptists.

THey say that they ought not to receive ye Lords Supper, where there is no
true excommunication. Fol. 38.


Fol. 35.
They say they may not participate in the sacraments with any man whom they
know to be wicked.

Fol. 53.
Catharistes, Donatistes, and Anabaptists seek a Church without spot.

Fol. 58.
The Anabaptists say no man that is minister may have a certain charge,
alleging for proof the Apostles example.

Out of Calvin against the Libertines.

THe sect of the Libertines is that sect which S. Peter and S. Jude foretold.

Fol. 129.
The whole speech of the Libertines is in such strange kind of style, that
those which hear them at the first do wonder at them, and so dealt Marcion in
the hatching of his heresy.

Fol. 131. Fol. 133.
The Libertines denied the resurrection.

The Libertines, were divided into orders of men.

The first sort were called blessed ones, which when they used their office in
purging their religion, they were termed Puritanes.

Secondly there were ij. kinds of their disciples, the first they unto whom
they did reveal their mysteries of their sect, and them they termed Elected
ones.

Others whom they a far of by little and little made acquainted with their
heresy, they termed Hearers.

Fol. 164.
In the beginning the Libertines bouldly rejected the scriptures, they
tauntingly scoffing at either of the Apostles sought to weaken their credit
that thereby they might the more magnify their own authority, they termed S.
Paul a broken vessel, S. Peter a forswearer of his Master, S. John a sely
young man, S. Matthew an usurer, neither were they ashamed to blaspheme them
openly.

But afterward, when the Libertines perceived, that all men abhorred them for
those their uncomely speeches, they devised more slyly and justly to behave
themselves, and saying then that they rejected no scripture, they did writh it
into allegories, and wrested it into wonderful strange interpretations.

In the ordering of their discples, 135.
they follow altogether the Manichies neither come they commonly abroad that
they may the better be known, nor tell any man what they think: but keep
them long in doubt, and by far fetched circu^staunces, they wind in them
whom they desire to make their disciples, neither do they tell the watchworde
of their mighty assemblies to any man, before they perceive they have so
bewitched him, that they may easily persuade them whatsoever they list.

Their secrets they open only unto those which first are sworn unto them, and
the chief Rabbis do always keep back some especial points of their
doctrine, whereby they may the better maintain the opinion that their hangbyes
have of them.

Quintinus the Archlibertine and other of his fellows of botchers were made
doctors, and so changed their calling: the reason was they feign would live
daintely, and idly, neither thought they that they were fit to labor. 139.
155.


The Libertines books were written in such a lofty style, that hardly they
could be understood.

One of the chefest points of their doctrine was, 156.
that they ought to use a certain crafty kind of dissembling, and
cou^terfeiting that they may easily deceive the simple.

They think they may lawfully run to Idol service. 157. 165.


They are not content with the simple sense of the Scripture, but they writh it
unto Allegories, neither will they keep them to the letter: for they say the
letler kills.

They affirmed that every one of the children of God are Christ's, Fol. 215.
and Quintinus the chief heretic being asked how he did, answered how can
Christ do amiss.

They say that regeneration is the restoring of the estate wherein Adam was
placed before his fall. Fol. 217.


Fol. 218.
They make an Allego. of the history of Adam Genesis 3.

Adams innocence say they is nothing else but this, not to be able to judge
between black, and white*

219
If they see any man stroock with a fear of Gods judgment: oh have thou yet
say they a taste of the Apple?

237
They surely hold these 3. principles, the first there is no Art in the world
which they do not allow of although God have condemned it in his word, as for
example. They think that the Popish priesthode is good, and Quintinus being at
the Mass of a certain Cardinal, affirmed that he saw the glory of God there.

238
Secondly they affirm that the abuses and corruptions wherewith the world is
infected, is no harm.

240
Thirdly they affirmed that all man's inclination whe^csoeuer it come, be it from
corrupt nature, or evil custom is it is every man's calling.

The books which M. Calvin saw of the Libertines.

297
1. AN instruction, and wholesome admonition how we should live in this world,
and be patient in aduersitye.

2. The Glass of Christians.

Out of M. Zuinglius against the Catabaptistes.

Fol. 5.
THe Catabaptistes cry God, the truth, ye word, the light, the spirit, holiness.
etc. not only mighty but if hypocrisy were not, worthy, and excellent were
their speeches.

7
In what vice soever they are taken, be it adultery, ma^slaughter, theft. etc.
they answer. I have not sinned for I am not any more in the flesh, but in the
spirit, I am dead unto the flesh and the flesh unto me.

9
Those that take part with the Gospel, they rail worse on them then on the
Papists.

11
They spread abroad their books in ye hands of their disciples, boasting every
where yt they could so confute Zuinglius yt they would make him have never a
word to say.

Their Captains being frantic and brainesick men complained to the
Ministers, 12
that they could not live among the wicked, and therefore would they separate
themselves from the Church, because that in their common asse^bly and Church,
there were many that were openly wicked.

They rayled upon the Baptism of infants and said that it is a great
abhominatio^ come from the devil and the Pope. 14


They say they will prove their doctrine, 16
by sheddyng their blood when as they ca^ not prove it by the scriptures.

They rayled on the Ministers and said, that the Ministers hated them, because
they found fault with their evil life.

They said no man was Gods child, 33
but they which fulfilled the law and wrought righteousness.

They boasted much of the spirit, 35 62
when they had no Scripture, and under the pretense of the spirit they wrought
much filthynes.

They prophesied domes day should be on the Ascension day two years after. 63


They held freewill. 75


They reject the authority of the old Testament. 76


They brag of ye certainety of knowledge in doctrine without the word and say
We are thus certified from God. 77


They say there is no Sacrament of the Lords Supper, without their
congregation. 81


Those which are not of their sect are abominable before God, 89
neither can they do any thing that is not abbomination.

They must in this life depart from all evil, and those that be ungodly, for
proof they quote Apo.

They make three sects.

videl. Romanistes Papists. Protestauntes half Papists. Anabaptists perfect
Christians.


92.
When they have drawn any man unto their sect they straightly charge him, not to
come at the table with him that is not of their faction, neither at the Sermons
of any man that is an enemy to their sect.

100.
They boast perfection.

They have aunsweres reueiled unto them.

107.
All that are not of their own sect, they say that they are infidels.

182.
They say that the dead sleep, both in soul and body till the day of Judgment.

187.
They affirm that both the devil and the wicked shall be saved.

190.
They deny that Christ is Gods son by nature.

Out of Zuinglius.

THe reason wherefore (gentle Reader) I have out of these three excellent
learned men, gathered the particular opinions of these heretics, was not that
I think the Family of Love, to be culpable in all those points, which I have
set down although I dare avouch the most of these errors out of HN. his
writings and other the letters and writings of the Family: but this
especially moved me, that when any either of ye ministry, which know not
neither have read, and also the simple, which are acquainted by conference with
the opinions of the Family may hereby hereafter have some light and skill both
of the short propositio^s by me gathered, and also of diverse Reasons of the
Family, being mere heretical being set down in this end of the book might
hereafter (when they shall here any of the Family, slide into any of these
affirmations) know whence such speeches have been learned and avoid them:
gentle reader the Lord give thee understanding in all things, and lighten all
thy ways by the candle of his word, that the day star arising in thy heart thou
may grow to a further knowledge of the Lord, with a fervent desire to do
his will, and to live to learn, and learn to live, to tread the steps of
Gods son, and to dye his servant: He this grant unto thee, who has given
himself for thee, to whom be eternal praise, power, and glory. Amen.

Tim. 4. chap. 6. verse. 87.

IF thou put thy brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a
good Minister of Christ, which have been nourished up in the words of faith,
and of good doctrine, which thou have continuallye followed. But cast away
profane and old wives Fables and exercise thy self unto godliness. So be it.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate Anno. 1579.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


