A SECOND MEMENTO FOR Magistrates. Directing how to reduce all offenders, and
being reduced, how to preserve them in unity and love both in Church and
common wealth. By W. W. Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains
in Ordinary.

printer's device of Roger Jackson, representing an eagle and eaglet facing the
sun over a mountainous landscape (McKerrow 280)

AT LONDON Imprinted for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleet Street near the Conduit: 1608.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Great Britains most renowned Monarch, James the
first, of France and Ireland King, defender of the says, etc.
MOst dread Sovereign:
GOd which has put the Globe of this little world into the hands of your rule,
does in the bottomless graces wherewith he has imbrodered your Scepter,
merit your thankefulest recognition of his divine goodness, in whose bosom
their Spring arises, and oblige the Christian Nations of your Kingdoms in
straightest bonds of loyalty unto your Sacred Person, the next and immediate
Conduit by which all happiness is derived unto them.

Your Highness religious affections to the service of God, experienced in
those effects of your royal desires with best offices to glorify his eminent
and eternal being, has a most sure promise of blessings from the immortal
rewarder of holy works. And for so much as your Majesty in your admirable
wisdom studying by all means to continuate the tranquil peace of the
Gospel, has seen it necessary to propose, and by intimation of your
gracious pleasure enjoined one uniform order of worship due to Gods divine
excellency. The Subjects of your Dominions whose toungs are the true witnesses
of their hearts, to acknowledge that supreme Power which is in existent in
your princely rule, will not fail by their cheerful obedience the true
workemaister of happy State, to manifest their religion to God, and submission
to your just command!

If any through a wanton Superfluity of fancy, shall disaccustome their
deuotiue actions from the train whereunto your Laws would range them: God
shall in time reveal better things unto their apprehension, and by their
industry, whom your Majesty has deputed for the administration of government,
frame them to that method of devotion which in the Prerogative of your wisdom
is prescribed unto all.

In mean time, I know he which shall oppose himself against this evil, now
grown headdie by custom and suffrance of time, lies open for the racket of
malice to band him into the hazard of undoing, the thoughts whereof seconded
with the knowledge of my own disabilitie, to write in a matter of so great
consequence, had kept me resolute in my resolved silence, but that my private
conscience, and sorrow to see this unnatural distraction, wherein the body
does refuse to follow the will of the head, counterpoized the validity of all
other opposite respects, and gave confidence in your Majesty for my
protection, who having nothing better then my self to bestow upon your
Majesty, do with best alacrity of spirit, deuote and give my all, to be
disponed at your Princely pleasure.

God which ballanceth the times, prolong the time of your most glorious
Regiment, and so strengthen your sacred power in the continuance of that
unmatchable goodness, wherewith he has honored all your lives time, that
when the time of times shall come, wherein time shall be without time, you may
be received into his timelesse eternity.

Your Majesty's faithful Subject and humble Servant WILLIAM WILKES.

BY THE KING.
THe care which we have had, and pains which we have taken to settle the
affairs of this church of England in an uniformity as well of doctrine, as of
government, both of the^ agreeable to the word of God, the doctrine of the
Primitive church, and the laws heertofore established for those matters in
this realm may sufficiently appear by our former actions, etc.

In the mean time, both they may resolve either to conform themselves to the
church of England, and obey the same; or else to dispose of themselves and
their families some other ways, as to them shall seem meet. And the Bishops
and others whom it concerns, provide meet parsons to be substitutes in the
place of those who shall wilfully abandon their charges upon so light causes.
Assuring them that after that day, we shall not fail to do that which Princely
providence requires at our hands. That is to put in execution all ways and
means, that may take from among our people all grounds and occasions of Sects,
deuisions, and unquietness, whereof as we wish there may never be occasion
given us to make proof, but that this our admonition may have equal force in
all men's hearts to work an universal conformity. So we do require all
Arch-bishopps, Byshopps, and other Ecclesiastical parsons, to do their
uttermost endeauours by conferences, arguments, perswations, and by all other
ways of love and gentleness, to reclaim all that be in the Ministry, to the
obedience of our Church laws.

For which purpose only, we have enlarged the time formerly prefixed for their
remove, or reformation, to the end, that if it be possible, that uniformity
which we desire, may be wrought by clemency, and by weight of reason, and not
by rigor of law.

And the like aduertizement we do give to all civil Magistrates, Gentlemen,
and others of understanding, as well abroad in the counties as in Cities and
Towns, requiring them also not in any sort to support, favor, or countenance
any such factious Ministers in their obstinacy. Of whose endeavors we doubt
not but so good success may follow as this our Admonition with their
endeavors may prevent the use of any other means to retain our people in
their due obedience to us, and in unity of mind to the service of Almighty
God.

Given at our Manor of Ottlands the 16. day of July 1604. in the second year
of our reign of England, France and Ireland, And of Scotland the xxxvii. God
save the King.
OBEDIENCE Or Ecclesiastical Union.
WE have now long time been more disputant, then agent in Religion. and whereas
we should study to do what we know, we are set in inquisition to find, what
we may believe.

Such is the supple, and restless volubilitie of wavering minds, whose
licentious fervor, will not admit strength to ground and settle them in
dutiful obedience unto a stayed rule: That there is no Error so absurd, but
some do embrace it; No Paradox so incredulous, but some do believe it; no
Action so irreligious, but some do countenance it; not any Sentence so
certain, but some by contradiction, do call it into needless and subtle
dispute. That which wrought much hurt amongst the ancient Christians,
Procopius lib. 3. Goth.
has greatly troubled the State present, and would dangerously hazard the
government both of Church and Commonweal, if Princely determination had not
prevented it.

\ To dispute, and by trial of disputation to strengthen the weak, as Saint
Paul did with the Christians at Troada: or to convince the errant, as the
Saints Act 20, Eusebius eccl. hist. lib. 6. cap. 24. Trip. lib. 1. cap. 11.
did; Augustine with Poscentius: Sabinus with Photius, and Origin with
Berillus: or to determine things doubtful, as the religious and grave reverend
Fathers did in their councels and Synods; or to settle the Peace of the Church
as in the colloqui at Ratisbonn An. 1541. An. 1603. Ia. 14.
appointed by Charles the fifth; and it pleased his Majesty in the late
interlocutorie conserence, with the Lords, Bishops, and others of the clergy,
at Hampton Aust. lib. 2. cap. 13. and 14. contr. Crescon.
Court, has always had special approbation.

But yet (if I may in the liberty of a humble spirit, freely speak, what some
of you, (the Brethren of the newfangled faction) in the merit of your
contentious disposition should patiently hear) to live in obedience to orders,
orderly by judgment of decision established, is more answerable to faith,
profitable for the Church, and honorable for our calling.

By the first, we bring light to the truth, and confirm knowledge: by the
second, we give life to the truth, and after our example direct others in the
religious service of God; a duty amongst all Offices appertaining to man, most
excellent and most deserved; whether we consider the bottomless graces
wherewith Heavens hand has embrodered our state in general; or unfold before
our selves, the unspeakable blessings he has enfolded upon us in particular.

My private life has given me the right hand of Opportunity, to read what
has been disputed, and finding the christian cause become more contemptible,
for that the rules of Government have been so disputable, do (without all
partial construction of what I have read) in singleness of heart, wish that
the spirit of singularity in some particulars of you, giving place unto
public Judgment, had rather by dutious actions conformed it self unto
Authority, then by unjust opposition, endeavored for licentious liberty.

Action is the best blazoner of virtues virtue; The truest approuer of
Learnings value. The soundest witness of hearts desire; and then worthy
principal acceptance. When it works by the Line not of opinion, but of
Judgment: not of private fancy, but of public rule; patternd unto us in the
laws both of God and men.

. 2.
The just constitutions of lawful Princes, are the settled boundaries of duty
unto their Subjects, and do confine every man within the lists of his
particular obedience, as the land-markes in the fields do limmit out their
inheritance; He which Deutr. 27.
removed these was held accursed. Consider I pray you whether he who
uncharitably offends against those, can in his offense be reputed blessed.

The determinations of God, are the uncontrollable warrants of power unto
Princes. The infallable rules both of their duty unto the highest ruler, and
authority over the greatest that are ruled.

Rules made known unto them, not so much by the dim light of nature, as by the
everlasting director of holy actions, in the evidence of Scripture, wherein are
the truly honorable instructions for higher powers to command their
subjects, and most honest directions for Subjects to obey higher powers.

Unto the King it is a pattern and card to guide Austin. lib. de vera relig.
cap. 31. vida. lib. 2. de Reip. dignit.
by; unto the Subjects it is a light wherewith to judge aright of the laws
under which they live. So that whatsoever is good in the laws of Princes, or
commendable in the duty of subjects. That same is as it were coppied out of,
and justified by the eternal law of God, by whose powerful grace Kings do
reign, and by whose gracious influence Princes do Sap. 7.
decree righteousness.

If you had made this law the chief head and principal ruler of your
actions, and held it so ordinary in your thoughts, as it was common in your
talk; it would have bred in your religious minds, a dutiful estimation of
Princely offices, and made you respective of public obseruances, if your
minds be religious, this being an Axiom invincible, that nothing is more
ancient in the laws of God; nothing more pregnant to advance common good,
then obedience.

First, to God, the supreme guide of this worlds mass, to whose sovereign
power all flesh must stoop, and to whose will all kingdoms do owe
conformity, in that he requires.

Secondly, to the King, sent of God to be the Rex dei figuram inter homines
representat. Diotogines lib. de reg.
representer of his Majesty, and the Plutar. li de doctr. principis.
Leutenant of his regencie.

The memory of which subordination, as it serves to drowned all self
conceit, that may hold the King with admiration of his sublimitie, and
strengthen him against all adversary means which interrupt him in the exercise
of that high duty, the divine goodness requires of him: So it does
(obedience to God preserved) bind us generally, without exception, and
particularly, without respect of person, to obey him, cheerfully, without
cunctation, and readily without inquisition, what he ought or may command us
to do, whether it be in causes Ecclesiastical or Civil.

. 3.
That Princes may command the observation and practice of religion in their
Realms, dominions, and kingdoms, according as God informs their consciences
by the direction of his alteaching spirit, and rules of his sacred word, in
the hands of those Priests, whose lips he has sanctified, to be the
treasuries of his wisdom, is by the united practice of all commonweals,
manifestly convinced, and has evidence in the testimonies of the best
common-wealths-men.

Amongst all things incident into the actions of men, there is none more
excellent, then Religion says In Epinenide.
Plato: In it, our cheifest good consists, says Lib. 3. cap. 10.
Lactantius: It is the immovable foundation of Princely honor, says Lib. de
recta side ad Theodosium.
Cyrill. The safest defense of public state, says De conceptione digestoru^.
Justinian. The richest storehouse of man's felicity, says Neceph. lib. 7.
ca. 46
Constantine. And therefore ought to be the Inter caeteras solicitudines quas
amor publi. us preuigili nobis cura indixit, precipuam imperatoriae maiestatis
curam esse perspicimus. verae religionis indagiman. lib. legum Novel. tit. 2.
cheifest care of Majesty's Empire, says Valentinian. In deed most worthy to
be the highest care of all cares appertaining to Pincely rule, both in respect
of the Prince and of the People.

In respect of the Prince, for by religion, and Rex orat habita in Senate.
works according thereunto, God is moved to give life unto their councels,
perfection to their endeavors, and settlement to their throanes; for which
cause, the more eminent they are in regal Authority, the more vigilant they
ought to be in religious piety.

In respect of the People, for that the happiness of our lives does primarily
and principally consist in the well ordering of our lives, according to the
rule of his will who did at the first imbreath life. And when our wills do
yield to the regiment of his will, whose service ought to have the highest care
of all cares, appertaining to this life. We are sure to reeaue at his
merciful hands, all things necessary for the conservation of life, his
providence to guide it, his wisdom to instruct it, his patience to support it,
and mercy to provide for it, with that fatherly affection, which affords his
creatures to serve, and Angels to guarde us. All which prerogatives our lives
enjoy, like so many Testimonies of his love, given by the influence of grace to
make them happy, as the observation of Piety does approve them to be holy.

So is Religion to us, the top of all public good. To the King, the most
valued sacrifice of reingration to God, both to the King and us, the best
assurance of our secular happiness; and most sufficient remonstrance of
celestial blessedness.

In the acknowledged knowledge whereof his Procla^. 24. Octo. 1603
Majesty knowing no greater means then Religion, to make evident the sight of
heaven, and in the judgment both of men and Angels, his thanks to God, and
love to us, amongst all negotiations of State dependant upon his charge;
sithence the Imperial Crown of this Realm descended unto him, (Committing
his own private) labored, first to settle the affairs of Religion, and
service of God; his sole Sovereign Lord, by whose only goodness he holds the
Royalties of his prerogatives, the excellency of his calling, the security of
his content, the prerogative of his security, and glory of his kingdoms.

Secondly, to reform (not the State of the Procla^. 16. July. 1604.
Church, formerly by Law established, as if in any material point he had
found it defective) but the troublesome spirit of some persons whose only
contentment rests, in the prosecutions of their own fantasies, and by his
judicial authority, made known in his admonitorie declarations, to enrayle
those parts of our Christian duties, which novelty with disdain of Antiquity
had licentiously violated.

. 4.
Wherein as his Highness has given us many singular Testimonies and evident
assurances of his Princely resolution, what reason have (you of the faction)
now that his Highness has deliberated, and upon deliberation promulged the
duty which each part shall perform, to refuse the duty imposed? What just
and sufficient cause are ye able to allege wherefore you should not
absolutely condescend in this business, to have your opinions ouerruled by his
definitive sentence?

You cannot misdoubt the sufficiency of his Judgment, thereof you have
already received so good a taste, as that you confess him, (he thanks Humble
petition.
you for it) able of himself to judge the equity of your cause.

I will not wrong you so much as to think that you make any Question of his,
either Leges su^t public. vitae praecepta quibus nos omnes obtemporare semper
opportet, sequide^ omne bonum and equitate^ ipsa^ perpetuo spectant atque ab eo
qui iubendi and exeque^di potestatem habet, proponuntur. Biesius lib. quart de
repub.
Authority to command, or power to execute what he does command. The whole
body of this realm, and every particular member thereof, either in person, or
representation, have with one full voice of tongue, and heart, acknowledged his
rightful Sovereignty, and their obleaged duty, unto the last expense of
blood, so that unless Obedience be in your mouths, as Justice some-time is,
in the mouth of a Lawyer, and not as it ought to be, in your hearts, and
affections, you will not like blasted Branches fall from that body; but with
genuine Submission (not distracted by ouer-pleasing service of your selves, nor
mollified, with that too much reputation of self conceit,) refer your lives
to his Laws; your desires to his will: and your opinion, to his judgment.

If you consider his laws, herein he has performed such godly care that we
may say of them not as Polydore did of the conquerors: Magis sunt ex vsu
Principis quam populi: But as Moses said of the Laws of Israel: There is no
Nation so great that has ordinances, and laws so righteous, this being the
cheifest endeavor of his Highness desire, to have the works of Religion
reuerendly performed, the causes of his Subjects, uprightly determined; and the
Judgments of his Kingdom euenly balanced. All which are actions of most high
and admirable merit, whereunto the hearts of mighty Princes ought continually
to be fashioned.

Of these premises (if you will spare me the weakest of most) and let some one,
or other good man, if you will, make illation, behold, the man that was so
discoursiue upon the method of Obedience. (Good Man he was, and you reputed him
for a good man,) does in the zeal of that reformation you desire, conclude,
that to disobay a King, so complete in all princely indowments: so wise, in
councelling: so powerful in commanding; so respective of public good, and
deuotiue to the service of God, must needs be condemned forwicked and ungodly
rebellion, Page 114.
And (if you please to make him Judge in the action) deserves justly to
receive Gods punishment, Page 112.
which as the Apostle threatens is damnation. Romans 12.


. 5.
You do not I hope think your selves exempted from the inbarment of this
policy, that you should as men lawless with so strong opposition, refuse to
be guided by his laws. They are the wings under which the good do fly; They
are the yoakes under which the evil do labor: Well borne minds will not deny
them, well bredde men will readily accept them, And free generous spirits
endeavor conformity with them.

If you will be free, obaye the Law; If you take away the Law, you take
away liberty, we Libertas aufertur, ablato iure ac legibus: Dionisius
Hallicar. lib. 7.
therefore obaye the Law that we may be free. Cicero in oratione pro Aulo
Cluentio.


Free, not to do what we list, Nullus se^sus priuatus, reru^ mensura est.
Plato. nec libido. Euripides.
Lust is no line to level liberty, nor was fancy at any time the true
measure of duty. But free to do what reason shall by public Ordinations
enjoin; which because they are common to all, (although the Law of the Lex
Alexandri Imperatoris.
Empire do free Princes from the solemnities and formalities of them). His
Highness does with Princely resolution, and you should with Salomonius li. 1.
de principatu.
reverend admiration, acknowledge them for the rules of your actions.

If you yield then that Obedience which in justice they exact, and perverseness
only will deny, you shall be embraced as men rightly indenized in Loyalties
prerogative. But so long as you stand out against them, that Obedience has her
let, and incompatebilitie with you, your tumultarie Agitations will give you
the imputation of disloyalty to the King, repugnance to order, and enmity to
the Church, which requires your zealous labor to maintain it, with the
religious employments of your virtuous and peaceable endeauoures.

Plead not exemption, when the Apostle places every soul under subjection:
Ye are, questionless ye are, marshalled within the listes of this order, and
whatsoever Privilege you assume unto your selves, you have in this, no
pre-eminencie above others, but are with like bands subjected unto
Sovereignty: Pleases it you to withdraw your thoughts from the opinion which
possesses you, and entertain your studies, with those fore-gone Examples of
religious Churchmen before time. You may in their lives, (and Basil. epist.
prima.
the histories of Gods Saints, are the lively examples of Gods commonwealths,)
as in a Gallarie of pleasant Pictures, see the viue Images of loyal spirits,
conforming themselves with all submission; Aaron to Moses; Zadocke to Solomon;
Gregory to Maurilius, etc. Reverend Priests to their lawful Princes, as they
have proceeded in Church business.

You may see the holy consort of Gods deuotiues, with all humility defraying
the tribute of their most due service to heavens Majesty, not as fancy
conceived, but as the authority of their Superiors, (strengthened with his
power who has sovereign superiority in all causes) prescribed.

You may see the Christian armies and Soldiers, sacred unto the service of our
blessed Savior, in the dissemination of his everlasting truth, though equalled
in unity of Ordination, and united in ministerial equallitie, yet performing
their humble and virtuous obedience, to them of their own society, whom only
Order, the preserver of all things had differenced in dignity.

You may see our fatherly guides-men of honorable place, ancient years, and
reverend behavior, gathered together in Counsels and Synods (the assemblies
of divine Ordination to strengthen our spiritual commerce with the free use of
sacred consultations) aduising upon, and prescribing orders, for the
Propagation of religious doctrine, and establishment of holy discipline.

All which their sacred resolutions and holy sanctions, were no sooner
intimated unto the Christian world; but you may see them with unquestionable
obedience received by Princes, as rules of their devotion, regarded by Priests,
as the Canons of their practique religion, and followed by the People, as the
lights of their Christian conversation.

What the reverend Fathers of the Church decreed then, was as much reverenced
by the best Princes, as the best decrees of our reverend Fathers now, are
basely contemned by the worse Subjects, (and with you of the faction) the
persuasion of your own sufficiency, to know and perform the duty which does
most fit you in your perochiall residences has made them the more contemptible.

I know that Nature has interessed every particular of you, Qui libet est rei
suae moderator, rector and arbitrer. in le. in remandata mandati. Lex respicit
ordinem ad bonu^ commune. Aquin. lib. 2. q. ^^.
with ability to prescribe rules unto your selves, in your private actions;
but those rules are not laws to bind others, because they have respect more
to your own private, then reference to the public good; and Natures self,
which has preuiledged you with such prerogative, does disanull the liberty,
if your rules be repugnant to the laws of Superiors: which gives me hope, you
will make no more appeals from your Ordinaries unto your selves, but as men
conformed to better advise, accept directions from our grave Prelates, the most
competent judges of decency in this case, and with sobriety perform the
Offices of your Ministry according to the prescript of holy rule.

It is safer to leave the Pains of your conduct unto the Law, then unto
liberty; and more honorable to order your designs with correspondencie to a
stayed rule, then irregularlie to work by the prescript of fancy, the mutual
impartment of Christian Johannes de Turrecremata.
ciuillitie, being then most rightly administered when it is communicated by the
line and level of Justice.

Wherefore since it has pleased God to endue you with capacity of discourse,
and make you not seruilely subject to command, as beasts: but voluntarily
Eccles. 15.
inclinable to reasons dictates, as men; do not suffer affection stubbornly to
carry you away, but (as you are men of judgment,) when judgment does not give
order and direction for the producement of your actions, distaste the very
Propension that leads you unto the action.

Questionless you could not walk in this way of singularity, nor so
irkesomely contend for things so much prohibited, but that you permit your
understanding too much reflexe upon your selves, and who will marvel when the
admiration of your own skill shall hold you, if the conceit of your
obedience be drowned in your own conceit. But you are the true Philodoxes of
your own opinions, and will I suppose rather hazard an opposition to the Good
of the Church, and peace of the Country, then have your zeal guided by the
limmits of any laws.

. 6.
The more eye-full ought you the civil Magistrates to be over this creeping
and incroaching evil, that error by Schism break not, what truth by
authority has builded.

To preserve the peace of the Church is a special prerogative belonging to the
supreme power of the highest commander: and all be it in his Royal person
there be great excellencies, (his Princely mind being enriched with so many
heroicke and divine virtues) yet because one, as one cannot possibly govern
many, his Highness has with Kingly indulgence communicated part of this
royalty with you, and instiled you Justices of peace, that the mention of your
names may put you in mind of your duties for the conservation of peace Sicut
vita in homine, ita pax in regno, and sic sanitas nihil est nisi temperantia
humoru^, sic pax est cum vnu^-quodque retinet ordinem suu^, et sicut recedente
sanitate tendit homo ad interitum? Sic discedente pace regnum tendit ad
desolationem, vnde vltimum quod attenditur pax est. Vnde Philosophus inquit
sicut medicus, ad sanitatem sic defensor respub. tendere debet ad pacem. Aquin
in mat. cap 12
without which if so be it were possible that all other complements of common
good might be had in their full perfection, nevertheless the commonwealth
that should possess them, divorced from concord, could be but a spectacle of
commiseration. Even as that body which adorned with sundry admirable helps,
wants health the chiefest thing that nature desires.

Prosperity honors Peace as her parent, and the prosperous peace of all
well ordered commonweales, does acknowledge religion for her cheifest stay, as
well in regard of that blessed protection which Gods merciful hand bestows
upon them, who faithfully serve him, as also for the serviceable disposition
which Religion works both in the governors, and them that are governed.

When they from whose habilities the duties of command and service proceed,
do with constant resolution of mind, acknowledge Heavens divine Empire over
all, and with assured confidence repose in the assistance of God Almighty,
that inflameth them which are in place of authority with desire to resemble
God in the action of common good, and humbles inferiors with reverence to
acknowledge their rule by whose industrious labors the Rivers of that good are
set open unto the comminaltie.

It qualifieth the Magistrate to rule with consscience, in the dread of his
judgment, whose providence is the producer of order; it makes the subject for
conscience, willing to obey, fearing the severity of divine revenge, which
follows them that are wilfully disobedient unto order. So conscience the
daughter of Religion, keeps them both, awefull to swerve from that which is
right, and makes them diligent obseruers of all effectual furtherances of the
Churches peace, the sure conseruatorie of kingdoms happiness.

For which cause, the best commonwealths men, always had in detestation this
bitter strife and envying, whatsoever the differences were, from whence it did
arise, and with special care endeavored a universal and uniform agreement in
religion. The united and monacord practice, whereof, has the happy condition of
public society, so closlie wouen into it, that neither can be, where both
are not.

If I should endeavor the illustration of this, by matching it with the
contrary in former succession of ages, I could produce many fearful miseries,
which both Church and commonweal, have sustained by the restless affections
of disagreeing minds in matters of this kind.

Pleases it you, to set before your eyes, the mischief wherewith the Western
Church of old, Proclam. in Scotl. 1582
and our late neighbor Church (now by a most blessed union most happily
incorporated) has been perplexed by the same plausible and fair pretenses,
you shall find just cause to fear, least your readiness to favor
proceedings of such consequence, shall cause this kingdom to feel those
evils Facilius impeditur acquirendu^ qua^ impediatur acquisitum. ff. de his
quae sunt sui vel alien.
which hereafter cannot be so easily remedied, as by your wisdom now they may
be timely prevented.

You cannot but see what hatred this difference in opinion concerning the
complements of Church actions, has already caused amongst many, both of the
Clergy and Laytie.

Do you not see what opposition, what distraction, what division has grown
from this variety, what passions have been stirred, what quarrels prosecuted,
what disgraces offered with mutual exchange to either party; what petitions
have been framed? what companies assembled? what lawless private
subscriptions required against subscription lawful and public? what parts
have been taken? what conceits urged, and calumniations suggested, no less
to stop the stream of the Law, then to take away all ornaments of comeliness,
and means of difference in Ecclesiastical order?

Seeing these inconveniences, you must needs see, that a continuing distance of
Ceremonies, will occasion through continuing variance of minds, continual
hatred, the mother of sedition, the mother of tumult, the mother of
insurrection, the mother of depopulation and ruin. Wherefore that you may with
less trouble prevent a more stirring and actual infection, show your special
care to appease the disturbance, suffer not mischief to grow to head by your
heedlesse regard, or private supportation of these too familier evils, but do
your uttermost endeavors to remove these bitter Antipathyes.

\ In time (Gentlemen) in time, in time, least when the bridle of Obedience is
broken, and the plumes of Pride have mounted newfanglisme so high, that it both
can and will, either by fraud ouer-reache, or power ouer-beare the Laws
whereunto it should be subject, you labor in vain to cure the Annosa passio
medicame^to momentaneo non curatur.
wound; Old soars are not easily cured.

So long as the blithfulnesse of your aspect reflexeth upon them, they will
endeavor so much as in them lies, quite and clean to bannish from their
cogitation, all that may sound unto conformity. But if you with-drawe your
hand, and leave their actions vnwitnessed by your Liberality (which is well
known to have drawn dry the fountains of some men's wealth) for such men's
sustenance and relief, they will follow the things which now they shun, and
more ceremoniously perform the function which belongs to this pre-eminence.

Truth will not permit them to be so ignorant, as they would, and the want of
your side propts, will make them study to go upright as they ought, etc.

If they had not in some places received so many Testimonies of affection from
some of you, their endeavors had long since moultred between their fingers,
whether those some have affected and followed this course, in desire to uphold
opposition against Bishops, or to seize one the remaining patrimony of holy
religion, I have not attained so perfect a sight, that I should enter into your
breasts, where lodges the knowledge of your will and worth. But I fear and
would God I might but fear, least that these which do so earnestly solicit
for Innovation, and persuade the change of a known old good, under the
pretense of a new better, do level at nothing more then that all things in
this settled State, being disorderly hudled, themselves may glide through,
whilst others do fish in the troubled waters.

An Action of such general detestation in the eye of every wise understanding
heart, and of such eternal prejudice to peace-able government, that I list
not to cast the least aspersion of such staifull ignomie upon any of you.

Opinion it self, in some Newfanglists (both Ecclesiasticke and Layicke,
bewitched with strong enchantments,) labors under the countenance of hatred
unto Ceremonies, without any more ceremony to impouerish the Church of her
Princely endowments, and disable Majesty in the prescription of Orders for
Churches rule: And since their labors could not so long continue, but as they
are the marks of faction, and instruments of division; The King (who is the
head of Justice, from whose power Authority is derived unto you, his
subalterne and subordinate both Justices and Magistrates) has with special
words required you, to afforde no supportation unto the factious ministers of
that bewitched opinion.

Peaceful rule, is more pleasefull to him, and when you please, to yield the
performance of this required service which you duly owe him, their submission
unto that rule, whereby our deuotiue actions in the service of God are to be
framed, will crown his Princely regiment with a blessed union of wills, and
consent of desires betwixt God and our selves.

The breach of this union makes a breach of peace, by scandal in deed,
contention in speech, and Schism in outward behavior, a sin S. Tho 22. q
39. ar. 2. ad. 13.
of all sins which may be against our neighbor most hurtful, and the S.
Austin. lib. 2 de bap. cap. 6.
greatest, because it is against the good of the multitude; so that you must
Edw. 3. An. 1.
needs acknowledge it to be within your ward: and as in your quarter Sessions
you May. Fitsharb.
ought, in your private Sessions you may enquite of offenses in this cause
committed.

. 7.
And fith that you of the Graund-Iuries, together with the Churchwardens, in
your several places, have the inquisition of these things given unto you in
charge. If you be persuaded the cause why you were first instituted, was that
the truth might have the better evidence: if you know that you are chosen to
be instruments of truth, that you are intelligencers for the commonwealth,
that you are the ears and eyes of Justices and Ordinaries. If you mark how
the laws concerning these matters of the Church, are opened before you, and
openly given you in charge, at the times both of visitation and Session, to the
end, not only your selves may be truly informed, but every other which hears
it, may with God and Angels witness with, or against you. Take heed I beseech
you how you neglect so great a duty.

My ear did tell my soul a wonder, when it heard that in such a settled State,
neither the Bishop in his visitation, nor the Justices in their Sessions, could
(for these many years) have notice given them of such exorbitancie, either by
presentment or indictment.

But know, o know, that when you lay your hands upon the sacred book, to
teueale unto Justice what is done amiss, to the end that judgment might
reform it. The concealment of these misdone things shall be more dear to you,
then the penalty can be grievous to the party indicted, or presented; for by
you, the party delinquent may loose his mortal and fading both goods and
livings: but you fill your lives with shame, your state with danger, your names
with ignomie, your houses with blood, your hearts with distrust, and forfeit
your Souls which by oath you have pawnd to Gods divine justice.

But poor souls, the motive cause of this offense by concealment of things
indictable and presentable, is not in your selves; it is the pleasure of your
rulers which does carry you as the wind does drive Feathers which way they
please, and ambition of your Pastors, who to cover their own faults, and
vncontroulably to continue their faultfull practice, do labor to make you
without conscience, as Idols without sense.

. 8.
The more worthy blame are you (the associates of this Newfangled faction) to
mislead poor deceived souls into such unhallowed actions. Dispense with their
oaths you cannot, and how you will excuse them of perjury I see not.

You hoodwinke your simple agents with facility of glozing speeches, and bear
them in hand, that such and such Articles shall not be given them in charge.
And have you indeed at any time indented with the Bishop, or compounded with
his Chauncelour or Archdeacon, to limmit the charge which they give (according
to the prescript of your content)? then have you received too much favor of
them, who have least reason to allow disorder. And it may be truly said, such
halfe-waking Governors, have given you, both heart and hand to cross the Law
in practice, with the practice of your laws in devise, how ever you have
complotted with them, The King is little beholding to you, or them.

For either such Guardians of the spiritualties do follow the execution of
their offices, only as a Trade with unconscionable thirst of gain unto
themselves, more then with desire to advance the common good of the Church.
Au^^itia matter est omniu^ malorum, and maxim cu^ in animis non priuatorum sed
magistratuu^ innascatur. Justin No^ell. Co^st. 8
And nothing does more dazell the eye of Judgment, or vnstrengthen the band of
duty, then covetousness: specially when she is sovereign commaundresse in
the minds of such ordinary Maiestrates.

\ 2 Or, they think these Cannons and Constitutions (the due observation
whereof is committed to Subdito fat non est lege^ iniquitatis prostringere.
Vlpian.
their trust) are not good. And to accuse the laws of that iniquity which
could never as yet be justified by any their contumelious inuectiues, is a
defect unbeseeming their Authority, whether we consider their places in
relation to higher powers, whose hands they are, and therefore with united
hearts should set forward the execution of orders prescribed: Or in reference
to others whom Law has confined within the borders of their jurisdiction,
amongst whom they should be fathers and fauters of unity and order.

3. Or themselves are Puritans in heart, and then they ride the road way of
Athisme, in keeping those their dignities, Rooms and Offices, so much
contrary to their puritanized opinion.

4. Or they conceive it skilleth not of what sort their religion be, or with
what different variety they perform those religious duties which in reason
and conscience they owe to Godward; And yet the very Turks keep themselves
in one and Azor. 26.
the same inviolable uniformity of service to that one God whom they
acknowledge not, permitting Azor. 47.
any dishonorable alteration. Because they know that to swerve in the least
points which they Azor. 13.
are persuaded to be true, is error in it self and enmity to God.

5. Or it may be Justice concealed, or injustice unseen, is all one, or of
small difference with them God forbid such an opinion should ever enter a man's
understanding, who has the honor to bear the name of a Divine, or Lawier. If
that were true, a man need not to keep in rule and order the operations of his
soul, which is the true seat of virtue, but Iudex non potest mutare pena^ a
lege statuta^. l. final. ne sanctum bapt. iteretur.
only endeavor to be just so far forth as it may come to the knowledge of
men, and from such no good service may be drawn or good expected. For where
Impiety is Justice in the ruler, all kinds of treacheries are open to the
inferior.

Legislator minimas dunt^xit mulctas Iudicibus co^mittat. Plato. l. 9. de. l.
ne in rebus maioribus arbitrio proprio Iudices abutantur, and legibus
sapientiores se este arbitrentur. Martia^ l^ad Turpilianu^.
6 Or they suppose their authority invested with Power to pardon, where the
Law does punish; if their supposall run upon those penalties, which the Law
has left attributary to their discretion, the supposition is allowed. The
least amercements, fines and penalties are left to them, (small things in the
eye of the Law, are as nothing) And those not many, least any man should seem
wiser then the Law, and through liberty in small things, abuse his will in
matters of greater moment. But where the Laws with special words have
entailed a punishment upon the fact committed against their rule, they cannot
without sin remit or dispense in it. The Laws are above them as they are
above others, and must be Lords of men, not men Lord, of them.

Leges hominu^ non homines legum dominos esse oportet. Pausanius apud Plut.
Your actions (my masters of the faction) may coulourablie give our Rulers the
imputation of such partial and vnapprouable government, but howsoever you
stroke and smooth your followers with comfort of your pretended interest. In
those rulers no man charitably minded will suppose such deiection of mind in
men so grave, so learned, as to gleane in your fields what should relieve them,
or learn in your Schools that which may direct them.

I look more to the insight of their judgment, which cannot but see their own
fall in your rising, their ebb in your flow, their weakness in your
strength, their no-being when you are: and therefore sithence Silence argues
consent; and sufferance of error, gives demonstration of error, in them that
suffer it: If I were worthy to counsel them, (who are so wise in all the
counsels of the Law) they should, first, withdraw the veil wherewith you do
labor to cover the Law. Co^sentire est facere cum possis arquere. Glossa. ad
Romans 1.
He which smoothereth the light of the Law from others, does Eclipse the
light of conscience in himself.

Qui alios ab errore no^ reuocat, seipsum errare demo^strat. Cap. qui alios de
Haereticis.
Secondly, see and procure so much as in them lies all and every Cannons and
orders of the Church to be in all points duly observed. He who in the extent of
his Government, neglects the observation of that which the Law counsels, his
endeavors have their issue in incurable inconveniences.

Boni ipsoru^ conatus in exitus imedicabiles de sinu^t. Joseph. in proemio
antiq. Iudaicarum,
Thirdly, not spare to execute the penalties in them severally mentioned upon
any that shall wittingly or wilfully break or neglect to observe them. The
execution of the Law is the life of the Law, and when the law of public
constitution has lost his place, private fancy will breed disturbance of
peace in every place.

Fourthly, not measure the validity of ordinances by the slight conceit
which you have of things commanded, but by the common good, for which they are
propounded and published. Upon the head of the Law all specialties of common
good are dependent: He which remembers this, cannot but hate Opportet odisse
illos qui scribu^t decreta co^tra leges. Eschin. contra Clesiph.
them whose pens are ready to write decrees against the Laws, and with all
industry endeavor so to draw the Circumference of his government, that every
line of the Law may have his union in the centor of obedience to the
settlement of common good.

: 9.
For my last counsel, they are beholding unto you, whose thoughts floating up
and down the faddomlesse bottom of your unsteady conceits, have (according
to the model) enstamped the Cross, Learned disc. pa. 122
the Font, and the Surplesse, with the note of trifles. The more wantons have
you been, and the worse is your example so stubbornlie for trifles (as you
term them) to occasion the contempt of Authority, and to raise such
inexcusable hot contentions Learn. disc. pa. 75.
for trifles.

The quiet repose of the Church (to which you ought to live, rather then unto
your selves) requires you: First to accustom your minds even in trifles to
regard the authority of Laws; The long permitted contempt of lesser things
does give heart of boldness to the contempt of greater.

Secondly, to compose your labors in subjection to his rule, by whose supreme
authority they are commanded, and upon whose favor next under God the
flourishing estate of the Church and Gospel of Jesus Christ has his
dependencie. Know you not Obedientia est praetiosa and praeclarissima regu^
veneranda corona: sine qua no^ very reges sed vt priuati eru^t and reputabuntur
sine corona. Feretius de re militari. pa 88.
that the honor of the King consists in the loyal hearts of his people,
that their true obedience, is his Crown and dignity, then can you not but
know, he that hinders or denies obedience, deminisheth the dignity of his
crown: A vice which no good heart can so much as conceive without horror.

Lear. disc. pa. 76.
A Schoolemaister of yours has said: It is the duty of a true Pastor, to
observe those things which are commanded by the lawful Authority of the
Church, concerning ceremonial matters for order, and comeliness sake and
edification: and not to control public Authority by his private judgment.
If you would frame and model your selves by assaye of action suitable unto this
lesson, your obedience to the holy ordinances of the Church, would give us a
sound testimony of your honor to the sacred word, by whose special warrant
her laws do exact your obedience. But herein you have not as yet infeoffed
your selves. Therefore if I shall pourtray the substance of the discoursers
judgment, and set it forth by those colors under which you have quartered
your selves, You must either by your disobedience conclude, that the Authority
of this Church is unlawful, or by your inuectiues against the authorized
ordinances of this Church, exclude your selves from the number of true Pastors.

Take which you will, the choice is yours. Upon the first I think you will not
adventure; and the second, is too much unpleasing unto your expectation, yet
worthily cast upon you, by that good spirit which directs your fiery toungs
in the heat of your zeal scandalously to inueigh, and mal^partly to control
the State of this Church so happily established, only therefore because it
concurreth not in opinion and sentence with you.

You control the Government, and censure it to Admo. pa. ^5. Hay any. pa 13.
be Antichristian: You control the State, and charge it with maiming and
deforming the body of Christ.

You control the Rulers and Princes, and call Gilb. to Engl. and Scotl. pa 5.
9. 11.
them trayters, destroyers of their spiritual Fathers, Consumers of their
country. Rebellious children.

You control the Lords of the most honorable privy Counsel, and accuse
them of violent oppression Epis. from Scotland before reform. no enemy. pa. 3.
4.
of Gods Saints. Yea you brag, that you dare control them, because you know
of no power but from above, and their power as all their force is bent (you
say) to bereave Jesus Christ of his government.

You control the Laws, and judge them to be Fen. atque Bridges. pa. 5.
Suppl. pa. 95.
Sanctuaries of all wickedness in this opposition against you. You control
the Judges, and blame them as suffering impiety, to bear sway against the
majesty of God.

You control the Parliament, and condemn it 2. Admo. pa. 3.
as a Court where all honest men shall find lack of equity. You control
the Convocation house as a Throgin. dia. 4.
house of Devils, and account the Clergy there assembled, intolerable
oppugners of Gods glory.

\ You control Bishops, and call them incarnate Hay any. 28 Vdal. dial. 1
devils; bastardly governors; enemies to God; the relics of Antichrist; the
plague of the Church: and report Cartvv. 2. repl. pa. 414
the best of them to be less honest, then the worst Puritan.

You control the Ministry, and deny it to be Admo pa. 2. 4.
a right ministry of God; The ministers for the greater number, you term
ignorant Asses; filthy Swine; Preface to the Deni.
Popish Priests, haulting Neutrals, Forlorn Atheists: amongst whom (when your
spirit is Searcher) nothing Gllby. pa. 20. 3. 30. 53. 89. Epist Fr. Scot.
before reform. no enemy. etc.
else is to be found, but a troop of bloudy-soule murderers, and sacrilegious
Church-robbers.

You control the whole Commons and Inhabitants of this Realm, (who directed
by the Churches public order, do make reverent esleeme of ancient
obseruances, according to the religion now established) 1. 2. admo.
And sentence not only them, but those also Danger. posit. l. 2.
which go unto their Churches for Infidels. By which means you make the
Catholics to bavvke our Churches.

There was never any State more Turckishly handled Surv. pa. 56
by unchristian calumniations, then this State has been, and yet is, by
diverse of you our Geneuating passauantians.

For whereas the King in his princely persuasion of that profitable use, which
the whole Church of this Kingdom may have in the due observation of the
Cannons and Constitutions agreed upon, has by his Royal command, commended
them unto our practice. There are of you, and is one special Archfactioner
Rector ecclaesie Elaundunensi^
amongst you, who daily exclaimeth against them as Popish and Superstitious,
disclaimeth their execution, as sinful and damnable: and as if he would strike
up the Drum unto Sedition, does under a high commanding form, adjure and
charge his people to join and hold with him: what should make him so much to
forget his duty to the King, humility to the Church, charity to his
neighbors, and mercy which he owes to himself, his wife, and his children?
I will not now examine: but if he had kept his orderlesse opinions private, and
not made them the common subjects of public discourses, to frame in the hearts
of his hearers a dislike of the state present, and fancy of his faction; it
would have been (in my poor opinion) though no way approuable yet more
pardonable.

: 10
Such contumelious maledictions (you the Majors and Magistrates of his
Highness Cities and Towns corporate) do hear many. What may hinder that
you will not, or does affright you that you dare not, but make approbation of
every both speech and action, whereof they give you evidence; is best known
within your selves, where no eyes do shine but yours.

Your authority to see the Laws of Gods worship Cartw. 1. ^eply.
duly executed, and orders of the Church reverently observed, has the clear
light of general acknowledgment. And if it were so freely performed by you, as
it is fully permitted to you, these ill-languaged Nouellists could not have
gotten such gentell audience in your public assemblies, nor disobedience to
Ecclesiastical Constitutions so much tainted the reputation of your Citizens.

It must not be denied you, that our Fathers never had any society so
warrantable for institution, or wise for government, that could retain all her
parts in due obedience. Man's will is by Nature auerse from all obedience to the
sacred Laws of his Nature, and in the deprauation of his mind, would imploye
all both wit and valor, to the extremities of evil, had not that wisdom
which ordains order and regiment obseruable in pollitique affairs, by Laws
provided to frame our outward actions to that common good, for which societies
were ordained.

These Laws are like so many instructiue Bridles to restrain the headlong
course of self-will, always in love with her own councels, and to guide it
in the way which Judgment with consent has approved: The Raynes are in your
hands, and had you euenly borne them, Newfanglisme in going backward from the
State, could not have gotten so far forward in opposition to the State. But
too much, or too little, as too soon, or too late, has always been
dangerous in government, and your ill-carriage has given some opportunity to
win head of you, whom otherwise you might have brought and kept in an
uniformity of Rain.

\ To attribute this defect unto your unskillfulness in the manage of public
occurrents, it is a disgrace I would no way give to the simplest. Virtuous men
do oftentimes err, and you may fail in this business, not because you
would, but for that it is of more hard digestion, then your virtue can well
overcome.

The Sleights of this Schism are cunning, the devises subtle, the panges
vehement, the affections earnest, the passions unruly, and attempts impetuous,
with contempt of your magistracy, and despite to the lawful ordination of
our Clergy: All which are so palliated with a seeming gravity in their
behavior, and purity of Gospel in their mouths, that to the trial of it,
there appertains a great deal more then ordinary conceit can reach unto.

The greater cause have you () for seeking your own advise in these things, to
cleave unto the Counsels of those reverend Prelates, to whom the resolutions
of doubts in these causes, is by the Law of God and man referred, as in other
causes you would to the reverend Judges, those Sages of the land.

And to attend the command of the supreme Commander, whose sovereignty must
give you warrant for the order in doing all things, not only appropiate to
your Corporations, but also pertinent to the practice of religion, the due
reverence whereof, brings with it the happy continuance of every commonweal.

And since his Judgment, by whom all other inferior judgments in congruitie
of reason are to be ouerruled, has propounded this order of divine service, to
be equally kept, by all his loving subjects of this kingdom, let it not grieve
you, (as you rejoice to Zonaras in Valentinia^.
see him sit in the throane,) to bear a little part with him in the burden,
and within your precincts to see that regardfully performed, which he has
royally established.

You are the Deputies of Majesty, and did you but remember this? you would not
suffer such impudent contempt of Church government, so directly commanded by
the most mature discretion of his royal decrees.

You would not give tolleration to them, who esteem secret Corners and private
Conuenticles, (the Schools of maledictions against princes and rulers) to be
of equal use, with holy Churches, for the public performance of divine
service.

You would not be silent, when those holy Hymns, Venite exultemus, Te Deum
laudamus, Benedictus, are put to silence in your public assemblies.

You would not permit (that peculiar Hymn of Christianity) the blessed
Virgins Magnificat, to be served with a writ of eiectment out of your Churches.

You would not see your people (whose Elders, Ancients, and Majors you are) to
want their weekly Sacrifices of Prayer to God offered in the sacred Liturgies
for the appeasing of Gods wrath, and auerting of public evils due to our
public sins.

\ You would not allow the omission, but endeavor the continued publication
of the Apostolical, Athenasian and Nisen Creed, those treasures of inestimable
price to so many as have not given up the ghost of belief.

You would not give leave to pare away from the service of God that Hymn of
glory (then which) nothing does sound more heavenly in the ears of mortal
men, nor more witness our honor to the holy Trinity.

You would not suffer your Ministers at their own pleasures to alter and
change, to use or not to use that order of Common prayer to God, which divine
wisdom has agreed on, and Permittere no^ debes aliquid fieri contra nostras
praeceptiones occasion religionis. Just. rectori prouinciaru^ Novel. 17.
sovereign authority commanded to be used; but as far forth as you may,
provide that his Princely command be not frustrated by the undutiful
disposition of any.

If any shall offend against the Law, whether he be Lear. disc. pa. 141.
Preacher or hearer, beside the Ecclesiastical Censure which he should not
escape, he is also to be punished in body by the Civil Magistrate.

This is their own rule, whose vntulinesse your hand does so much spare, and
in favor of whom you keep your vnder-sworde of Justice so stiflye sheathed,
that neither the zeal which you owe to the Church, nor regard of Sovereigns
just command can vnscaberd it.

Faction and private respects, do not become Magistrates: but if you will make
a party? the Partialitate^ in ciuitate
Law does show you what side to follow: And although esse tanqua^ ve^men in
Caseo, dixit Baldus. ad. l. vinc. de cadu tolle^d.
you be Magistrates has appointed you a master, whom you are to obey. Duty
both in you and your Ministers, ought to be relative unto that which Kingly
authority does by law prescribe, especially when reason does not enforce,
that the law of reason or of God does enjoin the contrary.

The more unreasonable are those your Parish Rom 13. omnis anima. etc. hoc
quoad spiritualia habet vim praecepti, Ferdma^dus Vasquius contr. verse. ill. l.
1. presat. numer. 125.
Bishops which do so undutifully reject what is commanded, and contentiouslie
seek the innovation of order established, without warrant of that ground
whereupon the change must grow, such inconsideration cannot be well borne
within them, whom learning has enabled much more soundly to discern of these
differences, if parcialitie did not transport their resolutions beyond the rule
of judgment.

You never saw a good Scholar arrogant, for Vbi est in columitas obedientia^
ibi est forma sanae doctrinae. Leo mag. epis. 87.
the more he knows, the more of his weakness he understands. Youth and
Ignorance are the Fountes of Shisme. The least knowledge is ever most proud.
This in some of your conceits, deiects reverend fathers; And to your better
liking, blows up waitlesse youths, to preach insolently to your abused
ignorance, who flatter your preposterous zeal, sink your treasure, undo your
corporations, decay your trades, impouerish your citizens, seduce your
children, missead your servants, and make religion their stalking horse, under
whose belly they shoot at what their appettites do most affect.

\ Many of you do set a higher price on your knowledge in Divinity, then any
reasonable creature will give you for it. Will it please you to look to the
times of old, before Newfanglisme began to purchase resiance within your
walls? you shall find, that unnecessary swaruing from the Practice of the
Church, did never yield experience of good unto your cities.

Consider the time present, wherein your Neuelists do weigh the rules of
religion in a popular balance, which the world knows will be carried away
with very slender circumstances.) And say I pray you, what other may be the
drift of these divisions and subdiuisions, wherewith they of the faction do
tear and turmoile the State and government, but to fashion your minds with
coffeehouse toward the State: and why toward the State? forsooth that when
the cloud of prejudice, and miste of passionate affections, has darkened the
light of your judgment, they may bring in another kind of regiment, and lay
a Yoke upon your shoulders, which your Fathers did never bear. Misfashioned
preconceipts, are easily led with any slight declaration of specialties,
which may give enducements to the conceit.

For this cause they would persuade you to leave this disordered state of ours
(so their charity does Lear. disc. pa. 8.
term it) and with undeniable earnestness do importune Omnia noua
pulchritudine sunt decorata.
you, to give intertainment to that most beautiful (as their fancy does
conceive) order of ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifestly does
bless and prosper in our neighbors hands.

This is that which induces both some of you, and many the common deceived
multitude, to look a squinte at the state of the Church wherein they live, and
in erecting the fabric of their reformation, to cast their eyes upon the
pattern at Geneua.

Is outlandish fashion so fashionable to your desires, that for concurrencie
with them you will be disalegianced unto his Majesty? it shall not be in my
thought, that any true hearted Britain can so far bastardize his natural
affection, that foreign council should be of more moment, to work and frame
in him, the stamp and character of a strange policy, then the command of a
most just King, to keep him in an order of uniformity, so well beseeming the
Church and conformable to the government of our country.

I could in due moderation plead in bar against you: the practice of such
reformalists in some other place, where experience has found, and Authority
proclaimed the method of Church regiment, which they so earnestly quest for, to
be unsound in divinity, Proclam. Scot. 1582.
derogatorie to Princely rule, and only maintainable by complots of seditious
execution: so unblessed has it been in our neighbors hands, but I love not
to blaunch those actions.

If the graces wherewith the God of all grace has enriched this State, were so
graceful with us, as nature wills, because we are Britains, and grace
requires, because we are Christians; they would not suffer the glory of their
own Church, which by an incomparable distance, does outshine the others in
excellency, to be so disparaged, but as children which complie with there
mother in all Gods blessings, exhibit themselves instruments to embrace that
form of Religion, which God as a strong evidence, to be most pleasing unto
him, and profitable for us, has sealed with so great blessings of peace and
prosperity.

The effects, men say do bear resemblances of their causes, and if the
richest effects do infer the noblest faculties, you may bouldly give this
policy your letters testimonial, under the seals of your Cities and
Incorporations to be the best policy, for this government to observe, because
under this it does best maintain it self.

Therefore as you tender the peace of the Church, the quiet of the Country,
and service both of God and the King: If there be in you that fatherly care of
the common good, which has ever been the crown and glory of a Christian
Maiorate, reform your own former missead opinions: You are the second lights
of the Commonwealth, and when the eye is dim the body is dark.

Conform your religious exercises to that form Consulte agit qui praecepto
legis obte^perat. ca. de furtis. l. in ciuilem.
which the Law allows, it is an inseparable incident unto government, that
the Magistrates to whom the charge of the Law is committed be principal
Obseruators of the Law themselves; their example must be a Lantern of
direction unto the rest, for they shall find it most certain; When the Rulers
do run at random, the people will bear no byas.

\ Abandon from you the masters of novelty and workers of innovation, what
appearance soever there be in the novelty, you are sure to loose by the
bargain, the utility cannot be so helpful, but the novelty would be more
hurtful. For if it should be lawful for every man to cast the frame of
religion in the mould of their own fancies, The scruples and inconveniences
would be no less in the Church, then the suites at the common-lawe, in number
infinite, if every man had power to create a newfound estate intaile.

And that they may be the better acquainted with your constant resolution:
tell your Ministers it is not lawful for them to varye in their habites,
manners, and orders, who should be Presidents unto other men of the beautye of
order.

Tell your deceived Citizens, there is not a Qui sub nemine se dicit esse, non
Iuuetur eorum priuilegijs and beneficijs qui subijciu^tur. Paschalis Secundus.
more apparent mark of loyalty then Obedience, or necessary for the
manutention of Policy: And he that has no conscience to obey his Sovereign,
cannot with conscience challenge the benefit of a Subject.

Tell the factious their humor is good for nothing but to breed muddy Ecles,
which must be ratled out with a thunder. And though their contentions be
pleasing to the common adversary of our souls, who delights with discord
amongst familiars, yet it is most vnpleasfull to God, whose servants are best
known by the Character of love.

I know their disordered humors will much stomach at contradiction, and storm
against you, when you would reform them; but when you shall reprove their such
humors, by the Oracles of Wisdom, which have no side respect unto persons,
they will with more reason brook the reproof, and readily yield their
obedience. For this cause it behooves you, to have a true eye unto the laws
of this government, and give no passage unto fancy, which shall presume to
appose against them.

To calumniate and impunge the laws of the Church, was always deemed an
exorbitant offense, and he that can, but will not, set a pegge in their wheel
to stay it, is by his sufferance, Actor with them in the the evil that arises
from it.

. 11.
Your such offenses you excuse with the plea of conscience. There is nothing
more common then to hear and meet with passages of disloialtie under pretext
of conscience, upon supposed offense whereof, there is such straying of Gnats,
such swallowing of Cammels, such stumbling at Strawes, such leaping over
Blocks, such acquiting for the Horse, such hanging for the Saddle, such
excusing for the Sword, and accusing for the Scabberd, as in conscience was
never seen.

I will not presume to censure your consciences, in this refusal of orders
prescribed, which you suppose warranted with the pretense of conscience; yet
this I must tell you, if that you were men of such exact and precise conscience
as you pretend and bear the world in hand, your conscience should not pervert
and falsify the least circumstance which does become Divines or other men of
exquisite conscience; you would not so contenciouslie hunt after the receipt of
your own conceits, without either ca^e or conscience of the public good.
You could not (without conscience or charity) so rashly condemn whom you
list, for whatsoever your fancy does disalowe, or so bouldly impute all
corruption to the object of your dislike, but with full consent and conscience
would condescend unto that, which the light of Nature, the Law of Scripture,
and sentence of Antiquity has offered, warranted and received.

A good Conscience is grounded upon sure knowledge, but they which write in
defense of your discipline, The author of the petition directed to her
majesty. (...), page 18.
are enforced to acknowledge that with whom the truth is, they know not.
Therefore, by the just searment of the highest wisdom, your such conscience is
either an ignorant fantasy or an arrogant vanity.

The holy Scripture is the assured ground, whereon to build conscience: the
infallible rule to direct conscience, and whereas it has most invincible
authority which ought by singular praerogatiue to decide all doubts, any
either Papist, Anabaptist, or Nouellist, can move in these controuersed causes,
what argument M Hooker. l. 1. pref. pa. 11.
have your Leaders showed you, whereby it was ever proved that any one
sentence of scripture does necessarily enforce those things wherein you
concur with them against the orders of your own Church?

\ It is to be feared that you lay the safety of your conscience upon the
credit of your own conceits, or other men's humors. and that you square your
Conscience by the rule of your custom, which has seized upon, and so far
entangled you in this contradiction, that you know not how to leave the
opinions you have so much approved, and with conscience (that is, your credit)
to receive the ordinances whereby your opinions are checked; this distraction
of thoughts in you, is that alarnm which conscience gives you.

If you be unwilling to enter the doing of that which you have formerly
condemned, I marvel not. The nature of man is not willing to condemn it
self, but to devise so many shifts of wits invention, to avoid that which
all judicious learning does approve; I greatly marvel at in you, who desire
to be esteemed the holy Apostles and learned Sages of this age: and therefore
do entreat you to look into the Inuentarie of your conscience, whether the
painful imaginations wherewith you are perplexed to forgo that in which you
so much delighted, be not that grief of Conscience so much pretended.

As for the evil whereof the Church does blame you; if you would
conscienciouslie displaye it before your conscience, I think in conscience you
would not so earnestly repugne at that Book of Uniformity, for which they
whose spirits indeauored the labors of best excellency, did expone themselves
to the trial of hardest difficulties.

. 12.
It is disordered (you say) and must it be altered by your own private
warrant? will nothing gain 2. Admo. pa. 24.
esteem with you, saving what proceeds from your own devise? The public
judgment of the Church does approve it, if the Laws of public
determination may not overrule your private, though probable resolutions,
where is the possibility of sociable life? where is the bond of your
submission to morrall duty? where is the power of the Church, to admit or
reject, what shall be necessary or inconvenient, for the safety and security
of her society?

If it be lawful for every passionate spirit carried with an affectation of
Novelty, to repeal Laws which Authority has enacted, to break customs
which Antiquity has commended; to change Ordinances, which Experience has
approved, to pervert order which Judgment has established, and by suiting all
occurrents to their private humors, to innouate that form of government which
this kingdom has happily followed, and heaven richly blessed? where is that
so much valued wisdom of the Ancient? where is the allowance which time
gives to things profitablie honest? where is that supremicie which God has
impropriate to the Scepter of Princes, as their peculiar right?

\ I hear you confess it, take heed you be not found secretly to undermine
it, but if you be real as you are verbal in the recognition of his supreme
Authority, forgo the thoughts of your Consistoriall government, which
affects the usurpation of his Princely rule, and give his religious Offices
in the government of the Church, their honorable issues, in your obedience, to
that form of Church government, which he has allowed, and especially declared
in that book of Uniformity; wherein if there had been that apparent cause of
reformation, as you pretended, we have just cause to say, it was more in his
heart to have done it, then in yours to desire it.

. 13.
You implead the forms and Ceremonies as superstitious, Proclam. 5. Marti 1603
Procla^. 16. Iulii. 1604. Epist. ad Lodouicu^ Borbonium principem.
and not Apostolic, yet you heard them to be justified out of the practice
of the primitive Church. And Beza warranteth, you are not absolutely bound to
imitate the times, which have been in every particular, or without exception
to receive the Ceremonies, which the Church Apostolic esteemed as most
profitable for their times. And seeing that those grave learned men upon whose
judgment you laid the Burden, of upholding your cause by argument, did in
that committall conference, give their consent to the observation of the rites
in use, you should have presently embraced them, as free from all supposall of
superstition.

\ If we did so justly deserve to be touched with the note of superstition, as
in this case you have imagined we do, I would rather humbly seek and
suppliantly beg pardon of my souls Savior, then meditate words of
persuasion for your submission unto this order.

Wherein, those vnsownder times, whereof you speak have done amiss, that
comes not within the Circuit of my thoughts; but seeing this Church, whereof
you are members (unless by pertinacie in Schism, you disioynt your selves)
has required you to reverence this order as holy, and to observe it as
behoouefull for the exercise of Christian duty: I do greatly wish that your
minds now possessed with dislike, would not set them up as your marks to
shoot at, nor by way of Scorn to contradict what Authority has seriously
commanded, but with ready destination to receive whatsoever is in the exercise
of Religion, according to the Laws for that purpose now established.

. 14.
Some of them, I think you could be contented with, but the Cross stands in
your way, and I marvel not, your selves delight so much to stand in Discourse
of the troubles at Fra^ckford. pa. 54.
the Crosse-way; yet did the Church by your own confession, for one thousand
and three hundred years, observe the Ceremony of Crossing, as an outward
testimony of their inward faith, insomuch Basil. de spu. sancto. cap. 27.
that all which trusted in the name of the Lord Jesus, were marked with the
sign of the Cross, faith Saint Basil, and whosoever of you shall use the
sign of Counterplea to an Apological. epist. Sect. 2. pa. 141.
the Cross in this manner, I can assure you is far from Popish superstition;
if you will not believe me ask Master Willet.

I have heard of a man whose mouth (like a Mill that cannot grind but with
foul water) does commonly overrun with terms of obscenitie against the
approved ceremonies of holy Church, and contumely against men of honorable
service, only therefore because they run not with him, in the same excess
of unadvised zeal.

Ipse Dominus cruce^ sua^ vbi eum deme^tia superbae impietatis irrisit in
illoru^ qui in eu^ credere^t frontibus infixit, vbi est quoda^modo seeds
verecundiae vt de nomine eius fides no^ erubescat: and magis dei gloria^ qua^
hominem diligat. August. in Euangel. tracta. 53. in fine. Baptiz. 16. Ianu.
Anno Do^. 1601. Tacitus l. 14 annal. Sepult. 20. Ia. 1601.
This fellow hearing a child of his, at the time of Baptism to be signed,
with the Cross in the forehead, (the seat of honesty) did so frettingly
disdain thereat, that in the heat of his newfangled spirit, he said, it would
have done as much good, if it had been done in the seat of natures impuritie.
But what followed this profane contempt of that significatiue Ceremony, and
Character of Christianity? I know you desire to hear, and but to satisfy
your desire, as also to give witness to the cause in hand, I could
contentiuely silence it, least unhappily any of you should think me as Caius
Cassius spoke of himself in the Roman Senate, carried with too much love of
Ancient holy customs. His next borne Child, being a goodly boy, wanted that
place of Natures vent.

Whether Nature were hindered in producing of her intended effect, by some
Gross defection in the natural causes, or else that the Author of Nature (who
according to the rules of true Philosophy immediately concurreth with all
singular, secundarie causes, even to their particular effects, for ends best
known to his all-seeing providence, does at any time withdraw his
co-operatiue power: I recommend it to your consultation, yet I doubt the
tempest of your affections will beat against, what the hand of judgment does
build.

Many did admire it, as a blow given by his divine hand, whose power rules
all from the highest Seraphyn to the lowest Syncphee; and in the duty of a
Christian, I wish the remembrance of it, might not only water the Father with
the liquor of Obedience unto order, that he may prosper, as a well rooted Plant
in the garden of Humility; but also induce his brother (who in the work of
his Ministry impugneth this use of the cross) unto a more dutiful conformity.

. 15.
Two things have given great swaye unto your Qua^to sa^ctiores apparent tanto
magis sub praetextu sanctitatis nocent: Ambr. de Noc and Archa. ca. 14.
sect, the one is, apparancie of zeal, the other subtletie of discourse (the
glareing baits of masked folly) veiled with the show of devotion, ambitiously
desiring to be esteemed, what you are not,) you have mislead poor beguiled
Souls, to that they should not, and with facillitie of speech endeavored to
entangle the choicest wits in the toil of your misconceipted opinions. For
this cause: You Gentlemen at the Law, commonly have your eyes dazeled with the
first view of Fancies proiects, your affections sounded with the first touch of
zeales passion; your ears tickled with the first note of errors tune, and your
Chambers stored with the first fruits of their wits folly, to the end
(forsooth) that by your hands, they might more easily spread abroad, and be
dispersed among the Brethren of the cause, whose foster friends Novelty might
make you.

Notwithstanding the quickest wits in pliancie of disposition to Novelty,
do easily give favor to Novel opinions, not as reason does warrant, but as
Fancy does conceive them; yet I make no question, that you my masters (the
Gentlemen Apprentises at the Law) will so go with the current and stream of
the law, that the King who is the life of the Law, the living Law, the Patron
of your study, and founder Philo. l. 2. de vita mosis.
of your honor, shall not have cause so much as to hear Complaint of your any
further conniuence to enormities, or indulgence to factions, or supportance of
discentious partialities.

As Charles the fifth of France said of his College Chopinus de do. Fra^. pa.
594.
of Lawyers in Angew; your Houses of Innes of Court, are to his Majesty a
fluent Spring, to furnish him with men of high Council, both for the good
government of themselves, and procurement of others good.

Two things much commended in you, and much commended to you, that as you
study the benefit of your Country by your study at the Law, your conformity
with the Law, may crown your study with wisdom, your days with peace, your
knowledge with obedience, your zeal with judgment, and your love to religion,
with your loving acceptance of religious uniformity.

Your Fathers at the Law, measuring the Laws equity by public utility,
do condemn them for guilty, which attempt to do any thing contrary to
Smith. de repub. Angloru^ l. 1. cap. 2.
the Law, yea though it were to do good: And with grave resolution assure,
that the King cannot alter and change the laws of this Realm at his Fortesc.
in commend. of the laws of Engl. pa. 25.
pleasure, because the rule of his government is not only royal; but
pollitick. If you cannot find any preuiledge for the subject at his pleasure
to disobay, let your examplarie approbation of rites publicly established,
lead them in the performance of holy duties.

You are real speakers, and the chiefest graduates Bartolus.
of your faculty have the Prerogative of plea in real Actions, and therefore
must more entend to the Scire leges non est eorum verba tenere, sed vim and
potestate^ Regula iuris.
things for which the Laws are decreed, then to the words by which the Laws
are delivered; yet whether you consider the letter of the Law, or the reason,
(which is the life of the Law says Baldus, the spirit of the law says
Panormitan, and the bond that binds.) He that wresteth the Law in one, does
offer wrong to the Law in the other, and by both, has often times hindered the
Church of her learned Ministry, when the cause has come to a Quare impedit.

How much the Church has heretofore rejoiced in her honorable help of
profitable and religious laws, enacted by his Majesty's most noble
Progenitors, the Kings of these famous Islands, to protect her peace, and
privilege her safety, against Nouelists the untimely enemies of most ancient
times truth, her blessed mother on earth, and best beloved to her Father in
heaven, the histories of our venerable predecessors, do report with memorable
testimonies of their blessed names. Let me only tell you, the Church now
(comforted with the pleasefull aspect, and strengthened with the powerful hand
of his Majesty) hopefully expects, that as in pleading our causes, your
legal Philosophy, is free from Didimus ad Alexan.
those rules which the Philosophy schools do allow their disputants (with
falsated speeches to cover untruths) so you vouchsafe her the true Testimony
of your generous freedom, most demonstratiue in your Obedience, to her holy
prescriptions and Christian laws of out most Christian King, if she may
obtain this, but reasonable and honest boon at your hands, who are professors
of the Law, by observation of her rites and Ceremonies in your Churches,
Chapels, and Oratories, your such practice will be her preservative, and her
prayers a blessing to your such practice.

. 16.
Your Actions of singularity, are in such special veneration, with your
unlearned retinue, that you cannot now leave them without remorce, having used
them with so great applause, nor well reclaim your followers from those giddie
follyes, which with such force you have labored to indeed unto their
conceits.

There is no opinion so fantastical, nor fancy A nullis consuetudinibus homo
difficilius auellitur, qua^ ab his quae ad opinionem pertinent. Orige^. l. 1.
co^tra. celsu^.
so extrauagant, but if custom set the foot of her Authority in us, reason
cannot remove the imposture, the deep and sensible impression of Liberty will
not admit reasonable persuasions, and so long as your affections lie covered
under that stone, they cannot plye to the rule which truth affordes, and
understanding would administer.

Howbeit, where the fear of the Law is, there Chrisost. ho. 14. ad pop.
Antiochenum.
custom is easily broken, and for that this rust has eaten into you through
their sufferance, who by demandation from Sovereignty have received in charge
the execution of the Laws ordained for the strengthfull maintenance of this
both Ecclesiastical and Civil policy.

I trust you (my Lords the Judges of the land) which have the judgments of
our causes, the censure of our behavior, and sentence of our Actions, will so
take to heart the defense of these duties (in performance whereof rests the
very Soul of our Church, and life of Churches flourishing,) that neither
greatness of Authority, nor power of person, nor eminency of place, nor love
of favorites, nor fancy to faction, shall cause you to wink at, or dispense
with any, either Anabaptisticallie spirited, or seditiouslie opposite, to this
pure and unstained religion, by Law established.

The impartial defense of this, claims the first place above all, whatsoever
Sovereignty has comissionated unto your Authority, as well in regard of the
care which earth judging upon earth, ought Aust. ser. 94.
to have of his judgment which judges in the heavens, as also for the happy
advancement of public good, which ebbeth or flows as God the Author of all
good is respectively served. For proof of this.

If you look upon the blessings wherewith the giver of all Prerogatives, has
prosperously enriched this Nation, either in warlike action, or peaceable
deliberation, you shall see them flow from the spring of humble obedience
toward true religion; or if you please to behold them darkened in their
wisdom, hart-fallen in their courage, amazed in their spirits, confounded in
their councels, and overtaken in the issues of their own consultations, you
may discrie the vapoures of their unhappiness, arising from their
backwardness in performing those most excellent and most deserved duties,
which God by the Ministry of his Church had prescribed, and Princes zealous of
divine glory commanded.

In consideration whereof, the Church and commonweal, are most earnest
obtestants, that as you are Agents for God, in the Administration of Justice,
and iusticed by the King (their supreme head and Sovereign defender) to
execute the judgments of God, the hand of Justice, guided by the eyes of your
wisdom, may secure them from the smartfull inconveniences of Atheistical
security, and strengthen them in their mutual Offices against their
Anabaptisticall opposites, whose minds divorced from duty, do stiftly refuse
the rules of our religious duties, proudly censure the validity and priuitie
of Sovereigns government, Odiouslie calumniate the religious function of holy
Priesthood; wilfully shake of, those good things which authority has enacted
to establish common good; cunningly endeavor by shouldering out the Liturgey
and holy Hymns, to bring the worship of God with us to a mere preach, and
contentiouslie hinder the perfection of that unity, which would make them with
us religious to God, humble to the Church, loyal to our Sovereign, and
lovingly peaceful amongst our selves, if they did not hinder it.

In all these active and moving errors of their deceived minds, what else
have they aimed at, but to wrong this body polliticke, through contempt of the
laws both of honor and justice, both which, you may see daily violated with
contemptuous breaches; that of honor, by affected derogation from
Sovereignty; the other of Justice, by strong inforcement of their private
fancy; and when the mishaped disorder of some few, shall distemper the
welformed feature of the whole body, when affectation of singularity, shall
with vnrestraineable and headlong course of violent Schism, tear in sunder
the unseamed coat of Christ, when audacious ignorance shall call into question
the lawful Ordinances, which ripest judgment has decreed: the fancies of
private men, wantonized with conceit of purietic, shall not only deny their
Obedience in holy offices, lawfully imposed, but with clamorous inuectiues
traduce their honorable reputation, whose place does enjoin them to see the
observation of that which Law has appointed;) what may we else look for my
Lords) but that proud popularitie give the check to monarchy, and profane
vanity do weaken piety, if your zeal for the Laws committed unto your
trust, do not add validity to 1. Eliz. cap. 2. 23. Eliz. cap. 1.
strenthen them, and fear from your hand by their due execution, teach us
obedience in the works of devotion.

To the sollemne Actions of your Judgment, those suitable ornaments, your robe,
your cloak, your coife, are a beauty, and are the comely vestures wherewith
devout liberality has apparrelled religion a stain unto her.

That Priestly habit devised and used by Priests of old, to celebrate the
Actions of divine worship with solempnitie, and give state unto their Sessions
when determination of Civil causes, had dependant reference unto their
judgment, is an ensign of honor unto you (my Lords) and will retain it
ancient excellency, without imputation of blemish; or note of blame, to the
first deuisers, if you vouchsafe the Church this favor, to tender the
magnificence of her service, now the cognition of her causes in that kind is
deuolued unto you as Church men were formerly careful, to set forth the
magnificence of your place and calling.

Since then you have received those abiliments from the Church, and the world
takes special knowledge of your high place by the honorable ensigments of
your such habitts? Suffer not Nouelty to dishonor the Church in that wherein
you are honored. Leave her not to go naked that has clothed you, but so
negotiate her affairs in your Circuits and Sessions, that her service in the
Sanctuary may be performed with due and comely exhortations.

This if you do, you shall remove occasion of offense, taken by contrariety of
Ceremonies, you shall give the holy word and Sacraments a better relish in
their Judgments who for the observation of some few Ceremonies, do so much
distaste them, at a word you shall give a blessing of happiness unto this
Church, if by one uniform religious observation of things commanded, as
behooufull to Gods service, you keep us one in the bond of divine worship. A
blessing not to be looked for in a Babilonicall confusion, which presumes to
divide and quarter a tongue of one speech, but in the Church of God which
retayneth the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

. 17
Tanta est in repub de moru varietate diuersitas: vt nemo valeat leges
defe^dere nisi terror videatur aliqua temperare. Cassiodor. 12. variaru^ epist.
It was a rule always observed by them who were good-husbands for the
commonwealth, that what intractable men do not upon admonition, they must he
enforced unto by compulsion, howbeit (his greatness) knowing that Prou. 20.
Quaere^dae sunt ignoscendi causae non puniendi occasiones. Ammianus
Marcellinus. l. 19. Procla^. 16. Iulij. 1604 Lex habet vim cogentem. Arist. l.
10. Eth. c. 9.
piety and mercy are the pillars of Princely rule, the chiefest dowry that
God gives unto Kings, and precious ornament of Majesty, more desirous of cause
to pardon, then of occasion to punish, does earnestly wish there may never
occasion be given to make proof of severity, but that his Princely
declarations may have equal force in all men's hearts, to work an universal
conformity, by clemency and weight of reason, not by constraint and rigor of
Law.

It is in his power to make himself feared, he chooses rather to make
himself beloved, which loue-full duty, if it were so happily performed by us,
as by him is highly merited, his Majesty should always find your
concurrencie with him in the work of Gods service; and you should never feel
that necessitizing disposition which the Law has toward those who are
resractorie and repugnant to this method of service.

The power of the Lawe-maker (and the Law Plutar. Plato.
is the work of the King, to whose regal dignity it appertains to make
Laws) should breed a fear in our hearts, how we speak or judge in the worst
part concerning that, the unadvised disgrace whereof may be no mean dishonor
to him, toward whom we profess all submission.

By excommunication to be shut out of the Church, and bebarred of fellowship in
holy duties, is a correction more smartfull then that you should wilfully
deserve it, and so due to your disobedience, that he which will not acknowledge
the more then motherlie power of the Church, may not enjoy the preuiledge
Innocentius. Pontifex.
of a child, to be nourished in the bowels and bosom of the Church.

Dereliction of your Pastoral cures will be so burdensome to your souls,
obliged unto them with so strickt a bond of conscience, and hurtful to the
Church which requires your Ministerial employment, to advance the purchase of
Jesus Christ, that you ought with principal care to attend that whereunto the
holy ghost has separated you.

Deprivation from the rooms of your spiritual functions, whereunto you have
had so honorable admittance, will imprint your disobedience with a full stain
of disgrace unto your obstinacy, but clear the Luster of government from those
too many disgraces, wherewith your obstinate disobedience has labored to
stain it.

That is not a lawful Ministry (says Master 2. p. 2. repl. pa. 167.
Cartwright,) that is obstinate, and where the obstinacy is general, or for
the most part, there the State is ruinous, so that the Prince may after due
means assayed to bring them home, procure that other be put in their places.

\ You will think this is much severity, but the Law presumes the
extreamitie of your descent, whereby you labor to blemish what his wisdom
has pollished, and authority published: Therefore if you feel his power as a
strong rock which regorgeth the inuectiue waves that strike against it; blame
your selves.

. 18.
To submit the public constitutions of State, to the instabilitie of private
fancy, no policy did ever tolerate, no not in the civil Law, where the
reason of man has most familier commerce: how can you then (the Brethren of
this faction) expect tolleration in matters of so great importance, or conceive
any reason, that your private reason, (which is a private jurisdiction) should
ever rule in things divine, so far above the reach of common apprehention.

You see the rule of his Highness government Lex ex aequo ad omnes pertinent
Arch. l. de lege and iustitia.
does extend to all after a like measure: and since he has authority of
supreme command over all, in favor of whom should he remitte any part of
his Sovereignty, I do with all humility acknowledge his Majesty's royal
power, to dispense with his Laws, as in wisdom he shall think most conducent
to the good of that pollitique body (whose head God has made him,) but if he
should yield the bridle, and give you leave to shroude your selves in the
bosom of his protection, and by his Prerogative shelter your novelties from
the rigor of the law, what profit should we reap. Sure I am that such
passionate surprising of Princely designements will more trouble then steed the
quiet repose of the Church; and as soon may you erect Colonies in the Moon for
the use, as by your novelties bring any benefit to the commonwealth. The
sufference which you have already gained, has hitherto perplexed both Church
and commonwealth with many difficulties, and would unavoidable cast us into
many incombrances, if this rule of policy had not prevailed; it is better to
prevent, then to be prevented.

Complete union is of better consequence to the furtherance of Religion, then
that admittance should be given to any example which leads from it, and your
known disposition contumeliously to traduce them, who look not the same way
that you do, has been more violent and virulent then any ingenious spirit
may willingly complie with.

You could never as yet with a single eye look at the state opposite to the
opinion you hold, and government you seek for: and it is to be feared, that
your zeal which rides with so hot a spur beside the causway of Obedience,
will not omit any occurrent that may procure you the equal freedom of that
which you call conscience.

It is out of question, that if you might once gain permission, to reject
those things whereof the laws, or reverence of ancient custom, has in fomer
times made impression, you would not thence-forwarde allow of any thing, but
what you your selves shall first give voice and particular consent unto.

They were your teachers which account those Cartw. 2. p. of his 2. repl. pa 65.
Princes who are not refined by their spirit, unworthy to be accounted amongst
the number of men, and therefore rather to be spitted upon then obeyed. They
were your teachers which defend rebellion against Princes of a different
religion, and honor those that are slain in such quarrels with the glory of
martyrs. They were your teachers which utterly Buccanam de Iure regni apud
Scotos. pa 70.
mislike, that Princes should be exempted from Ecclesiastical discipline, and
namely from excommunication. They were your teachers who have sentenced that
Prince to be unworthy of life upon the earth, who by censure of excommunication
is cast into hell.

These dangerous positions are to me like so many fearful foreshewes of an
undoubted assurance, that if your democraty might have taken place, (for you
move and remove in your motions by the same springs and wards) his Majesty
should quickly have lost the obedience, and found the vexation of seditious
Subjects. Commandment should be no longer his weapon, where such Commanders
have place of charge.

. 19.
But you will leave your charge, although Beza Discourse of troub. at Frankf.
pa. 202. and 206
and others of Geneua, do wish you rather to give over your functions to open
wrong, and retire your self from these things commanded, unto your private
life. Yet Cartwright dare not be author unto any of you, to forsake his
pastoral charge for the inconvenience of a Surplisse, his reason is, for that
the one is an absolute commandment of the Lord, and 2. p. 2. repl. pa. 264.
the other a thing of his own nature indifferent, which being laid in the
balance with the preaching of the word, is of less importance then for the
refusal of it, you should forgo so necessary a duty.

You hear the judgment of a Master in your school, and if you be not
carried with too much auersion from the ancient fathers (who knew not your
school) accept this argument taken both from the one, and from the other.

The preaching of the word, is so necessary for him Cartvv.
that is called thereunto; that a woe hangs on his head that does not preach,
but where the holy spirit Ierom. m, proverb.
denounces a woe, it notes a mortal sin in that which follows; therefore to
forgo your such charge, is to transporte your selves into the very bulk of
sin, and mortallitie to sin.

This Scamo^ny is too fretting, yet, will not offend your stomachs if you
take it, as it is given with Quinces, my moderate affections, unwilling to
grieve you, and so taking it, my hope is that you will not omit the
principal and substantial part of your duties, for shadows and semblances
of zeal, but bend your strength, with his Highness desire, to join in one
against the common adversary, for the establishing of the gospel.

\ You are credited with the free disposition of Gods inestimable benefits, and
therefore will not (being as I hope you are those good guiding Pastors, you so
earnestly speak for,) shrink from your ministry, or decline from the work
whereunto you are called.

If you be Salt, season, if lights, shine, if guides, go before, and as the
Apostolic fathers of former time, did by there labor make many, of profane,
holy, of ignorant, learned, of obstinate sinners, penitent conuerts, so do you
endeavor that by your industry others may change their affections, and better
their manners toward God, with reverence to perform their outward religious
offices, Contempt of religious duty, argues an irreligious contempt of deity
toward the Church, with humility, to conform themselves to her holy
ordinances in the service of god, where duty is submission, opposition
betokens pride, toward the King, with loyalty to yield obedience unto his
laws. A wilful Lawbreaker, would willingly break the Lawgiuer toward
religion, decently clothing themselves with the garments of righteousness, and
redily casting of every opposite thing that might hinder them in the exercise
of christian duties.

It is a manifest wrong offered to Religion when the outward action does not
consent and simpathize with the affected profession, for albeit, faith does
give fashion and worth unto works, yet works give the true tincture and
luster unto faith. (wherefore I beseech you and in the bowels of Christ I
beseech you, affect the excellency of constant course in the operation of
those things which belong unto your ministry, suffer not a matter of mere
formalitie, to distaste the performance of your duty, but submit your selves
unto the wisdom of Authority, and because you plead for your selves ingenuity
of spirit, your pretended leader unto these things; strive to tend to that
which is most exquisit in every ingenious spirit, truth in your opinion, virtue
in your action, and peace in your conversation.

. 20.
There is nothing more behoouful for the use of life and service of public
society, then to proportion this shady and terrestrial life to that most happy
and celestial, where Angels the most industrious attendants one the supernall
Majesty, and truly faithful guardions of our much endangered saffety, do in
the perfection of their obedience to God their immortal King in heaven, set
down to us, the Idea of Love, Honor, and duty to the King our mortal God
upon Earth.

Rex orat. habita in Senate.
Of Love, with love to repay that royal love wherein his Highness does more
glory in our weal, then in his own particular advantage, and with inseparable
Union to Crown the beauty of our Love, so visibly apprehensiue in the shine of
his Glory.

In principes veluti parents beneuolentia nos affectos esse decet. obedientes
et venerantes. nam patroni sunt ac domini ciuitatis and ciuium salut. Charondas
in proemiis legum.
Of Honor, humblye to acknowledge his Supreme sovereignty in the super-eminent
excellency, whereof, as he has greatest conformity with God, so he clears
the evidence of his greatness and potencie, to effect those delectable and
desirable good things, which have their dependencie upon his greatness.

Of duty, cheerfully to perform the offices of our several functions, by
the law proportioned, as they do the exercise of their high and admirable
virtues, to the glory of God, and good of men.

They hold inviolable the bond of fellowship, wherein they are associated we
should keep fast the Linkes of Christian society, wherein we are combined by
community of service, and perticipation of Sacraments, they vndeceauable
assurances of Gods blessings, the invaluable pledges of Christ his goodness,
and venerable warrants of our future blessedness in Angelical happiness.

They never incline to remit any part of their duty, we should not permit any
either color of pleasure, or bait of folly, or pretext of favor, or veil
of Sanctity, to auert our conceit from performance of those offices which by
our own consent, and heavens immediate appointment, he has power to command
us: but as they do althings to fulfill, and keep the Law of the Almighty,
we should order the Actions of our lives unto his Majesty's just Commands, the
correspondence which is between the Actions of men in this estate of our
mortallitie, and their heavenly operations of eternity, does require these
things of all in general, but especially of us who must appear for others in
the presence of God as Angels.

When the Church of God was attended on by those Apostolic Fathers, whose
industrious travail in the business of the Church, did gain them the names
of Angels, althings were carefully performed for the continuation of the
Catholic peace. In their Councels they determined all matters of doubt or
difficulty which might disturb the peace of the Church, and what they
determined was no more controuerted.

In their Synods, they provided by holy ordinances to reform all trespasses
repugnant to the Ancient holy Cannons: and what they ordained was cheerfully
observed.

In their Sermons, they labored with grave exhortations to keep their
subjects in due allegance unto their temporal Lords, and what they councelled
was religiously regarded.

In their Actions, they did with reverent humility make known their
subjection to Christian Princes: And Christian Princes (amongst whom Religio
and iustitia politica mutuis stant non solum officiis sed beneficijs.
our Sovereign does associate with most honorable resolution) esteeming
nothing dearer then religion, most willingly employed their Authority to
advance all religious Actions, and provide for the Churches safety by
opposition to novelty. The mutual reciprocation of these Christian offices
was then the strength of their government, the Loadstarre of their happiness,
the Centor of their Peace, And will be to us that so much spoken of, and much
desired mother of our goulden world.

. 21.
The thoughtfull remembrance of this does give me heart to speak unto you
(Right reverend Fathers) Epist. ad vbique orthodoxos.
and to request, as blessed Athanasius, did those of his time, so to strengthen
your minds in the lively emotions of christian zeal, (the Garment that
beautifieth the Stewards of Gods divine mysteries,) that those good things
which the Church of God, has hitherto happily enjoyed, may not in your times
unhappily be discontinued.

Many attempts have been made by many, (whose actions do witness they are
impatient of government, apt to tumult, zealous of nothing more then their own
conceits, though they be as the are unwarranted by truth, disclaimed by
Antiquity, indeed the Mushroomes of yesterdayes Nouelty) many attempts I say,
have been made to deface the beauty of the Church, and weaken her strength, by
weakening your government. If their malice had been so forcible, as it was
industrious, and their Appellations so regardfully accepted, as they were
violently urged, your Authority, your Dignity should not now been questioned,
but they should not now have been.

\ You have hitherto with fatherly care, restrained your selves from the severe
execution of laws made against them, and mere compassion has caused you to
restrain your selves; if the Church, whose rulers you are, had gained a
restraint of their vsusuall contradictions against the State, warranted with a
settled Union of affection to the State, your first Lenity had been well
employed: and their obedient humility prevented the motion which now their
continuing repugnancie, does force from us, for your due censure of their
undutiful recusancie.

The continuance whereof, they cannot impute unto any weakness, orinsuffie^cie
in the means which have been used toward them, but to the willfulnes of
their obstinate hearts against the means which have been used; with minds
obdurate nothing preuayleth.

Oratione^ quae nobis co^di est, facile comprobare solemus. Zonoras anual. cap.
vlt.
You have entreated them gently; but the speech that pleases not has not
allowance: Apud nolentis animu^ quamuis sit euidens ratio, haec ipsa obstaculu^
esse solet. Greg: epist. 41. l. 3.
You have reasoned with the^, but to their unwilling minds, Reason it self, be
it never so evident, is oftimes a hindera^ce. Respondendi modus nullus erit
respo^dend. esse respondent. semper existimamus. Austin.
You have answered their books, but your contestation has the more engaged
them to opposition, You have given them fatherly Councels, and had they
carefully applied your Counsels unto their manners to follow them, as they
have unprofitably commended them unto their memories only to cross them, they
might have been able to distinguish, the true visage of a truly reformed Church
amongst us.

\ Your clemency has omitted no reasonable inducements that might any way be
available to join their submission unto authorized proceedings, if neither
courtesy of usage, nor force of reason, can stop the current of their
conceits. Authority must procure what virtue can not.

The goodness of nature it self enclineth more to mildness then rigor, and
the Church delights with moderate and merciful courses, rather then severe
inforcements to advance the observation of her spiritual ordinances. The holy
fathers Gregory at Nazianzen and Austen at Hippo; did acknowledge it: How be
it finding by experience in the Arrians, Donatists, Aust. l. 2. retract. c. 5.
Appollinarists, and other froward opposites unto the Church Catholic, that
Presumption makes men in love with their errors, and impunitie does foster
presumption, they then thought requisite by practice of discipline, to
accomplish what they could not effect by doctrine: And better with moderate
severity to correct them which disturb the Peace of the Church with
unhallowed contentions, then by suffering in conformity unto good laws to
give passage unto confusion.

Disobedient minds are more easily taught when the fear of severity does
second the industrious Aust. epist. 184.
Schoolemaisters of truth, insomuch that Saint Jerome wondered at that Bishop
who suffered Vigilantius to rest in his jurisdiction, and would not with his
Apostolical Ierem l. co^vigilantiu^.
rod break so unprofitable a vessel.

You know (honorable and reverend Fathers,) that we are a Spectacle to God, to
Angels, and to men, the good the bad, the weak; God requires the performance
of our service, according to the high of his excellencies, and will not suffer
himself to be mocked with Copper for Gold, Glass for pearl, seeming for
being, or fancy for conscience, but claymeth the uttermost of the ability which
our unfeigned affections toward him may yield; if possibly we could yield him
so much, as his divine sublimitie deserves when it is rightly considered.

Angels attend the furtherance of our religious duties, to present them before
God, and represent his favor toward them.

To this end, that we remembering the royal prerogative of our christian
souls, served by their Angelical ministrye and heavens blessed acceptance of
our religious duties, beautified with correspondencie to heavens glory, may
remember to perform them with that solempnity which best beseems the
dignity of religion, and has most concurrency with their celestial exercises.

Good men, rejoice that the church is so graciously preserved from the
baseness of nouelty, and do zealously wish that in every christian assembly,
might be seen the cheerful devotion and bountious expenses of those
religious fathers, who carried with a holy love (like so many pleasant Gales of
wind blowing in the air, pointing us to the haven, and directing us to the
point whereto unload the profits of our flitting life,) did enrich, endowe, and
possess holy men, holy religion, holy places, with much, with large, with
great both goods, preuiledges, and reuenews, offering up themselves, and
theirs, to furnish the worship of God with a sensible excellency, the true
testimony to God of their inward piety.

This excellency highly displeases others, as if God more delighted with
beggary, then bounty, and were better pleased to see Pellagius standing before
Ierom. aduers. Pellagium. l. 1. c. 9.
him in a slovenly coat, then Aaron in a decent vestment. Pompeis Horses in a
Stable by the Altar, then the Divine Sacrifices whereunto it was dedicated.
Julian spoiling, then Constantine enriching Theod. l. 2. cap. 24.
the Church. Sabellius sitting Malancholy, then Basil making melody unto the
Lord in spiritual Basil. epist. ad Neocesar. 63.
all Hymns. Cayne serving him with the worst, then Abell sacrificing the best,
And more accepted the lean Oblations of a sparing hand, then the liberal
contributions of a Cheerful giver.

Of all whatsoever Princely Munificence and christian Zeal has given to be
Ornaments for the Church, and Arguments of their piety, you (honorable Prelates
(are the treasurers to keep it, the Overseers to order it; and the Stewards to
employ it: If your fatherly care continue them unto those religious uses;
whereunto they were at first intended, it will nourish a reverent affection in
all toward the Church to beautify it, Religion to observe it, and your Order
to Reverence it.

Wherefore now that the Church has recovered it self from the tempests and
storms of Newfanglisme, and discipline gained the re-establishment of those
helps wherein by long disturbance it has been much hindered (the supreme
hand of divine providence uphold his Throane in a blessed perpetuity which
has done us this good) let not the slackned raynes of your regiment give way
unto profane Liberty, teach the Obstinate the execution of your Cannons,
accept all occurrents that may advance the honor of his Crown and dignity,
who by his princly approbation has given them the strength of Laws.

They are the rules by which your Episcopal function must be directed, and the
Obliquity of Clergies disposition rectified. The constant observation of these,
amongst those which are yours, will ground many reguler productions in the
minds of others. Qui leges reipub, oculos esse dixerit, is perfecto nihil
indecens pronu^ciauerit, que^ admodu^ enim res maxim necessaria animali no^
titubans oculus, ita reip. Legu^ aequus and rectus status. Leo imperat.
constitut. 19.
They are the eyes by which your Justice must behold the Actions of good men,
to reward them, and to punish others. If these eyes be sleepy, your conniuence
will be their encouragement; who with the stroke of will, do contend against
the Stream of order.

Austin. l. 19. con. Faustum. ca. 11.
They are the Sinews, by which religion, and herrites are made of near
neighbors, that the Acts of religion cannot absolutely be performed, if they
want the furniture of comely ceremonies, nor the ceremonies accounted sacred,
but as by religious separation they serve to holy uses.

This should make you more carefully diligent to restrain the uncharitable
Constructions made by private Men of your Canonical resolutions, and to
provide that noe practice of Satan, nor fraud of hipocrites separate what God
and his church has so nearly joined.

Such do you bouldly forbid; be you afraid of Chrisost. orat. de no^
contemne^da ecclesia dei, et diuinis misterijs.
them, and they will scorn you, do you suffer them, and they will trouble you,
though you want your Cossier, you have both rod and staff to repress the
insolent, and strengthen the weak, to convert the incredulous, and rule the
disordered, to reclaim the Barnard. l. 3. de consider.
erroneous, to convince seducers, and to bring them to amendment, or bar them
liberty of deceit.

In performance of all which, your Episcopal duties, bethink your selves (my
Lords) what the King, what his Council, what the Country does require of you,
and if you be persuaded that Heaven has inspirited you, with this form to
extend the first frame, and advance the successiue parts of his church?

If you study the glory of Christ your first Consecrator, Dionisius. ca. 5. de
Hierach ecclesiastica.
who has excellenced your order, with the rule of others, that by your rule,
holy orders might be observed. If with due worship you reverence the
aspersion of his all-pacifing blood, by which he has set at one althings both
in Heaven and Earth: Col. 1. 20.
Seek the peace of the Church by a well ordered concord of the Church, carry
the hand of your Authority with an equal tenor, let not your actions swerve
from your own Cannons; what you have prescribed to others, acknowledge it to
be prescribed to your selves. The authority of your place, the seruour of your
zeal the gravity of your persons, and light of your example, will grace your
government, and lead the Disordered into the path of orders.

\ Let your countenance be set upon them, that are religious wirh a fatherly
propension, incline to embrace them, which frame the contexture of their
service by the line of duty.

Such as reclaim themselves, cherish with the hopes of favor, least your
stricktnesse toward them, make others more obstinate in their errors, and since
that the double dyed minds of some will not easily loose their tincture, be
specially watchful over the limiters of your Authority.

Finally so rule as you would be obayed, your canonical rule shall have a
canonical obedience, and give us the heart of hope, that as his highness with
princely resolution has approved this church, sound in Doctrine, decent in
Ceremonies, perfect in Government, and holy in her Liturgies, so he will
continue her blessed in her peace, rich in her endowments, plentiful in her
immunities, and free from the wounds of malice.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
page lin. Faults. Correction. 5 4 which interrupt which may interrupt 7 12
committing his own omitting his own 11 26 Maurilius Mauritius 12 11
guides-men guides, men 24 14 attributary arbitrary 28 2 expectation acceptance
32 18 for seeking forsaking 40 18 straying strayning 50 4 ancient times truth
auntiently times truth. 51 26 of Churches of our Churches 56 18 by him is
highly by him it is highly 58 2 presumes presupposes ea. 15 should ever rule
should over rule 60 19 democraty democracy 61 1 self from selves from ea. 22
mortallity to sin mortally to sin 63 3 formality to formality cause you to
ea. 26 shine of his glory. shine of his virtues. 68 3 join their submissio^
win their submission ea. 22 in conformity vnconformitie 71 27 of near
neighbors so near neighbors 73 2 religious with a religious with a ea. 12 a
canonical our canonical


