THE Miseries of Inforst MARRIAGE. As it is now played by his Majesty's Servants.

Qui Alios, (seipsum) docet. By George Wilkins.

LONDON Printed for George Vincent, and are to be sold at his shop in
Woodstreet. 1607.

The Miseries of inforst Marriage.
Enter Sir Francis Ilford, Wentloe, and Bartley. Bart. But Francke, Frank, now
we are come to the house, what shall we make to be our business?


Ilford. Tut, let us be Impudent enough, and good enough.


Went. We have no acquaintaince here, but young Scarborrow.


Ilf. How no aquaintance: Angels guard me from thy company. I tell thee Wentloe
thou art not worthy to wear guilte Spurs, clean Linen, nor good Clothes.


Went. Why for Gods sake?


Ilford. By this hand thou art not a man fit to Table at an Ordinary, keep
Knights company to Bawdy houses, nor Beggar thy Tailor.


Went. Why then I am free from Cheaters, clear from the Pox, and escape
Cursses?


Ilf. Why do thou think there is any Christians in the world?


Went. I and Jews too, Brokers, Puritans, and Sergiants.


Ilf. Or do thou mean to beg after Charity, that goes in a cold suit
already, that thou talkest thou have no acquaintance here. I tell thee Wentloe
thou can not live on this side of the world: feed well, drink Tobacco, and be
honored into the presence, but thou must be acquainted with all sorts of men,
I and so far in to, till they desire to be more acquainted with thee.


Bart. True, and then you shall be accounted a gallant of good credit.


Enter Clown. Ilf. But stay, here is a Scrape-trencher arrived: How now blew
bottle, are you of the house?


Clow. I have heard of many black Iacks Sir, but never of a blew Bottle.


Ilf. Well Sir, are you of the house?


Clow. No Sir, I am twenty yardes without, and the house stands without me.


Bart. Prithee tells who owes this building.


Clow. He that dwells in it Sir.


Ilf. Who dwells in it then.


Clow. He that owes it.


Ilf. What Is his name.


Clow. I was none of his Godfather.


Ilf. Dus master Scarberow lie here,


Clow. I Will give you a rhyme for that Sir,
Sick men may lie, and dead men in their Graves,
Few else do lie abed at noone, but Drunkards, Punks, and knaves.

Ilf. What am I the better for thy answer?


Clow. What am I the better for thy question?


Ilf. Why nothing.


Clow. Why then of nothing comes nothing.


Enter Scarborrow. Went. Sblud this is a philosophical fool.


Clow. Then I that am a fool by Art, am better then you that are fools by
nature.


Exit Scar. Gentlemen, welcome to Yorkshire.


Ilf. And well incountred my little Villain of fifteen hundred a year, S^ut
what make thou here in this barren soil of the North, when thy honest
friends miss thee at London?


Scar. Faith Gallants it is the Country where my Father lived, where first I saw
the light, and where I am loved,


Ilf. Loved, I as Courtiers love Usurers, and that is just as long as they lend
them money. Now dare I lay.


Went. None of your Land good Knight, for that is laid to morgage already?


Ilf. I dare lay with any man that will take me up.


Went. Who list to have a Lubberly load.


Ilf. Sirrah wag, this Rogue was son and heir to Antony Now, Now, and Blind
Moon. And he must needs be a scuruy Musition, that has two Fiddlers to his
Fathers: but tell me in faith, art thou not, nay I know thou art called down into
the country here, by some hoary Knight or other, who knowing thee a young
Gentleman of good parts, and a great living* has desired thee to see some
pitiful piece of his Workmanship, a Daughter I mean, Is It not, so?


Scar. About some such preferment I came down.


Ilf. Preferment, a good word: And when do you commence into the Cuckolds
order, the Preferment you speak of when shall we have Gloves: when, when?


Scarb. Faith gallants
I have bin guest here but since last night.

Ilf. Why, and that is time enough to make up a dozen marriages, as marriages
are made up now adays. For look you Sir: the father according to the fashion,
being sure you have a good living, and without Encumbrance, comes to you thus:
-- takes you by the hand thus: -- wipes his long beard thus: -- or turn svp his
Muchacho thus: -- Walks some turn or two thus: -- to show his comely Gravity
thus: -- And having washed his foul mouth thus: -- it last breaksout thus. --


Went. O God: Let us hear more of this?


Ilf. Master Scarborrow, you are a young Gentleman, I knew your father well,
he was my worshipful good Neighbor, for our Demeanes lay near together.
Then Sir, -- you and I must be of more nere acquaintance. -- At which, you must
make an eruption thus: -- O God (sweet Sir)


Bart. Sfut, the Knight would have made an excellent Zany, in an Italian Comedy.


Ilf. Then he goes forward thus: Sir, my self am Lord of some thousand a
year, a Widdower, (master Scarberrow) I have a couple of young Gentlewomen to
my Daughters, a thousand a year will do well divided among them? Ha, wilt not
Master Scarborrow, -- At which you out of your education must reply thus. --
The Portion will deserve them worthy husbands: on which Tinder he soones takes
fire and swears you are the Man his hopes shot at, and one of them shall be
yours.


Went. If I did not like her, should he swear to the devil, I would make
him forsworn.


Ilf. Then putting you and the young Puggs to in a close room together.


Went. If he should lie with her there, is not the father partly the Bawd?


Ilf. Where the young puppet, having the Lesson before from old Fox, give the
son half a dozen warm kisses, which after her fathers oths, takes such
Impression in thee, thou straight calst by Jesus Mistress, I love you: -- When
she has the wit to ask, but Sir, will you marry me, and thou in thy
Cox-sparrow-humor replyest, I (before God) as I am a Gentleman will I, which the
Father ouer-hearing, leaps in, takes you at your word, swears he is glad to
see this; nay he will have you contracted straight, and for a need makes the
priest of himself.

Thus in one hour, from a quiet life,
Thou art sworn in debt, and troubled with a wife.

Bart. But can they Love one another so soon?


Ilf. Oh, it is no matter now adays for love, it is well, and they can but make
shift to lie together.


Went. But will your father do this too, if he know the gallant breaths
himself at some two or three Bawdy houses in a morning.


Ilf. Oh the sooner, for that and the Land together, tell the old ladde, he
will know the better how to deal with his Daughter?

The Wise and Ancient Fathers know this Rule,
Should both wed Maids, the Child would be a Fool.
Come Wag, if thou have gone no further then into the Ordinary fashion, meet,
see, and kiss, give over: Mary not a Wife to have a hundred plagues for one
pleasure: lets to London, there is variety: and change of pasture makes fat
Calves.


Sca. But change of women bawld Knaves, Sir Knight.


Ilf. Wag and thou be a Lover but three days, thou will be Hartles,
Sleeplesse, witles, Mad, Wretched, Miserable, and indeed, a stark Fool. And
by that, thou have been married but three weeks, tho thou should wed a
Cynthia rara avis, thou would be a man monstrous: A Cuckold, a Cuckold.


Bart. And why is a Cuckold monstrous, Knight?


Ilf. Why, because a man is made a Beast by being married? Take but example thy
self from the Moon, as soon as she is delivered of her great belly, does
she not point at the world with a pair of horns, as who should say, married
men, some of ye are Cuckolds.


Scar. I conster more Divinely of their sex,
Being Maids, methinkes they are Angels: and being Wives,
They are Sovereigns: Cordials that preserve our Lives,
They are like our hands that feed us, this is clear,
They renew man, as spring renewes the year.

Ilf. There Is nere a wanton Wench that hears thee, but thinks thee a Coxcom
for saying so: Marry none of them, if thou will have their true Characters,
I Will give it thee, -- Women are the Purgatory of men's Pursses, the Paradise of
their bodies, and the Hell of their minds; Marry none of them. Women are in
Churches Saints, abroad Angels, at home Devils.

Here are married men inow, know this: Marry none of them.


Scar. Men that traduce by custom, show sharp wit
Only in speaking Ill, and practice it:
Against the best of Creatures, divine women
Who are Gods Agents here, and the Heavenly eye
By which this Orb has her Maturity;
Beauty in women, get the world with Child,
Without whom, she were barren, faint, and wild.
They are the stems on which do Angels grow,
From whence Virtue is stild, and Arts do flow.

Enter Sir John Harcop and his Daughter Clare. Ilf. Let them be what Flowers
they will, and they were Roses, I will pluck none of them for pricking my
fingers. But soft, here comes a voider for us: and I see, do what I can, as
long as the world lasts, there will be Cuckolds in it. Do you hear Child,
heeres one come to blend you together: he has brought you a kneading-tub, if
thou do take her at his hands,

Tho thou had Argus eyes, be sure of this,
Women have sworn with more then one to kiss.

Har. Nay no parting Gentlemen: Hem.

Went. Sfut dus he make Punkes of us, that he Hems already?

Har. Gallants,
Know old John Harcop keeps a Wineseller,
Has Traueld, bin at Court, known Fashions,
And unto all bears habit like your selves,
The shapes of Gentlemen and men of sort.
I have a health to give them ere they part.

Went. Health Knight, not as Drunkards give their healthes I hope, to go
together by the ears when they have done?


Har. My healths are welcome: welcome Gentlemen.


Ilf. Are we welcome Knight, Infayth.


Har. Welcome infayth Sir.


Ilf. Preethee tell me have not thou bin a Whoremaister.


Har. In youth I swild my fill at Venus cup,
In sted of full draughts now I am feign to sup.

Ilf. Why then thou art a man fit for my compauy:
Do thou hear that he is a good fellow of our stamp,
Make much of his ^ather.

Exeunt Manet Scarborrow and Clare. Scar. The Father, and the Gallants have
left me hear with a Gentlewoman, and if I know what to say to her I am a
villen, heaven grant her life has borrowed so much Impudence of her sex, but
to speak to me first: for by this hand, I have not so much steel of Immodesty
in my face, to Parle to a Wench without blushing. I Will walk by her, in hope
she can open her teeth. -- Not a word? -- Is it not strange a man should be in
a woman's company all this while and not hear her tongue. -- I Will go further?
-- God of his goodness: not a Syllable. I think if I should take up her Clothes
to, she would say nothing to me. -- With what words tro dus a man begin to woe.
Gentlewoman pray you what Is It a Clockc?


Clar. Troth Sir, carrying no watch about me but mine eyes, I answer you: I
cannot tell.


Scar. And if you cannot tell, Beauty I take the Addage for my reply: You are
naught to keep sheep.


Clar. Yet I am big enough to keep my sclfe.


Scar. Prithee tell me: Are you not a Woman?


Clar. I know not that neither, til I am better acquainted with a man.


Scar. And how would you be acquainted with a man?


Clar. To distinguish betwixt himself and my self.


Scar. Why I am a Man.


Cla. That's more then I know Sir.


Scar. To approve I am no less: thus I kiss thee.


Cla. And by that proof I am a man too, for I have kissed you.


Scar. Prithee tell me can you love?


Clar. O Lord Sir, three or four things: I Love my meat, choice of Suitors:
Clothes in the Fashion: and like a right woman I love to have my will.


Scar. What think you of me for a Husband?


Clar. Let me first know, what you think of me for a wife?


Scar. Troth I think you are a proper Gentlewoman.


Clar. Do you but think so?


Scar. Nay I see you are a very perfect proper Gentlewoman.


Clar. It is great pity then I should be alone without a proper man.


Scar. Your father says I shall marry you.


Clar. And I say God forbid Sir: I am a great deal to young.


Scar. I love thee by my troth.


Clar. O pray you do not so, for then you stray from the steps of Gentility,
the fashion among them is to marry first, and love after by leisure.


Scarb. That I do love thee, here by heaven I swear, and call it as a witness to
this kiss.


Clar. You will not enforce me I hope Sir?


Scar. Makes me this woman's husband, thou art my Clare,
Accept my heart, and prove as Chaste, as fair.

Clare, O God, you are too hot in your gifts, should I accept them, we should
have you plead nonage, some half a year hence: sue for reuersement, and say
the deed was done under age.


Scar. Prithee do not Jest?


Cl. No (God is my record) I speak in earnest: and desire to know Whether ye
mean to marry me, yea or no.


Scar. This hand thus takes thee as my loving wife,


Clar. For better, for worse.


Scar. I, till death us depart love.


Clar. Why then I thank you Sir, and now I am like to have that I long looked
for: A Husband.

How soon from our own tongues is the word sed,
Captives our maiden-freedome to a head.

Scar. Clare your are now mine, and I must let you know,
What every wise does to her husband owe,
To be a wise, is to be Dedicate
Not to a youthful course, wild, and vnstedy,
But to the soul of virtue, obedience,
Studying to please, and never to offend.
Wives, have two eyes created, not like Birds
To rome about at pleasure, but for two sentinels,
To watch their husbands safety as their own,
Two hands, ones to feed him, the other her self:
Two feet, and one of them is their husbands,
They have two of every thing, only of one,
Their Chastity, that should be his alone.
Their very thoughts they cannot term them one,
Maids being once made wives, can nothing call
Rightly their own; they are their husbands all:
If such a wife you can prepare to be,
Clare I am yours: and you are fit for me.

Clar. We being thus subdued, pray you know then,
As women owe a duty, so do men.
Men must be like the branch and bark to trees,
Which does defend them from tempestuous rage,
Cloth them in Winter, tender them in age,
Or as Ewes love unto their Eanlings lives,
Such should be husbands custom to their wives.
If it appear to them they have straid amiss,
They only must rebuke them with a kiss,
Or Clock them, as Hens Chickens, with kind call,
Cover them under their wing, and pardon all:
No iarres must make two beds, no strife divide them,
Those betwixt whom a faith and troth is given,
Death only parts, since they are knit by heaven:
If such a husband you intend to be,
I am your Clare, and you are fit for me.

Scar. By heaven.

Clar. Advise before you swear, let me remember you,
Men never give their faith, and promise marriage,
But heaven records their oath: If they prove true,
Heaven smiles for joy, if not it weeps for you,
Unless your heart, then with your words agree,
Yet let us part, and less us both be free.

Scar. If ever man in swearing love, swore true,
My words are like to his: Here comes your father.

Enter Sir John Harcop, Ilford, Wentloe, Bartley, and Butler. Har. Now master
Scarborrow.


Sca. Prepared to ask how you like that we have done,
your daughters made my wife, and I your son.

Har. And both agreed so.


Both. We are Sir,


Har. Then long may you live together, have store of sons.


Ilf. It Is no matter who is the father.


Har. But son here is a man of yours is come from London.


But. And brought you Letters Sir.


Scar. What news from London Butler.


But. The old news Sir, the Ordinaries are full, some Citizens are
bankerouts, and many Gentlemen beggars.


Scar. Clare here is an unwelcome Pursiuant,
My Lord and Guardian writes to me with speed,
I must return to London.

Har. And you being Ward to him son Scarborrow,
And know him great, it fits that you obey him.

Har. It dus it dus, for by an ancient law,
We are borne free heirs, but kept like slaves in awe,
Who are for London Gallants?

Ilf. Switch and Spur we will bear you company.

Scar. Clare I must leave thee, with what unwillingness
Witness this dwelling kiss upon thy lip,
And tho I must be absent from thine eye,
Be sure my heart does in thy bosom lie,
Three years I am yet a ward, which time I Will pass,
Making thy faith my constant Looking-glass,
Till when.

Clar. Till when you please, where ere you live or lie,
Your loves here worn, your presence in my eye.

Exeunt Enter Lord Faulconbridge, and sir William Scarborow. Hunsd. Sir William,
How old say you is your kinsman Scarborrow.

Will, Eighteen my Lord, next Pentecost.

Lord. Bethink you good Sir William,
I reckon thereabout my self, so by that account
There Is full three Winters yet he must attend,
Under our awe, before he sue his Livery:
Is It not so?

Willi. Not a day less my Lord.

Lord. Sir William you are his Uncle, and I must speak
That am his Guardian, would I had a son
Might merit commendations even with him.
I Will tetl you what he is, he is a youth,
A Noble branch, increasing blessed fruit.
Where Caterpiller vice dare not to touch,
He is himself with so much gravity,
Praise cannot praise him with Hypperbole:
He is one whom older look upon, as one a book,
Wherein are Printed Noble sentences
For them to rule their lives by. Indeed he is one
All Emulate his virtues, hate him none.

Willi. His friends are proud, to hear this good of him.

Lord. And yet Sir William being as he is,
Young, and unsettled, tho of virtuous thoughts,
By Genuine disposition, yet our eyes
See daily presidents, hopeful Gentlemen,
Being trusted in the world with their own will,
Divert the good is looked from them to Ill,
Make their old names forgot, or not worth note
With company they keep, such Reuelling
With Panders, Parasites, Podigies of Knaves,
That they sell all, even their old fathers graves.
Which to prevent, we will match him to a wife,
Marriage Restraines the scope of single life.

Willi. My Lord speaks like a father for my Kinsman.

Lord. And I have found him one of Noble parentage,
A Niece of mine, nay I have broke with her,
Know thus much of her mind, what for my pleasure
As also for the good appears in him,
She is pleased of all that's hers to make him King.

Willi. Our name is blessed in such an honored marriage


Enter Doctor Baxter. Lord. Also I have appointed Doctor Baxter,
Chansellor of Oxford to attend me here
And see he is come. Good master Doctor.

Bax. My honorable Lord.

Willi. I have possessed you with this business master Doctor

Baxt. To see the contract twixt you honored Niece and master Scarborrow.


Lord. It Is so, and I did look for him by this.


Bax. I saw him leave his horse as I came up.


Lord. So, so.
Then he will be here forthwith: you Master Baxter
Go Usher hither straight young Katherine,
Sir William, here and I will keep this room til you return.

Scar. My honorable Lord.

Enter Scarborrow Lord. It Is well done Scarborrow.

Scar. Kind Uncle.

willi. Thanks my good Couz.

Lord. You have bin welcome in your Country Yorkshire.

Scar. The time that I spent there my Lord was merry.

Lord. It Was well, it was very well, and in your absence,
your Uncle here and I, have bin bethinking
what gift betwixt us we might bestow on you,
That to your house large dignity might bring,
With fair increase, as from a Crystal spring.

Enter Doctor and Katherine. Scar. My name is bound to your benificence,
your hands has bin to me like bounties purse,
Never shut up, your self my foster-Nurse:
Nothing can from your honor come; prove me so rude,
But I Will accept to shun Ingratitude.

Lord. We accept thy promise, now return thee this,
A virtuous wife, accept her with a kiss.

Scar. My honorable Lord.

Lord. Fear not to take her man, she will fear neither,
Do what thou can being both abed together.

Scar. O but my Lord.

Lord. But me a Dog of wax, come kiss, and agree,
Your friends have thought it fit, and it must be.

Scar. I have no hands to take her to my wife.

Lord How Sawce-box.

Scar. O pardon me my Lord the vnripenes of my years,
Too green for government, is old in fears
To undertake that charge.

Lord. Sir, sir, I and sir knave, then here is a mellowed experience knows how
to teach you,


Scar. O God.


Lord. O Jack.
How both our cares, your Uncle and my self,
Sought, studied, found out, and for your good,
A maid, a Niece of mine, both fair and chaste,
And must we stand at your discretion.

Scar. O Good my Lord
Had I two souls, then might I have two wives,
Had I two faiths, then had I one for her,
Having of both but one, that one is given
To Sir John Harcops daughter.

Lord. Ha, ha, what is that, let me hear that again?

Scar. To Sir John Harcops Clare I have made an oath,
Part me in twain, yet she is one half of both.
This hand the which I wear it is half hers,
Such power has faith and troth twixt couples young,
Death only cuts that knot tide with the tongue.

Lord. And have you knit that knot Sir.

Scar. I have done so much, that if I wed not her,
My marriage makes me an Adulterer,
In which black sheets, I wallow all my life,
My babes being Bastards, and a whore my wife.

Enter secretary Lord. Ha, is it even so, My secretary there,
Write me a Letter straight to Sir John Harcop,
I Will see Sir Jack and if that Harcop dare,
Being my Ward, contract you to his daughter.
Exit secret. My steward too, post you to Yorkshire,
Enter steward. Where lies my youngsters Land, and sirrah,
Fell me his wood, make havocke, spoil and wast.
Exit steward Sir you shall know that you are Ward to me,
I Will make you poor enough: then mend your self.

Will. O Cozen.

scar. O Uncle.

Lord. Contract your self and where you list,
I Will make you know me Sir to be your guard.

scar. World now thou see what it is to be a ward.

Lord And where I meant my self to have disburst
Four thousand pound, upon this marriage
Surrendered up your land to your own use,
And compast other portions to your hands,
Sir I Will now yoke you still.

scar. A yoke indeed.

Huns. And spite of they dare contradict my will,
I Will make thee marry to my Chambermaid. Comecouz.

Exit. Bax. Faith Sir it fits you to be more advised.

scar. Do not you flatter for preferment sir

willi. O but good Coze.

scar. O but good uncle could I command my love,
Or cancel oaths out of heavens brazen book,
Ingrost by Gods own finger, then you might speak.
Had men that law to love as most have tongues
To love a thousand women with, then you might speak.
Were love like dust lawful for every Wind,
To bear from place to place, were oaths but puffes,
Men might forswear themselves, but I do know,
Tho sin being past with us, the acts forgot,
The poor soul groans, and she forgets it not.

willi. Yet hear your own case?

scar. O it is to miserable:
That I a Gentleman should be thus torn
From mine own right, and forest to be sorsworne.

will. Yet being as it is, it must be your care,
To salve it with advice, not with despair,
you are his ward, being so, the Law intends,
He is to have your duty, and in his rule
Is both your marriage, and your heritage,
If you rebel against these Injunctions,
The penalty takes hold on you, which for himself,
He straight thus prosecutes, he wastes your land,
Weds you where he thinks fit, but if your self
Have of some violent humor matched your self,
Without his knowledge, then has he power
To Merce your purse, and in a sum so great,
That shall for ever keep your fortunes weak,
Where otherwise if you be ruld by him
Your house is raisd by matching to his kin.

Enter Falconbridge Lord. Now death of me, shall I be crossed by such a Jack, he
wed
himself, and where he list: Sirrah Malapart, I Will hamper you,
You that will have your will, come get you in:
I Will make thee shape thy thoughts to marry her,
Or wish thy birth had bin thy murderer.

Scar. Fare pity me, because I am inforst,
For I have heard those matches have cost blood,
Where love is once begun and then withstood,

Exeunt. Enter Ilford and a Page with him. Ilf. Boy, have thou delivered my
Letter?


Boy. I Sir, I saw him open the lips ont.


Ilf. He had not a new suit on, had he?


Boy. I am not so well acquainted with his Wardrobe Sir, but I saw a lean
fellow, with sunk eyes, and shamble legs, sigh pitifully at his chamber
door, and entreat his man to put his master in mind of him.


Ilf. O, that was his Tailor, I see now he will be blessed he profits by my
counsel, he will pay no debts before he be arested, nor then neither, if he
can find ere a beast that dare but be bail for him, but he will seal in the
afternoon.


Boy. Yes Sir, he will imprint for you as deep as he can.


Ilf. Good, good, now have I a Parsons Nose, and smell tyth coming in then.
Now let me number how many rooks I have half undone already this Term by the
first return: four by Dice, six by being bound with me, and ten by queanes,
of which some be Courtiers, some Country Gentlemen, and some Citizens Sons.
Thou art a good Frank, if thou pe^gest thus, thou art still a Companion for
Gallants, may keep a Caramite, take Physic, at the Spring and the fall.


Enter VVentloe. wont. Frank, news that will make thee fat Frank.


Ilf. Prithee rather give me somewhat will keep me lean,
I ha no mind yet to take Physic.

Wen. Master Scarberrow is a married man.


Ilf. Then heaven grant he may, as few married men do, make much of his wife.


Went. Why? would have him love her, let her command al, and make her his
master?


Ilf. No no, they that do so, make not much of their wives, but give them their
will, and its the marring of em.


Enter Bartley. Bart. Honest Frank, valerous Francke, a portion of thy wit,
but to help us in this enterprise, and we may walk London stret and cry pish
at the Sergiants.


Ilf. You may shift out one term, and yet die in the Counter, these are the
scabs now that hang upon honest Job, I am Job, and these art the scuruy
scabbes, but what is this your pot seeths over withal?


Bart. Master Scarborrow is a married man.


Went. He has all his land in his own hand.


Bart. His brothers and sisters portions.


Went. Besides four thousand pound in ready money with his wife.


Ilf. A good talent by my faith, it might help many Gentlemen to pay their
Tailours, and I might be one of them.


Went. Nay, honest Frank, have thou found a trick for him, if thou have not,
look heeres a line to direct thee. First draw him into bands for money, then
to dice for it: Then take up stuff at the Mercers, straight to a punke with
it: Then morgage his Land, and be drunk with that: so with them and the rest,
from an Ancient Gentleman, make him a young beggar.


Ilf. What a Roge is this, to read a lecture to me, and mine own lesson too,
which he knows I ha made perfect to 9 hundred fourscore and nineteen. A
cheating Rascal will teach me that ha made them that have worn a spacious
Park, Lodge and all of their backs this morning: bin feign to pawn it before
night, and they that ha stauked like a huge Elephant, with a Castle on their
necks, and removed yt to their own shoulders in one day which their fathers
built up in seven year, bin glad by my means, in so much time as a child
suckes, to drink bottle Ale, tho a punk pay fort. And shall this Parat instruct
me?


Went. Nay but Frank.


Ilf. A roge that has fed upon me, and the fruit of my wit like Pullen from a
Pantlers chipings, and now I put him into good cloths to shift two suits in a
day, that could scare shift a patcht shirt once in a year, and says prayers
when he had it: hark, how he prates.


Went. Besides Frank, since his marriage, he stawkes me like a cashierd
Captain discontent, in which Melancholy, the least drop of mirth, of which
thou have an Ocean, will make him, and all his ours for ever.


Ilf. Says mine own Roge so, give me thy hand then, we will doot, and there is
earnest. Strikes him. Sfut you Chitrtiface, that looks worse then a Collier
thorough a wooden window, an Ape afeard of a whip, or a Knaves head, shook
seven years in the weather upon London Bridge. Do you Catechize me?


Wen. Nay but valorous Frank, he that knows the secrets of al hearts, knows I
did it in kindness.


Ilf. Know your seasons: besides, I am not of that Species for you to instruct.
Then know your seasons.


Bart. Sfut friends, friends, al friends: Here comes young Scarborrow, should
he knew of this, all our disseignes were prevented.


Enter Scarborrow. Ilf. What, melancholy my young master, my young married
man, God give your worship joy.


Scar. Joy, of what Frank?


Ilf. Of thy wealth, for I hear of few that ha joy of heir wives


Scar. Who weds as I have to enforced sheets,
His care increases, but his comfort fleets.

Ilf. Thou having so much wit, what a Devil meantst thou to marry?


Scar. O speak not of it,
Marriage sounds in mine care like a Bell,
Not rung for pleasure, but a doleful knell.

Ilf. A common course, those men that are married in the Morning, to wish
themselves buried ere night.


Scar. I cannot love her.


Ilf. No news neither, wives know that's a general fault amongst their
Husbands.


Scar. I will not ly with her.


Ilf. Cetera volunt she will say still, if you will not, another will.


Scar. Why did she marry me, knowing I did not love her.


Ilf. As other women do, either to be maintaind by you, or to make you a
Cuckold. Now sir, what come you for?


Enter Clown. Clow. As men do in have, to make an end of their business.


Ilf. What Is your business?


Clow. My business is this Sir, this Sir, and this Sir,


Ilf. The meaning of all this Sir. Cl. By this is as much as to say Sir, may
May. has sent unto you. By this is as much as to say Sir, my master has him
humbly commended unto you, and by this is as much as to say, my master craves
your answer.


Ilf. Give me your Letter. And you shall have this Sir, this Sir, and this Sir.


Clow. No Sir.


Ilford. Why Sir?


Clow. Because as the learned have very well instructed me, Qui supranos, nihil
ad nos, and tho many Gentlemen will have to do with other men's business, yet
from me know, the most part of them prove knaves for their labor.


Went. You ha the Knave in faith Frank.


Clo. Long may he live to enjoy it. From Sir John Harcop of Harcop, in the
County of York Knight, by me his man, to your self my young master, by these
presents greeting.


Ilf. How camst thou by these good words?


Clow. As you by your good clothes, took them upon trust, and swore I would
never pay for em.


Scar. Thy master Sir John Harcop writes to me,
That I should entertain thee for my man,
His wish is acceptable, thou art welcome fellow.
Oh but thy masters Daughter, sends an Article
Which makes me think upon my present sin,
Here she remembers me to keep in mind
My promised faith to her, which I ha broke.
Here she remembers me I am a man,
Black tore with perjury, whose sinful breast,
Is Charactred like those cursed of the blessed.

Ilf. How now my young Bully, like a young wench forty weeks after the loss of
her Mayden-head, crying out.


Scar. Trouble me not,
Give me Pen, Ink, and Paper, I will write to her,
O? but what shall I write?
Mine own excuse, why no excuse can serve
For him that swears, and from his oath does swerve?
Or shall I say, my marriage was info rest,
It Was bad in them, not well in me to yield.
Wretched thee to whose marriage was compeld,
I Will only write that which my grave has bred,
Forgive me Clare, for I am married:
It Is soon set down, but not so soon forgot, or worn from hence.
Deliver it unto her, there is for thy pains,
Would I as soon could cleanse these periurd stains.

Clow. Well, I could alter mine eyes from filthy mud into fair water: you have
paid for my tears, and mine eyes shall prove bankerouts, and break out for
you, let no man persuade me, I will cry, and every Town betwixt
Shoreditch-church and York bridge, shall bear me witness.


Exit. Scar. Gentlemen, I Will take my leave of you,
She that I am married to but not my wife,
Will London leave, in Yorkshire lead our life.

Ilf. We must not leave you so my young Gallant,
We three are sick in state, and your wealth must help to make us whole
again.
For this saying, is as true as old:
Strife nursed twixt man and wife, makes such a flaw,
How great so eres their wealth, it will have a thaw,

Enter Sir John Harcop with his Daughter Clare, and two younger Brothers,
Thomas, and John Scarborrow. Har. Brothers to him ere long shall be my son,
By wedding this young girl: You are welcome both,
Nay kiss her, kiss, tho that she shall
Be your Brothers wife, to kiss the cheek is free.

Tho. Kiss, Sfut what else? thou art a good plumpe wench, I like you well,
prithee make have and bring store of boys, but be sure they have good faces,
that they may call me vnck^e.


Io. Glad of so fair a sister, I salute you.


Har. Good, good y faith, this kissings good y faith,
I loved to smacke it too when I was young,
But Mum: they have felt thy cheek Clare, let them hear thy tung.

Clar. Such welcome as befits my Scarborrows brothers,
From me his troth-plight wife be sure to have,
And tho my tongue prove scant in any part,
The bounds be sure are large, full in my heart.

Tho. Tut, that's not that we dout on wench, but do you hear Sir John, what do
you think drue me from London, and the Innes of Court, thus far into
Yorkshire?


Har. I guess to see this girl, shall be your sister.


Tho. Faith, and I guess partly so too, but the maine was, and I will not lie
to you, that your coming now in this wise into our kindred, I might be
acquainted with you aforehand, that after my brother had married your daughter,
I his brother might borrowe some money of you.


Har. What? Do you borrow of your kindred Sir?


Thom. Sfut what else, they having interrest in my blood, why should not I
have interrest in their coin. Besides Sir, I being a younger brother, would be
ashamed of my generation if I would not borrow of any man that would lend,
especially of my affinity, of whom I keep a Calendar. And look you Sir, thus
I go over them. Frst ore my Uncles, often ore mine Aunts, then up to my
Nephews, straight down to my Neeces, to this Cosen Thomas, and that Cosen
Ieffrey, leaving the courteous claw given to none of their elbowes, even unto
the third and fourth remove of any that has interest in our blood. Al which
do upon their summons made by me, duly and faithfully provide for appearance,
and so as they are, I hope we shall be, more indeerd, intierly, better, and
more feelingly acquainted.


Har. you are a merry Gentleman.


Tho. It Is the hope of money makes me so, and I know none but fools use to be
sad with it.


Ioh. From Oxford am I drawn, from serious studies
Expecting that my brother still had soiournd
With you his best of choice, and this good Knight.

Har. His absence shall not make our hearts less merry
Then if we had his presence. A day ere long,
Will bring him back, when one the other meets,
At nooneith Church, at night between the sheets.
We Will wash this chat with wine. Some wine: fill up,
The sharpner of the wit, is a full cup.
And so to you Sir.

Tho. Do, and I Will drink, to my new sister, but upon this condition, that she
may have quiet days, little rest a nights, hapleasant afternoones, be plyant
to my brother, and lend me money when soere I Will borrow it.


Har. Nay, nay, nay,
Women are weak and we must bear with them,
Your frolic healths, are only fit for men,

Tho. Well, I am contented, women must to the wall, tho it be to a feather-bed.
Fill up then.


Enter Clown. Clo. From London am I come, tho not with pipe and Drum,
Yet I bring matter, in this poor paper,
Will make my young mistress, delighting in kisses,
Do as all Maidens will, hearing of such an ill,
As to have lost, the thing they wished most,
A Husband, a Husband, a pretty sweet Husband,
Cry oh, oh, oh, and alas, And at last ho, ho, ho, as I do.

Clar. Returned so soon from London? What Is the news?

Clow. O mistress, if ever you have seen Demoniceacleare look into mine eyes,
mine eyes are Seuerne, plain Seuerne, the Thamee, nor the River of Tweed are
nothing to em: Nay all the rain that fell at Noah's flood, had not the
discretion that my eyes have: that drunk but up the whole world, and I ha
drowned all the way betwixt this and London.


Cla. Thy news good Robbin.


Clow. My news mistres, I Will tell you strange news, the dust upon London way,
being so great, that not a Lord, Gentleman, Knight, or Knave could travel,
least his eyes should be blown out: At last, they all agreed to hyre me to go
before them, when I looking but upon this Letter, did with this water, this
very water, lay the dust, as well as if it had raind from the beginning of
April to the last of May.


Clar. A Letter from my Scarborrow, give it thy mistress.


Clow. But Mistress.


Cla. Prithee be gone,
I would not have my father nor this Gentlemen,
Be witness of the comfort it does bring.

Clo. Oh but mistress.

Cla. Prithee begone,
With this, and the glad news, leave me alone.

Exit Clo. Tho. It Is your turn Knight, take your licquor, know I am bountiful,
I Will forgive any man any thing that he owes me, but his drink, and that I Will
be paid for.


Cla. May Gentlemen the honesty of mirth
Consists not in Carowsing with excess,
My father has more welcomes then in wine:
Pray you no more.

Tho. Says my sister so, I Will be ruld by thoe then. Do you hear, in hope
hereafter you will lend me some money, now we are half drunk lets go to dinner.
Come Knight.


Exeunt. Manet Cla. Clar. I am glad your gone,
Shall I now opent: no, I Will kiss it first,
Because his outside last did kiss his hand.
Within this fould, I Will calt a sacred sheet,
Are writ black lines, when our white hearts shall meet,
Before I open this door of my delight,
Methinkes I guess how kindly he does write,
Of his true Love to me, as Chuck, Sweet-hart,
I prithee do not think the time too long,
That keeps us from the sweets of marriage rites,
And then he sets my name and kisses it,
Wishing my lips his sheet to write upon,
With like desire methinkes as mine own thoughts,
Ask him now here for me to look upon,
Yet at the last thinking his love too slack,
Ere it arrive at my desired eyes,
He hastens up his message with like speed,
Even as I break this open, wishing to read:
Oh: what is hear? Mine eyes are not mine own? sure they are not,
Tho you ha bin my lamps this sixteen years,
Lets fall the Let. You do belie, my Scarborrow reading so;
Forgive him, he is married, that were Ill:
What lying lights are these. Look I ha no such Letter,
No wedded syllable of the least wrong
Done to a Troth-plight-Virgin like my self*
Beshrow you for your blindness: Forgive him, he is married.
I know my Scarborrowes constancy to me,
Is as firm knit, as faith to Charity,
That I shall kiss him often, hug him thus,
Be made a happy and a fruitful Mother
Of many prosperous children like to him,
And read I, he was married? Asked forgiveness?
What a blind Foolo was I? yet heeres a Letter
To whom directed tro? To my beloved Clare.
Why Law?
Women will read, and read not that they saw,
It Was but my fervent love misled mine eyes,
I Will once again to the Inside, Forgive me, I am married:
william Scarborrow. He has set his name to it to,
O perjury? within the hearts of men
Thy feasts are kept, their tongues proclaims them.

Enter Thomas Scarborrow. Tho. Sister, Gods precious, the cloths laid, the
meat cooles, we all stay, and your father calls for you.


Clar. Kind Sir, excuse me I pray you a little,
I Will but peruse this Letter and come straight.

Tho. Pray you make have, the meat stays for us, and our stomach*
Ready for the meat, for believe this,
Drink makes men hungry, or it makes them lie,
And he that's drunk ore night, ith mornings dry,
Seen and approved.

Exit. Clar. He was contracted mine, yet he unjust
Has married to another: what is my estate then?
A wretched maid, not fit for any man,
For being united his with plighted faiths,
Who ever sues to me commits a sin,
Besiedgeth me, and who shall marry me:
Is like my self, lives in Adultery, (O God)
That such hard Fortune, should betide my youth.
I am Young, Fair, Rich, Honest, Virtuous,
yet for all this, who ere shall marry me
I am but his where, live in Adultery.
I cannot step into the path of pleasure
For which I was created, borne unto,
Let me live nere so honest, rich or poor,
If I once wed, yet I must live a whore.
I must be made a strumpet against my will,
A name I have abhord, a shameful Ill
I have eschewed, and now cannot withstand it
In my self. I am my fathers only child,
In me he has a hope, tho not his name
Can be increast, yet by my Issue
His land shall be possessed, his age delighted.
And tho that I should vow a single life
To keep my soul unspotted, yet will he
Enforce me to a marriage:
So that my grief does of that weight consist,
It helps me not to yield, nor to resist:
And was I then created for a Whore? A whore,
Bad name, bad act, Bad man makes me a scorn:
Then live a Strumpet? Better be unborn.
Enter John Scarborow Sister, Pray you will you come,
Your father and the whole meeting stays for you.

Clar. I come, I come, I pray return: I come.

John I must not go without you.

Clare, Be thou my Usher, sooth I Will follow you

Exit. He writes here to forgive him, he is married:
False Gentleman: I do forgive thee with my heart,
Yet will I send an answer to thy letter,
And in so short words thou shall weep to read them,
And hears my agent ready: Forgive me, I am dead.
It Is writ, and I will act it: Be judge you Mayds
Have trusted the false promises of men.
Be judge you wives, the which have been inforst
From the white sheets you loved, to them ye loathed:
Whether this Axiom may not be assured,
Better one sin, then many be endured.
My arms imbracings, Kisses, Chastity,
Were his possessions: and whilst I live
He does but steal those pleasures he enioyes,
Is an Adulterer in his married arms,
And never goes to his defiled bed,
But God writes sin upon the Teasters head.
I Will be a Wife now, help to save his soul
Tho I have lost his body, give a slake
To his iniquities, and with one sin
Done by this hand, end many done by him.
Farewell the world, then farewell the wedded joys
Till this I have hoped for, from that Gentleman,
Scarborrow, forgive me: thus thou have lost thy wife,
Yet record would, though by an act too foul,
A wife thus did to cleanse her husbands soul.
Enter Sir John Harcop. Har. Gods precious, for his mercy, where is this wench?
Must all my friends and guests attend on you?
Where are you Minion?

Clar. Scarborrow come close mine eyes, for I am dead.

Har. That sad voice was not hers I hope:
Whose this, my daughter?

Clar. Your daughter,
That begs of you to see her buried,
Prays Scarborrow to forgive her: she is dead.

Dies. Har. Patience good tears, and let my words have way
Clare, my daughter, help my servants there:
Lift up thine eyes, and look upon thy father,
They were not borne to loose their light so soon,
I did beget thee for my comforter,
And not to be the Author of my care.
Why speakst thou not? Some help my Servants there:
What hand has made thee pale? Or if thine own,
What cause had thou that were thy fathers Joy,
The Treasure of his age, the Cradle of his sleep,
His all in all? I prithee speak to me?
Thou art not ripe for death, come back again,
Clare, my Clare, If death must needs have one,
I am the fittest, prithee let me go,
Thou dying whilst I live, I am dead with woe.

Enter Thomas, and John Scarborrow. Tho. What means this outcry?

Io. O ruthful spectacle.

Har. Thou were not wont to be so sullen child,
But kind and loving to thy aged father:
Awake, awake, Ift be thy lasting sleep,
Would I had not sense for grief, nor eyes to weep.

Io. What Papers this, the sad contents does tell me,
My Brother writ, he has broke his faith to her,
And she replies, for him she has killed her self.

Har. Was that the cause that thou have soyld thy self,
With these red spots, these blemishers of beauty?
My child, my child, wast perjury in him,
Made thee so fair, act now so foul a finne,
That he deceived thee in a Mothers hopes,
Posterity, the bliss of marriage?
Thou have no tung to answer no, or I,
But in red Letters writes: For him I die.
Curse on his Traitorous tung, his youth, his blood,
His pleasures, Children, and possessions,
Be all his days like winter, comfortless:
Restles his nights, his wants Remorcelesse,
And may his Corpse be the Physicians stage,
Which played upon, stands not to honored Age,
Or with diseases may he lie and pine,
Till grief wastes blood, his eyes, as grief does mine.

Exit. Ioh. O good old man, made wretched by this deed,
The more thy age, were to be pitied.

Enter Scarborrow, his wife Katherine, Ilford, Wentlo, Barley and Butler. Ilf.
What ride by the gate, and not call, that were a shame in faith.


Went. We Will but taste of his Beer, kiss his Daughter, and to horse again,
where is the good Knight hear?


Scar. You bring me to my shame unwillingly.


Ilf. Shamed of what, for deceiving of a wench, I ha not blushed,
that ha dnut to a hundred of em.
In women's love he is wise, does follow this,
Love one so long till her another kiss.
Where Is the good Knight here?

Io. O Brother, you are come to make your eye
Sad mourner at a fatal Tragedy.
Peruse this Letter first, and then this Corpse.

Scar. O wronged Clare? Accursed Scarborrow?
I writ to her, that I was married,
She writes to me, forgive her she is dead:
I Will balm thy body with my faithful tears,
And be perpetual mourner at thy Tomb,
I Will sacrifice this Commit into sighs,
Make a consumption of this pile of man,
And all the benefits my parents gave,
Shall turn distempered to appease the wrath
For this blood shed, and I am guilty of.

Kat. Dear husband.

Scar. False woman, not my wife, tho married to me,
Look what thy friends, and thou art guilty of,
The murder of a creature, equald heaven
In her Creation, whose thoughts like fire,
Never looked base, but ever did aspire
To blessed benefits, till you and yours undid her,
Eye her, view, tho dead, yet she dus look,
Like a fresh frame, or a new printed book
Of the best paper, never looked into,
But with one fullied finger, which did spot her,
Which was her own too, but who was cause of it,
Thou and thy friends, and I will loath thee fort.

Enter Sir John Harcop. Har. They do belly her that do say she is dead,
She is but straid to some by-gallery,
And I must ha her again. Clare, where art thou Clare?

Scar. Here, laid to take her everlasting sleep.

Har. A lies that says so,
Yet now I know thee, I do lie that say it,
For if she be a villen like thy self,
A periurd Traitor, recreant, miscreant,
Dog, a dog, a dog, has dunt.

Scar. O Sir John Harcop.

Hra. O Sir John villen, to be troth thy self
To this good creature, harmless, harmeles child,
This kernel hope, and comfort of my house,
Without Inforcement, of thine own accord,
Draw all her soul ith compass of an oath,
Take that oath from her, make her for none but thee,
And then betray her?

Scar. Shame on them were the cause of it.

Har. But hark what thou have got by it,
Thy wife is but a strumpet, thy children Bastards,
Thy self a murderer, thy wife, accesary,
Thy bed a stews, thy house a Brothell.

Scar. O, it is too true.

Har. I, made a wretched father childles.

Scar. I, made a married man, yet wiueles.

Har. Thou the cause of it.

Scar. Thou the cause of it.

Har. Curse on the day that ere it was begun,
For I an old man am, undone, undone.

Exit Scar. For Charity have care upon your father,
Least that his grief, bring on a more mishap,
This to my arms, my sorrow shall bequeath,
Tho I have lost her, to thy grave I Will bring,
Thou were my wife, and I Will thy Requiem sing:
Go you to the Country, I Will to London back,
All riot now, since that my souls so black.

Exit with Clare. Ka. Thus am I left like Sea-tost-Marriners,
My Fortunes being no more then my distress,
Upon what shore soever I am driven,
Be it good or bad, I must account it heaven,
Tho married, I am reputed not a wife,
Neglected of my Husband, scornd, despised,
And tho my love and true obedience
Lies prostrate to his beck, his heedles eye,
Receives my services unworthily.
I know no cause, nor will be cause of none,
But hope for better days when bad be gone,
You are my guide, whether must I, Butler?

But. Toward Wakefield, where my masters living lies.

Ka. Toward Wakefield where thy master we will attend,
When things are at the worst, it is hopt they will mend.

Enter Thomas, and John Scarborrow. Tho. How now sister, no further forward on
your journey yet?

Ka. When greefes before one, who'd go on to grief,
I Would rather turn me back to find some comfort.

John And that way sorrows hurtfuller then this,
My Brother having brought unto a grave,
That murdered body whom he called his wife,
And spent so many tears upon her Hearse,
As would have made a Tyrant to relent,
Then kneeling at her Coffin, thus he vowed,
From thence he never would embrace your bed.

Tho. The more Fool he.

John Never from hence acknowledge you his wife,
When others strive to enrich their fathers name,
It should be his only aim, to beggar his,
To spend their means, and in his only pride,
Which with a sigh confirmd, he is rid to London,
Vowing a course, that by his life so foul
Men nere should ioyn the hands, without the soul.

Kath. All is but grief, and I am armd for it.

John Weel bring you on your way in hope that's strong
Time may at length make strait. what yet is wrong.

Exit. Enter Ilford, Wentloe, Bartley. Went. He Is our own, he is our own, Come,
lets make use of his wealth, as the snow of Ice: Melt it, melt it.


Ilf. But art sure he will hold his meeting.


Wen. As sure as I am now, and was dead drunk last night.


Ilf. Why then so sure will I be arrested by a couple of Sergeants, and fall
into one of the unlucky Crankes about Cheapside, called Counters.


Bar. Withal, I have provided M. Grype the Usurer, who upon the instant will
be ready to step in, charge the Seargeaunts to keep thee fast, and that now
he will have his five hundred pounds, or thou shall rot for it.


Went: When it follows, young Scarborow shall be bound for the one: then take
up as much more, we share the one half, and help him to be drunk with the
other.


Ilf. Ha, ha, ha.


Enter Scarborow. Bar. Why, do laugh Frank?


Ilf. To see that we and Usurers line by the fall of young heirs as swine by the
dropping of Acorns. But he is come. Where be these Rogues? shall we ha no
tendance here?


Scarb. Good day Gentlemen.


Ilf. A thousand good days, my noble Bully, and as many good fortunes as
there were Grasshoppers in Egypt, and that's covered over with good luck: but
Nouns, Pronounes, and Participles. Where be these Rogues here: what, shall we
have no Wine here?


Enter Drawer. Drawer Anon, anon, sir.


Ilf. Anon, goodman Rascal, must we stay your leisure? gee't us by and by,
with apoxe to you.


Scar. O, do not hurt the fellow?


Exit Drawer Ilf. Hurt him, hang him, Scrape-trencher, star-waren, Wine
spiller, mettle-clancer, Rogue by generation. Why, do hear Will? If thou
do not use these Grape-spillers as you do their pottle-pots, quoit em down
stayres three or four times at a supper, they le grow as saucy with you as
Sergeants, and make bills more unconscionable then Tailors.


Enter Drawer Draw. Here Is the pure and neat grape Gent. I hate for you.


Ilford. Fill up: what ha you brought here, goodman roge?


Drawer The pure element of Claret sir.


Ilf. Ha you so, and did not I call for Rhenish you Mungrell?


Throws the wine in the Drawers face. Scar. Thou needst no wine, I prithee be
more mild?


Ilf. Be mild in a Tavern, it is treason to the red Lettyce, enemy to their
sign post, and slave to humor:

Preethee, lets be mad,
Then fill our heads with wine, till every pate be drunk,
Then piss in the street, Iustell all you meet, and with a Punke,
As thou will do now and then: Thank me thy good
Master, that brought thee to it.

Went. Nay, he profits well, but the worst is he will not swear yet


Scar. Do not belie me: If there be any good in me that's the best: Oaths are
necessary for nothing, They pass out of a ma^s mouth, like smoke through a
chimney, that files all the way it goes.


Went. Why then I think Tobacco be a kind of swearing, for it furs our nose
pockily.


Scar. But come, lets drink our selves into a stomach asor supper.


Ilf. Agreed. I Will begin with a new health. Fill up.


To them that mnke Land fly,
By wine, whores, and a Die.
To them, that only thriues,
By kissing others Wives.
To them that pay for clothes,
With nothing but with Oaths:
Care not from whom they get,
So they may be in debt:
This health my hearts
drinks. But who their Tailors pay,
Borrow, and keep their day,
Weel hold him like this Glass,
A brainlesse empty Ass,
And not a mate for us.
Drink round my hearts.

Wen. An excellent health.

Enter Drawer. Master Ilford, there is a couple of strangers beneath desires to
speak with you.


Ilf. What beards ha they? Gentleman-like-beards, or broker-like-beards?


Drawer I am not so well acquainted with the Art of Facemending sir: but they
would speak with you.


Ilf. I Will go down to em.


Went. Do: and we will stay here and drink Tobacco.


Scarb. Thus like a Fever that does shake a man
From strength to weakness, I consume my self:
I know this company, their custom vilde,
Hated, abhord of good-men, yet like a child
By reasons rule instructed how to know
Evil from good, I to the worser go.
Why do you suffer this, you upper powers,
That I should surfeit in the sin I taste, have sense to feel my mischief,
yet make wast
Of heaven and earth:
My self will answer, what my self does ask?
Who once does cherish sin, begets his shame,
For vice being fosterd once, coms Impudence,
Which makes men count sin, Custom, not offense,
When all like me, their reputation blot,
Pursuing evil, while the good (...) got.

Enter Ilford led in by a couple of Sergeants, and Gripe the Usurer. Ser. Nay,
never strive, we can hold you.


Ilf. I, me, and any man else, and a fall into your Clutches: Let go your
tugging, as I am a Gentleman, I Will be your true prisoner.


Wen. How now: what is the matter Frank?


Ilf. I am fallen into the hands of Sergiants, I am arested.


Bart. How, arrest a Gentleman in our company?


Ilf. Put up, put up, for sins sake put up, lets not a^l suppe in the Counter
to night, let me speak with master Gripe the Creditor.


Grip. Well: what say you to me Sir?


Ilf. You have arrested me here master Gripe.


Gri. Not I Sir, the Sergiants have.


Ilf. But at your suit master Gripe: yet hear me, as I am a Gent.


Gri. I rather you could say as you were an honest man, and then I might
believe you.


Ilf. Yet hear me.


Gri. Hear me no hearings, I lent you my money for good will.


Ilf. And I spent it for mere necessity, I confess I owe you five hundred
pound, and I confess I owe not a penny to any man, but he would be glad to hate:
my bond you have already master Gripe If you will, now take my word.


Grip. Word me no words: Officers look to your prisoner: If you cannot either
make me present payment, or put me in security such as I shall like too.


Ilf. Such as you shall like too: what say you to this young Gent. He is the
widgen that we must feed upon.


Grip. Who young master Scarborrow, he is an honest Gentleman for ought I
know, I nere lost penny by him.


Ilf. I would be ashamd any man should say so by me, that I have had dealings
withal: But my enforced friends, wilt please you but to retire into some small
distance, whilst I descend with a few words to these Gentlemen, and I Will commit
my self into your hands immediately.


Ser. Well sir we will wait upon you.


Ilf. Gentlemen I am to proferre some conference, and in especially to you
master Scarborrow, our meeting here for your mirth has proved to me thus
adverse, that in your companies I am Arrested: How ill it will stand with the
flourish of your reputations when men of rank and note communicate, that I
Frank Ilforde, Gentlem. whose Fortunes may transcend, to make ample Gratuities
future, and heap satisfaction for any present extention of his friends
kindness, was Enforced from the Miter in Bredstreet, to the Counter in the
Poultrey: for mine own part, if you shall think it meet, and that it shall
acord with the state of gentry, to submit my self from the featherbed in the
Masters side, or the Flock-bed in the Knights ward, to the straw-bed in the
hole, I shall buckle to my heels insted of guilt spurs, the armor of
patience, and doote.


Went. Come, come, what a pox need all this, this is Mellis Flora, the sweetest
of the honey, he that was not made to fat Cattle, but to feed Gentlemen.


Bart. You wear good clothes.


Wen. Are well descended.


Bart. Keep the best company.


Went. Should regard your credit.


Bar. Stand not upon it, be bound, be bound.


Wen. Ye are richly married.


Bar. Love not your wife.


Wen. Have store of friends.


Bar. Who shall be your heir.


Wen. The son of some slave.


Bar. Some groom.


Wen. Some Horse-keeper.


Bart. Stand not vpont, be bound, be bound.


Scar. Well at your Importance, for once I Will stretch my purse Whose borne to
sink, as good this way as worse.


went. Now speaks my Bully like a Gentleman of worth.


Bart. Of merit.


went. Fit to be regarded.


Bar. That shall command our souls.


went. Our swords.


Bart. Our selves.


Ilf. To feed upon you as Pharoes lean kine did upon the fat.


Scar. Master Gripe is my bond current for this Gentleman.


Ilf. Good security you Egyptian Grasshopper, good security?


Gri. And for as much more kind Master Scarborrow.
Provided that men mortal as we are,
May have.

Scar. May have security.


Gri. Your bond with land conuaid, which may assure me of mine own again.


Scar. You shall be satisfied, and I Will become your debtor, for full five hundred
more then he does owe you.

This night we sup here, bear us company,
And bring your Counsel, Scriuener, and the money with you,
Where I will make as full assurance as in the Law you would wish.

Gri. I take your word Sir,
And so discharge you of your prisoner.

Ilf. Why then lets come and take up a new room, the infected has spit in
this.

He that has store of Coin, wants not a friend,
Thou shall receive sweet rogue, and we will spend.

Exeunt. Enter Thomas and John Scarborrow, Ioh. Brother, you see the extremity
of want
Inforceth us to question for our own,
The rather that we see, not like a Brother
Our Brother keeps from us to spend on other.

Tho. True, he has in his hands our portions, the patrimony which our Father
gave us, with which he lies fatting himself with Sack and sugar in the house,
and we are feign to walk with lean purses abroad. Credit must be maintained
which will not be without money, Good clothes must be had, which will not be
without money, company must be kept which will not be without money, al which we
must have, and from him we will have money.


Io. Besides, we have brought our sister to this Town,
That she her self having her own from him,
Might bring her self in Court to be preferred,
Under some Noble personage, or else that he
Whose friends are great in Court, by his late match,
As he is in nature bound, provide for her.

Tho. And he shall do it brother, tho we have waited at his lodging, longer
then a Taylours bil on a young Knight for an old rekoning, without speaking
with him, Here we know he is, and we will call him to parle.


Io. Yet let us doot in mild and gentle terms,
Fair words perhaps may sooner draw our own,
Then ruffer courses by which his mischief grown.

En. Draw Dr. Anon, anon, look down into the Dolphine there.


Tho. Here comes a drawer we will question him.


Tho. Do you hear my friend, is not master Scarborrow here?


Draw. Here sir, what a jest is that, where should he be else, I would have
you well know my master hopes to grow rich before he leaves him.


Io. How long has he continued here since he came hither.


Draw. Faith Sir not so long as Noah's floude, yet long enough to have drowned
up the livings of three Knights, as Knights goes now adays, some month or
there abouts.


John. Time ill consumed to ruinate our house,
But what are they that keep him company?

Draw. Pitch, Pitch, but I must not say so, but for your further satisfaction,
did you ever see a young whelpe and a Lion play together.


John. Yes.


Draw. Such is master Scarborrows company
Within Oliver.

Draw. Anon, anon, look down to the Pomgranate there.


Tho. I prithee say heeres them would speak with him.


Draw. I Will do your message: Anon, anon there.


Exit John This fool speaks wiser then he is aware,
young heirs left in this town where sins so rank,
And prodigals gape to grow fat by them,
Are like young whelps thrown in the Lions den,
Who play with them awhile, at length devour them.

Enter Scarborrow. Scar. Whose there would speak with me?


John. Your Brothers, who are glad to see you well.


Scar, Well.


John. It Is not your riot, that we hear you use,
(With such as wast their goods, as Time the world
With a continual spending, nor that you keep
The company of a most Leprous route,
Consumes your bodies wealth, infects your name
With such Plague-sores, that had you reasons eye,
Twould make you sick, to see you visit them)
Has drawn us, but our wants to crave the dew
Our father gave, and yet remains with you.

Tho. Our Byrth-right good brother, this Town craves mainteinance, silk
stockings must be had, and we would be loath our heritage should be arraigned
at the Vintners bar, and so condemned to the Vintners box, though while you did
keep house, we had some Belly-timber at your Table, or so, yet we would have
you think, we are your Brothers, yet no Esaus to sell our patrimony for
Porridge.


Scar. So, so, what has your coming else?


Io. With us our sister ioynes in our request,
Whom we have brought along with us to London,
To have her portion, wherewith to provide,
An honored service, or an honest bride.

Scar. So, then you two my Brothers, and she my sister, come not as in duty you
are bound, to an elder brother, out of Yorkshire to see us, but like leaches to
suck from us.


Io. We come compeld by want to crave our own.


Scar. Sir, for your own, then thus be satisfied,
Both hers and yours were left in trust with me,
And I will keep it for ye: Must you appoint us,
Or what we please to like mixed with reproof,
You have bin to saucy both, and you shall know,
I Will curb you for it, ask why; I Will have it so?

Io. We do but crave our own.

Scar. Your own sir: what is your own?

Tho. Our portions given us by our fathers will,

Io. Which here you spend.

Tho. Consume?

Io. Ways worse then ill.

Scar. Ha, ha, ha.

Enter Ilford. Ilf. Nay, nay, nay, Will: prethy come away, we have a full gallon
of Sack stays in the fire for thee, thou must pledge it to the health of a
friend of thine.


Scar. What do think these are Frank?


Ilf. They are Fiddlers I think, if they be, I preethe send them into the next
room, and let them scrape there, and weell send to them presently.


Scar. They are my brothers Frank, come out of Yorkshire, To the Tavern
here, to ask their portions: they call my pleasures, ryots, my company
Leproes, and like a school boy, they would tutor me?


Ilf. O, thou should have done well to have bound them prentises when they
were young, they would have made a couple of saucy Taylers.


Tho. Taylers?


Ilf. I Birdlime: Taylers: Taylours are good men, and in the Term time they
wear good Clothes. Come, you must learn more manners, stand at your Brothers
back, as to shift a Treancher neately, and take a Cup of Sack, and a Capons
leg contentedly.


Tho. You are a slave
That feeds upon my brother like a fly,
Poisoning where thou do suck.

Scar. You lie.

Io. O, to my grief I speak it, you shall find,
There Is no more difference in a Tauern-haunter
Then is between a Spittle and a Beggar.

Tho. Thou workst on him like Tempests on a ship.

Io. And he the worthy Traffic that does sink.

Tho. Thou makst his name more loathsome then a grave.

Io. Live like a Dog, by vomit,

Tho. Die a slave?

Here they draw. Wentlo, and Bartley come in, and the two Vintners boys, with
Clubbes. All set upon the two Brothers. Butler, Scarborrows man comes in,
stands by, sees them fight takes part with neither. But. Do, fight: I love you
all well, because you were my old masters sons, but I Will neither part you,
nor be partaker with you. I come to bring my mast, news, he has two sons
borne at a birth in Yorkshire, and I find him together by the ears with his
brothers in a Tavern in London. Brother and brother at ods, it is naught: sure,
it was not thus in the days of charity. What Is this world like to? Faith just
like an Inne-keepers Chamber Pot, receives all waters, good and bad, It had
need of much scouring. My old mast kept a good house, and twenty or thirty tall
sword and Buckler men about him, and y faith his son differs not much, he
will have mettle to, tho he has not store of Cutlers blades, he will have
plenty of Vintners pots. His father kept a good house for honest men, his
Tenants, that brought him in part, and his son keeps a bad de house with Knaves
that help to consume al. It Is but the change of time: why should any man
repyne at it: Crekits, good living, and lucky worms, were wont to feed, sing,
and rejoice in the fathers chimney, and now Carrion Crows builds in the sons
Kitchen, I could be sorry for it, but I am too old to weep. Well then, I will
go tell him news of his of-springs.


Exit Enter the two brothers, Thomas and John Scarborrow hurt, and sister.
Sist. Alas good Brothers, how came this mischance?


Tho. Our portions, our brother has given us our portions sister, has he not?


Sist. He would not be so monstrous I am sure.


Io. Excuse him not, he is more degenerate,
Then greedy Vipers that devour their mother,
They eat on her but to preserve themselves,
And he consumes himself, and Beggars us.
A Tavern is his Inn, where amongst Slaves,
He kills his substance, making pots the graves
To bury that which our forefathers gave.
I asked him for our portions, told him that you
Were brought to London, and we were in want,
Humbly we craved our own, when his Reply
Was, he knew none we had, beg, starve, or d^e.

Sist. Alas what course is left for us to live by then?

Tho In troth sister, we two to beg in the fields,
And you to betake your self to the old trade,
Filling of small Cans in the suburbs.

Sist Shall I be left then like a common road,
That every beast that can but pay his tole
May travel over, and like to Cammomil,
Flourish the better being trodden on.

Enter Butler bleeding. But, Well I will not curse him: he seeds now upon
Sack and Anchoues with a pox to him: but if he be not feign before he dies to
eat Acornes, let me live with nothing but pollerd, and my mouth be made a
Cooking stool for every scolde to set her tail on.


Tho. How now Butler, what is the meaning of this?


But. Your brother means to lame as many as he can, that is a beggar himself,
many live with him in the Hospital. His wise sent me out of Yorkshire, to tell
him, that God had blessed him with two sons, he bids a plague of them, a
vengeance of her, crosses me ore the pate, and sendes me to the Surgeons to
seek salve: I looked at least he should have given me a brace of Angels for my
pains.


Tho. Thou have not lost all thy longing, I am sure he has given thee a cracked
crown.


But. A plague on his fingers, I cannot tell, he is your Brother and my master,
I would be loath to Prophecy of him, but who soere does curse his Children
being Infants, ban his wife lying in childbed, and beats his man brings him
news of it, they may be borne rich, but they shall live Slaves, be Knaves,
and die Beggars.


Sist. Did he do so.


But. Guess you, he bid a plague of them, a vengeance on her, and sent me to
the Surgeons.


Sist. Why then I see there is no hope of him. Some husbands are respectles of
their wives,
During the time that they are yssulesse,
But none with Infants blessed, can nourish hate,
But love the mother for the childrens sake.

Io. But he that is given over unto sin,
Leprosed therewith without, and so within,
O Butler, we were issue to one father?

But. And he was an honest Gentleman.

Io. Whose hopes were better then the sun he left,
Should set so soon, unto his houses shame.
He lives in Tauernes, spending of his wealth,
And here his Brothers and distressed Sister,
Not having any means to help us with.

Tho. Not a Scots Baubee (by this hand) to bless us with.

Io. And not content to riot out his own,
But he detaines our portions: suffers us
In this strange Air, open to every wrack,
Whilst he in riot swims to be in lack.

But. The mores the pity.

Sist. I know not what course to take me to,
Honesty feign would live: What shall I do?

But. Sooth I Will tell you, your brother has hurt us,
We three will hurt you, and then go all to a spittle together.

Sist. Jest not at her, whose burden is too grievous,
But rather lend a means how to relieve us.

But. Well I do pity you, and the rather because you sale, you would feign
live honest and want means for it, for I can tell you it is as strange here to
see a maid fair, poor, and honest, as to see a Collier with a clean face.
Maids here do live (especially without maintenance)

Like Mice going to a trap,
They nibble long* at last they get a clap.
Your father was my good Benifactor, and gave me a house whilst I live to put
my head in: for I would be loath then to see his only daughter, for want of
means, turn punk, I have a drift to keep you honest. Have you a care to
keep your self so, yet you shall not know of it, for women's tounges are like
siues, they will hold nothing, they have power to vent. You two will further m^*


John. In any thing good honest Butler.


Tho. Ift be to take a purse I Will be one.


But. Perhaps thou speak righter then thou art aware of: well, as chance it,
I have received my wages: there is forty shillings for you, I Will set you in a
lodging, and till you hear from us, let that provide for you, we will first to
the surgeons,

To keep you honest, and to keep you brave,
For once an honest man, will turn a Knave.

Exeunt. Enter Scarborrow having a Boy carrying a Torch with him, Ilford
Wentlo, and Barley. Scar. Boy* bear the Torch fair: Now am I armd to fight
with a Windmill, and to take the wall of an Emperor: Much drink, no money: A
heavy head, and a light pair of heels.


Went. O, stand man?


Scar. I wear an excellent creature to make a Punk of, I should down with the
least touch of a knaves finger, thou have made a good night of this: What have
won Frank?


Ilf. A matter of nothing, some hundred pounds.


Scar. This is the hell of al gamsters* I think when they are at play, the
board ea^es up the mo^ey: For if there be five hundred pound lost, there is never
but a hundred pounds won. Boy, take the wall of any man, and yet by light,
such deeds of darkness may not be.


Put out the Torch. Went. What do mean by that Will?


Scar. To save charge, and walk like a Fury with a fire-brande in my hand,
every one goes by the light, and weel go by the smoke.


Enter Lord Faulconbridge. Scar. Boy, keep the Wall: I will not budge for any
man, by these Thumbs, and the paring of the Nails shall stick in thy teeth not
for a world.


Lord. Whose this, young Scarborrow?


Scar. The man that the Mare^id on.


Lord. Is this the reverence that you owe to me?


Scar. You should have brought me up better.


Lord. That vice should thus transform man to a beast.


Scar. Go to, your names Lord, I Will talk with you when your out a debt and ha
better clothes.


Lord. I pity thee even with my very soul.


Scar. Pity ith thy throat, I can drink Muscadine and Eggs, and Muld sack,
do you hear: you put a piece of turned stuff upon me, but I will -


Lord. What will you do Sir?


Scar. Piss in thy way, and that's no slander.


Lord. Your sober blood will teach you otherwise.


Enter Sir William Scarborrow. S. Will. My honored Lord, your happily well met,


Lord. Ill met to see your Nephew in this case,
More like a brute Beast, then a Gentleman.

S. will. Fi: Nephew, shame you not thus to transform your self?

Scar. Can your nose smell a Torch.

Ilf. Be not so wild, it is thine Uncle Scarborrow.

Scar. Why then it is the more likely it is my Fathers brother.

sir will. Shame to our name, to make thy self a Beast,
Thy body worthy borne, and thy youths breast
Tyld in due time for better discipline.

Lo. Thy self new married to a Noble house,
Rich in possessions, and Posterity,
Which should call home thy unstaid affections.

S. will. Where thou makst havoc.

Lo. Riot, spoil, and wast,

Sir willi* Of what thy father left.

Lor. And live disgracst.

Scar. I Will send you shorter to heaven, then you came to the earth, do you
Catechize? Do you Catechize?


He draws and strikes at them. Ilf. Hold, hold, do you draw upon your uncle?


Scar. Pox of that Lord,
We Will meet at Miter, where we will sup down sorrow,
We are drunk to night, and so we will be to morrow.

Exeunt Lo. Why now I see: what I hard of, I believed not,
Your kinsman lives.

S. will. Like to a swine.


Lo, A perfect Epythite he feeds on draffe,
And wallowes in the mire, to make men laugh,
I pity him.

Sir will. No pitties fit for him.

Lo. Yet we will advise him.

Sir will. He is my kinsman.

Lo. Being in the pit where many do fall in,
We will both comfort him, and counsel him.

Exeunt Anoyse within, crying, Follow, follow, follow: Then enter Butler,
Thomas and John Scarborrow with money bags. Tho. What shall we do now Butler?


But. A man had better line a good handsome pair of gallows before his time,
then be born to do these sucklings good, their mothers milk not wrung out of
their nose yet, they know no more how to behave themselves in this honest and
needeful calling of Purse-taking, then I do to piece stockings.


within. This way, This way, this way. Both. Sfut what shall we do now?


But. See if they do not quake like a trembling. Asp-leafe, and look more
miserable then one of the wicked Elders picturd in the painted cloth, should
they but come to the credit to be arraind for their valor, before a worshipful
bench, their very looks would hang 'em, and they were indighted but for
stealing of Eggs.


within. Follow, follow, this way follow. Tho: Butler.


John. Honest Butler.


Butler. Squat heart squat, creep me into these Bushes, lie me as close to the
ground as you would do to a wench.


Tho. How good Butler, show v^how.


But. By the Moon patroness of all purse-takers, who would be troubled with
such Changelings, squat heart squat.


Tho. Thus Butler.


But. I so suckling, so, stir not now, If the peering Rogues chance to go
over you, yet stir not younger Brothers call you em and have no more
forecast, I am ashamd of you, these are such whose fathers had need leave them
money, even to make them ready withal, for by this hiltes, they have not wit
to butten their sleeves without teaching, close, squat close. Now if the lot of
hauging do fall to my share, so, then the Fathers old man drops for his young
masters. If it chance it chances and when it chances, heaven and the Sheriff
send me a good rope, I would not go up the lather twice for any thing, in the
mean time preuentious, honest preuentions do well, off with my skin, so you on
the ground, and I to this tree to escape the Gallows.


With. Follow, follow, follow. But. Do follow, if I do not deceive you, I Will bid
a pox of this wit, and hang with a good grace.


Enter Sir John Harcop with two or three other with him. Har. Up to this wood
they took, search near my friends, I am this morn robbed of three hundred
pound.


But. I am sorry there was not four to ha^ made even money now by the Devils
horns, it is Sir John Harcop.


Har. Leave not a bush vnbeare, nor tree unsearched, as sure as I was robbed the
thieves went this way.


But. Theirs Nobody I perceive but may lie at sometime for one of them climbd
this ways.


1. Stand, I hear a voice, and here is an Owl in an Iuy bush.


Bat. You lie, it is an old Seruingman in a Nut-tree.


2 Sirrah, sir, what make you in that tree.


But. Gathring of Nuts, that such fools as you are may crack the shells, and I
eat the kernels.


Har. What fellows that?


But. Sir John Harcop, my Noble Knight, I am glad of your good health, you
hear your Age faier, you keep a good house, I ha fed at your board, and bin
drunk in your buttery.


Har. But sirrah: what made you in that tree?
My man and I at foot of yonder hill
Were by three kanues robbed of three hundred pound.

But. A shrewd loss berlady sir, but your good worship may now see the fruit
of being miserable: You will ride but with one man to save hors-meat and man's
meat at your Inn at night, and lose three hundred pound in a morning.


Har. Sirrah, I say I ha lost three hundred pound.


But. And I say sir, I wish all miserable knights might be served so: For had
you kept half a dozen tall fellows, as a man of your coat should do, they
would have helped now to keep your money.


Har. But tell me sir, why lurkt you in that tree?


But. Mary, I will tell you sir, Coming to the top of the hill where you
(Right worshipful) were robbed at the bottom, and seeing some a scuffling
together, my mind strait gave me there were knaves abroad. Now sir, I knowing my
self to be old, tough, and unwieldy, not being able to do as I would, as
much as to say* Rescue you (right Worshipful,) I like an honest man, one of
the Kings liege people, and a good subject


Ser. A says well Sir.

Got me up to the top of that tree: The tree (if it could speak) would bear
me witness, that there I might see which way the knaves took, then to tell
you of it, and you right worshipfullie to send hue to cry after em.


Har. Was it so.


But. Nay it was so sir.


Har. Nay then I tell thee they took into this wood.


But. And I tell thee (setting thy worsh. knighthood aside) he lies in his
throat that sa^es so: Had not one of them a white Frocke? Did they not bind
your worships knighthoode by the thumbs? then fagoted you and the fool your
man, back to back.


Man. He says true.


But. Why then so truly, came not they into this wood, but took over the
Lawnes, and left Winno steeple on the left hand.


Har. It may be so, by this they are out of reach, Well, farewell it.


But, Ride with more men, good knight.


Har. It shall teach me wit.


Exit Har. with followers. But. So, If this be not played a weapon beyond a
Scholars Prize, let me be hist at. Now to the next. Come out you Hedghogs?


Tho. O Butler, thou deserust to be chronicled for this.


But. Do not belly me, If I had my right I deserve to be hanged fort. But come,
Down with your dust, our mornings purchase.


Tho. Here it is, Thou have played well, Thou deserust two shares in it.


But. Three hundred pound: A pretty breakfast: Many a man works hard all his
days and never sees half the money. But come, Tho it be badly got, it shall be
better bestowd. But do ye hear Galants, I ha not taught you this trade to get
your livings by. Use it not, for if you do, though I escaped by the Nut tree, be
sure you will speed by the Rope: But for your pains at this time, There Is a
hundred pounds for you, how you shall bestow it, I Will give you instructions. But
do you hear, Look you go not to your Gilles, your Punkes, and your
Cock-tricks with it, If I hear you do: as I am an honest thief, tho I helped
you now out of the Briars, I Will be a means yet to help you to the Gallows.
How the rest shall be employed I have determined, and by the way I Will make you
acquainted with it.

To steal is bad, but taken where is store,
The faults the less, being don to help the pore

Exeunt. Enter Ilford, wentloe, Bartley. Ilford having a letter in his hand.
Ilf. Sure I ha sed my prayers, and liud virtuously a late, that this good
fortunes befalne me. Look Gallants: I am sent for to come down to my Fathers
burial.


went. But dust mean to go?


Ilf. Troth no, I Will go down to take possession of his land, let the cu^try bury
him and the will: I Will stay here a while, to save charg at his funeral.


Bart. And how do feel thy self Frank, now thy father is dead?


Ilf. As I did before, with my hands, how should I feel my self else? But I Will
tell you news Gallants.


went. What Is that? Do mean now to serve God?


Ilf. Faith partly, for I intend shortly to go to Church, and from thence do
faithful service to one woman.


Enter Butler. But. Good, I ha met my flesh-hooks together.


Bart. What, Do mean to be married?


Ilf. I Mungrell, Married.


But. That's a bayt for me.


Ilf. I will now be honestly married.


went. Its impossible, for thou have bin a whoremayster this seven year.


Ilf. It Is no matter, I will now marry, And to some honest woman to, and so from
hence her virtues shall be a countenance to my vices.


Bart. What shall she be, prithee?


Ilf. No Lady, no widow, nor no waiting gentlewoman, for under protection

Ladies may larde their husbands heads, Widows will Woodcocks make, and
chambermayds of serui^gme^ learn that, they will ner forsake.


Went. Who will thou wed then, prithee?


Ilf. To any maid, so she be fair: To any maid, so she be rich To any maid so
she be young: and to any maid


Bart. So she be honest.


Ilf. Faith, its no great matter for her honestye, for in these days, that's a
Dowry out of request.


But. From these Crabes will I gather sweetness: wherein I Will imitate the Be,
that sucks her honey, not from the sweetest flowers, but Timb the bitterest: So
these having been the means to beggar my master, shall be the helps to
relieve his brothers and sister.


Ilf. To whom shall I now be a suter?


But. Fair fall ye Gallants.


Ilf. Nay, and she be fair she shall fall sure enough. Butler, how Is It good
Butler.


But. Will you be made gallants?


went. I, but not willingly Cuckolds, tho we are now talking about wives.


But. Let your wives agree of that after, will you first be richly married?


All. How Butler: richly married?


But. Rich in beauty, rich in purse, rich in virtue, rich in all things. But
Mum, I Will say nothing, I know of two or three rich heirs. But Cargo, my
fiddlestick cannot play without Rozen: Auant.


went. Butler.


Ilf. Do not know me Butler?


But. For Kex, dryde Kex, that in summer ha bin so liberal to fodder other men's
cattle, and scarce have enough to keep your own in Winter. Mine are precious
Cabinets, and must have precious Jewels put into them, and I know you to he
merchants of Stockfish, and not men for my market: Then vanish.


Ilf. Come, ye old mad-cap you, what need all this? Cannot a man ha bin a
little whoore-mayster in his youth, but you must vpbraide him with it, and tell
him of his defects, which when he is married, his wife shall find in him? Why
my fathers dead man now, who by his death has left me the better part of a
thousand a year.


But. Tut, she of Lancashire has fifteen hundred.


Ilf. Let me have her then, good Butler.


But. And then she the bright beauty of Leystershire, has a thousand, nay
thirteen hundred a year, at least.


Ilf. Or let me have her, honest Butler.


But. Besides, she the most delicate, sweet countenanst, black browd
gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, in substance equals the best of em.


Ilf. Let me have her then.


Bart. Or I.


Went. Or I, good Butler.


But. You were best play the parts of right fools, and most despera^te
whore-maysters, and go together by the ears for the^ ere ye see them. But they
are the most rare featurd, well faced, excellent spoke, rare qualited,
virtuous, and worthy to be admired gentlewoman,


All. And rich Butler?


But. (I that must be one, tho they want all the rest) And rich Gallants, as
are from the utmost parts of Asya, to these present confines of Europe.


All And will thou help us to them Butler?


But. Faith, it is to be doubted, for precious pearl will hardly be bought
without precious stones, and I think there is scarce one indifferent one to be
found, betwixt you three: yet since there is some hope ye may prove honest, as
by the death of your fathers. Fathers you are proved rich, walk severally, for
I knowing you all three to be covetous Tug-muttons will not trust you with the
sight of each others beawty but will severally, talk with you, and since you
have deignd in this needful portion of wedlock to be ruld by me Butler,
will most bountifully provide wives for you generally.


All. Why that honestly said.


But. Why so, and now first to your Sir Knight


Ilf. Godamercy.


But. You see this couple of abominable Woodcocks hear.


Ilf. A pox on them, absolute Coxcomes.


But. You heard me tell them, I had Intelligence to give of three Gentlewomen.


Ilf. True.


But. Now indeed Sit I ha but the performance of one.


Ilf. Good.


But. And her I do intend for you, only for you.


Ilf. Honest Butler.


But. Now sir, she being but lately come to this town, and so nearly watched
by the jealous eyes of her friends, she being a Rich heir, least she should be
stolen away by some disolute Prodigal, or desperate estated spend thrift, as you
ha bin Sir.


Ilf. O but that's past Butler.


But. True I knowt, and intend now but to make use of them, flatter with them
with hopeful promises, and make them needful instruments.


Ilf. To help me to the wench,


But. You ha hit it which thus must beeffected, first by keeping close your
purpose.


Ilf. Good.


Ba. Also concealing from them, the lodging beauty and riches of your new, but
admirable Mistress.


Ilf. Excellent.


But. Of which your following happiness, if they should know either in envy of
your good, or hope of their own advancement theyd make our labors known to
the gentlewomans Uncles, and so our benefit be frustrate.


Ilf. Admirable Butler.


But. Which done, als but this, being as you shall be brought into her company,
and by my praising your virtues you get possession of her Love, one morning
step to the tower, or to make al sure, hier some stipendary priest for money:
for Money in these days, what will not be done, and what will not a man do for
a rich wife, and with him make no more ado but marry hit in her lodging and
being married, he with her and spare not.


Ilf. Do they not see us, do they not see us, let me kiss thee, let me kiss
thee Butler, let but this be done, and all the benefit requital and happiness.
I can promise thee fort, shall be this, I Will be thy rich master, and thou shall
carry my purse.


But. Enough, meet me at her lodging some half an hour hence: hark she lies.


Ilf. I hate.


But. Fail not.


Ilf. Will I live.


But. I will but shift of these two Rhinoceros,


Ilf. Wigens, wingens, a couple of guls.


But. With some discourse of hope to wiue them two, and be with you straight.


Ilf. Blessed day, my love shall be thy cushion honest Butler.


But. So now to my the other Gallants.


Went. O Butler, we ha bin in passion at thy tediousnes,


But. Why look you. I had all this talk for your good.


Bar. Had.


But. For you know the knight is but a scuruy-proud-prating-Prodigall,
licentious unnecessary.


Went. An Ass, an Ass, an Ass.


But. Now you heard me tell him I had three Wenches in store,


Bar. And he would ha had them al would he.


But. Hear me, tho he may live to be an Ox, he had not now so much of the
Goat in him, but only hopes for one of the three when indeed I ha but two, and
knowing you to be men of more virtue, and deerer in my respect intend them to
be yours.


Went. We shall honor thee.


Bar. But how Butler.


Bu. I am now going to their place of residence, situate in the choicest place
in the City, and at the sign of the Wolf just against Gold-smiths-row where
you shall meet me, but ask not for me, only walk too and fro and to avoid
suspicion you may spend ^ome conference w^h the Shopkeepers wives, they have
seats built a purpose for such familiar entertainment, where from a bay window
which is opposite, I will make you known to your desired beauties, commend the
good parts you have.


Went Bith mass mine are very few.


But. And win a kind of desire, as women are soon won to make you be
beloved where you shall first kiss, then Woe, at length Wed, and at last bed
my Noble hearts.


Both. O Butler.


But. Wenches bona robes, blessed beauties, without color or counterfeit: Away,
put on you best Clothes, get you to the Barbers, Curle up your hair, walk
with the best strouts you can, you shall see more at the Window, and I ha vowed
to make you.


Bart. Will thou.


But. Both Fools, and I Will want of my wit but I Will doot.


Bar. We will live together as fellows.


Went. As Brothers.


But. As arrant knaves if I keep you company,
O, the most wretched season of this time,
These men like Fish, do swim within one stream,
Yet theyd eat one another, making no Conscience
To drink with them theyd poison, no offense,
Betwixt their thoughts and actions have control,
But headlong run, like an vnbiaest Bowl,
Yet I will throw them on, but like to him,
At play knows how to loose, and when to win.

Enter Thomas and John Scarborrow. Tho. Butler.


But. O, are you come. And fit as I appointed: so, it is well, you know you knes,
and have instructions how to bear your selves: Al, al is fit, play but your
part, your states from hence are firm.


Exit. John. What shall I term this creature not a man.

Betwixt this Butler leads Ilford in. He Is not of mortals temper but he is one,
Made all of goodness, tho of flesh and bone,
O Brother, brother, but for that honest man,
As near to misery had bin our breath,
As where the thundering pellet strikes is death.

Tho. I, my shift of shirts and change of cloths knowt.


John. Well tell of him, like bells whose music rings
One Coronation day for joy of Kings,
That has preserved their steeples not like towles,
That summons living tears for the dead souls,

Enter Butler and Ilford above. But. Gods preciour Sir, the hell Sir, even as
you had new kissed, and were about to court her, if her Uncles be not come.


Ilf. A plague on thee, spit out.


But. But it is no matter Sir, stay you here in this upper chamber, and I Will stay
beneath with her, it is ten to one you shall hear them talk now, of the greatness
of her possessions, the care they have to see her well bestowed, the
admirablenes of her virtues, all which for all their coming, shall be but
happiness ordained for you, and by my means be your inheritance.


Ilf. Then thou't shift them away, and keep from the sight of them.


But. Have I not promised to make you.


Ilf. Thou have.


But. Go to then, rest here with patience, and be confident in my trust, only
in my absence, you may praise God for the blessedness you have to come, and say
your prayers if you will, I Will but prepare her heart for entertainment of your
love, dismiss them, for your free access, and return straight.


Ilf. Honest-blest-natural-friend, thou dealest with me like a Brother:
Butler, Exit. Sure heaven has reserved this man to wear Grey-hairs to do me
good, now will I listen, listen close, and suck in her Uncles words with a
rejoicing ear,


Tho. As we were saying Brother,
Where shall we find a husband for my Niece.

Ilf. Marry she shall find one here tho you little knowt, thanks,
Thanks honest Butler.

Io. She is left rich in Money, Plate, and Jewels.

Ilf. Comfort, comfort to my soul.

Tho. Has all her manner houses richly furnished.

Ilf. Good, good, I Will find employment for them.

With. But. Speak loud enough that he may hear you.

Io. I take her state to be about a thousand pound a year,

Ilf. And that which my father, has left me, will make it about fifteen,
hundred admirable.


Ioh. Indebt to no man, then must our natural care be,
As she is wealthy to see her married well.

Ilf. And that she shall be as well as the priest can, he shall not,
Leave out a word ont.

Tho. I think she has.

Ilf. What a Gods name.

Tho. About four thousand pound in her great chest.

Ilf. And I Will find a vent fort I hope.

Io. She is virtuous, and she is fair.

Ilf, And she were foul, being rich, I would be glad of her.

But Pisht, pisht.

Io. Come, we will go visit her, but with this care,
That to no spend-thrift we do marry her.

Exeunt Ilf. You may chance be deceived old gray-beardes, ^eares he will spend
some of it, thanks, thanks, honest Butler, now do I see the happiness of my
future estate, I walk me as to morrow, being the day after my marriage, with
my fourteen men in Liuerie cloakes after me, and step to the wall in some
chief street of the City, tho I ha no occasion to use it, that the
Shopkeepers may take notice how many followers stand bare to me, and yet in
this latter age, the keeping of men being not in request, I will turn my
aforesaid fourteen into two Pages and two Coaches, I will get me self into
grace at Court, run headlong into debt, and then look scuruily upon the
City, I will walk you into the presence in the afternoon having put on a
richer suit, then I wore in the morning, and call boy or sitrah, I will ha the
grace of some great Lady though I pay fort, and at the next Triumphs run a
Tilte, that when I run my course, though I break not my lance: she may
whisper to her self, looking upon my smell, well run my knight I will now
keep great horses, scorning to have a Queen to keep me, indeed I will
practice all the Gallantry in use, for by a Wife comes all my happiness.


Enter Butler. But. Now sir, you ha heard her Uncles, and how do you like them.


Il. O But. they ha made good thy words, and I am ravished with the^.


Bu. And having seen and kissed the gentlewo. how do you like her?


Ilf. O Butler beyond discourse, she is Paragon for a Prince, then a fit
Implement for a Gentleman, beyond my Element.


But. Well then, since you like her, and by my means, she shall like you,
nothing rests now but to have you married.


Ilf. True Butler, but withal to have her portion.


But. Tut, that's sure yours when you are married once, for it is hirs by
Inheritance, but do you love her?


Ilf. O, with my soul.


But. Ha you sworn as much.


Ilf. To thee, to her, and ha called heaven to witness.


But. How shall I know that.


Ilf. Butler, here I protest, make vows Irreuocable.


But. Upon your knees.


Ilf. Upon my knees, with my heart, and soul I love her.


But. Will live with her.


Ilf. Will live with her.


But. Marry her and maintain her.


Ilf. Marry her and maintain her.


But. For her forsake al other women.


Ilf. Nay for her forswear all other women.


Ilf. In all degrees of Love.


But. In all degrees of Love, either to Court, kiss, give private favors, or
use private means, I Will do nothing that married men being close whoremaisters
do, so I may have her.


But. And yet you having bin an open whoremaister, I will not believe you til I
hear you swear as much in the way of contract to her self, and call me to be
a witness.


Ilf. By heaven, by earth, by Hell, by all that man can swear, I will so I may
have her.


But. Enough.
Thus at first sight, rash men to women swear,
When such oaths broke, heaven greeues and sheds a tear:
But she is come, ply her, ply her.

Enter Scarborrowes Sister. Ilf. Kind Mistres, as I protested, so again I vow,
I faith I love you.

Sist. And I am not Sir so uncharitable,
To hate the man that loves me.

Ilf. Love me then,
The which loves you as Angels loves good men,
Who wish them to live with them ever,
In that high bliss whom hell cannot diss ever.

But. I Will steal away and leave them, so wise men do,
Whom they would match, let them ha leave to woe.

Exit Butler Ilf. Mistress I hnow your worth is beyond my desert, yet by my
praising of your virtues, I would not have you as women use to do, become
proud.


Si. None of my affections are prides children, nor a kin to them


Ilf. Can you love me them?


Sist. I can, for I love all the world, but am in love with none.


Ilf. Yet be in love with me, let your affections
Combine with mine, and let our souls
Like Turtles have a mutual Simpathy,
Who love so well, that they together die,
Such is my life, who couets to expire,
If it should loose your love.

Sist. May I believe you?

Ilf. In Troth you may,
Your life's my life, your death my dying day.

Sist. Sir the commendations I have received from Butler of your birth and
worth, together with the Judgment of mine own eye, bids me believe and love
you.


Ilf. O seal it with a kiss,
Blessed hour my life had never joy till this.

Enter Wentloe, and Bartley beneath. Bart. Here about is the house sure.


Wentlo. We cannot mistake it, for here is the sign of the Wolf and the
Bay-window.


Enter Butler above. But. What so close? It Is well, I ha shifted away your
Uncles Mistress, but see the spite Sir Francis, if you same couple of
Smel-smockes, Wentloe and Bartley, ha not sented after us.


Ilf. Apoxe on em, what shall we do then Butler?


But. What but be married straight man.


Ilf. I but how Butler.


But. Tut, I never fail at a dead lift, for to perfect your bliss, I have
provided you a Priest.


Ilf. Where, prithee Butler where?


but. Where? But beneath in her Chamber. I ha filled his hands with Coin, and he
shall tie you fast with words, he shall close your hands in one, and then do
clap your self into her sheets and spare not.


Ilf. O sweet.


(Exit Ilford with his Sister. but. Down, down, it is the only way for you to
get up.
Thus in this task, for others good I toil,
And she kind Gentlewoman weds her self,
Having bin scarcely woed, and ere her thoughts,
Have learnd to love him, that being her husband,
She may relieve her, brothers in their wantes,
She marries him to help her nearest kin,
I make the match, and hope it is no sin.

Went. Sfut it is scuruy Walking, for us so near the two Counters, would he
would come once?


Bar. Mass he is yonder: Now Butler.


But. O Gallants are you here, I ha done wonders for you commended you to the
Gentlewomen, who having taken note of your good legs, and good faces, have a
liking to you, meet me beneath.


both Happy Butler.


but. They are yours, and you are theirs, meet me beneath I say.
By this they are wed, I and perhaps have bedded,
Ex. wen. and bax Now follows whether knowing she is poor,
Heel swear he loved her as he swore before.

Exit butler Enter Ilford with Scarborrowes sister. Ilf. Ho Sirrah, who would
ha thought it, I perceive now a woman may be a maid, be married, and loose her
maidenhead, and all in half and an hour, and how do like me now wench.


Sist. As does befit your servant and your wife,
That owe you love and duty al my life.

Ilf. And there shall be no Love lost, nor service neither, I Will do thee service
at board, and thou shall do me service a bed: Now must I as young married men
use to do, kiss my portion out of my young wife. Thou art my sweet Rogue, my
Lamb, my Pigsny, my play-fellow, my pretty pretty any thing, come a busse
prithee, so it is my kind heart, and wats thou what now?


Sist. Not till you tell me Sir,


Ilf. I ha got thee with Child in my Conscience, and like a kind Husband,
methinkes I breed it for thee. For I am already sick at my stomach and long
extremely. Now must thou be my helpful Physician, and provide for me.


Sist. Even to my blood,
What Is mine is yours, to gain your peace or good.

Ilf. What a kind soul is this, could a man have found a greater content in a
wife, if he should ha sought thorough the world for her: Prethy heart as I
said, I long, and in good troth I do, and methinkes thy first child will be
borne without a nose, if I loose my longing, it is but for a trifle too, yet
methinkes it will do me no good unless thou effect it for me. I could take thy
keys my self, go into thy Closet, and read over the deeds and evidences of
thy Land, and in reading over them, rejoice I had such blessed fortune to have so
fair a wife with so much endowment, and then open thy Chests, and survey thy
Plate, Jewels, Treasure. But a pox ont, al will do me no good, unless thou
effect it for me.


Sist. Sir I will show you all the wealth I have,
Of Coin, of Jewels, or Possessions,

Ilf. Good gentle heart, I Will give thee another busse for that, for that give
thee a new gown to morrow morning, by this hand do thou but dream what stuff
and what Fashion thou will have it on to night.


Sist. The land I can endow you with, is my Love,
The riches I possess for you is love,
A Treasure greater then is Land or Gold,
It cannot be forfeited, and it shall near be sold.

Ilf. Love I know that, and I Will answer thee love for. Love in abundance: but
come prithee come, lets see these deeds and evidences, this Money, Plate, and
Jewels, with ha thy Child borne without a nose* if thou be so careless,
spare not, why my little frappet you, I heard thy Uncles talk of thy riches,
that t^ou had hundreds a year, several Lord-ships, Mannours Houles,
Thousands of pounds in your great Chests, Jewels, Plate, and Ringes in your
little Box.


Sist. And for that riches you did marry me.


Ilf Troth I did, as now adays Batchelers do swear I loved thee but indeed
married thee for thy wealth.


sist. Sir I beseech you say not your oths were such,
So like falce coin, being put unto the touch,
Who bear a flourish in the outward show,
Of a true stamp, but truly are not so,
You swore me love, I gave the like to you,
Then as a ship being wedded to the sea,
Dus either sail or sink even so must I,
You being the haven to which my hopes must she.

Ilf. True Chucke I am thy haven, and harbor too,
And like a ship I took thee, who brings home Treasure
As thou to me, the Marchant-venturer.

Sist. What riches I am ballast with are yours.

Ilf. That's kindly said now,

Sist. If but with sand, as I am but with earth,
Being your right of right, you must receive me,
I ha no other lading but my Love.
Which in abund^nce I will render you,
If other fraught you do expect my store,
I Will pay you ^eares, my riches, are no more.

Ilf. Howes this? howes this? I hope you do but Jest,

Sist. I am Sister to decayed Scarborrow.

Ilf. Ha.

Sist. Whose substance your Inticements did consume.

Ilf. Worse then an Ague.

Sist. Which as you did believe so they supposed,
It Was fitter for your self then for another,
To keep the sister, had undone the brother.

Ilf. I am guld by this hand. An old Co^ichacher, and beguild; where the pox
now are my two Coaches, choice of houses, several suits, a plague on them, and
I know not what: Do you hear Puppet, do you think you shall not be damned
for this, to Cosen a Gentleman of his hopes, and compel your self into
Matrimony with a man, whether he will or no with you, I ha made a fair match
in faith, will any man buy my commodity out of my hand, as God save me he shall
have her for half the money she cost me.


Enter Wentlo, and Bartley. went. O, ha we met you Sir.


Bart. What, turned Micher, steal a wife, and not make your old friends
acquainted with it.


Ilf. A pox on her, I would you had her.


went. Well, God give you Joy, we can hear of your good fortune, now it is done,
tho we could not be acquainted with it aforehand.


Bart. As that you have two thousand pound a year.


Went. Two or three manor houses.


Bart. A wife, fair, rich, and virtuous.


Ilf. Pretty infaith, very pretty.


went. Store of Gold.


Bart. Plate in abundance.


Ilf. Better, better, better.


went. And so many Oxen, that their horns are able to store all the Cuckolds in
your Country.


Ilf. Do not make me mad good Gentlemen, do not make me mad, I could be made a
Cuckold with more patience, then endure this.


We. For we shall have you turn proud now, grow respectles of your Ancient
acquaintance, why Butler told us of it: Who was the maker of the match for you?


Ilf. A pox of his furtheraunce, Gentlemen as you are Christians, vex me no
more, that I am married I confess, a plague of the Fates, that wedding and
hanging comes by desteny, but for the riches she has brought, bear witness how
I Will reward her.


Sist. Sir.


Ilf. Whore, I and Jade, Witch, Ilfacst, stinking-breath, crooked-nose, worse
then the Devil, and a plague on thee that ever I saw thee.


Bart. A Comedy, a Comedy.


Went. What Is the meaning of all this, is this the mask after thy marriage.


Ilf. O Gentlemen, I am undone, I am undone, for I am married, I that could not
abide a Woman, but to make her a whore, hated all Shee-creatures, fair and
poor, swore I would never marry but to one that was rich, and to be thus cun
nicacht. Who do you think this is Gentlemen?


went. Why your wife, Who should it be else?


Ilf. That's my misfortune, that marrying her in hope she was rich, she proves
to be the beggarly Sister to the more beggarly Scarborrow.


Bart. How?


Went. Ha, ha, ha.


Ilf. I, you may laugh, but she shall cry as well as I for it,


Bart. Nay, do not weep.


went. He dus but conterfeit now to delude us, he has all her portion of Land,
Coin, Plate, Jewels: and now dissembles thus least we should borrow some Money
of him.


Ilf. And you be kind Gentlemen lend me some, for having paid the Priest, I
ha not so much left in the world, as will higher me a horse to carry me away
from her.


Bart. But art thou thus guld infaith.


Ilf. Are you sure you ha eyes in your head.


went. Why then, By her brothers setting one in my conscience, who knowing thee
now to ha somewhat to take to, by the death of thy father, and that he has
spent her portion, and his own possessions, has laid this plot, for thee to
marry her, and so he to be rid of her himself.


Ilf. Nay, that's without question, but I Will be revenged of em both, for you
Minxe. Nay Sfut, give em me, or I Will kick else.


Sist. Good, sweet.


Ilf. Sweet with a pox, you stink in my nose, give me your Jewels? Nay
Bracelets too.


Sist. O me, most miserable.


Ilf. Out of my sight, I and out of my doors, for now, what is within this house
is mine, and for your brother

He made this match, in hope to do you good,
And I wear this for which, shall draw his blood.

Exit with went. and Barley. went. A brave resolution.


Bart. In which well second thee.


Ilf. Away, whore, Out of my doors whore.


Sist. O grief, that poverty should ha that power to tear:
Men from themselves, tho they wed, bed, and swear.

Enter Thomas and John Scarborrow, with Butler. Tho. How now sister.


sist. Undone, undone.


But. Why Mistress, how is it? how is it?


sist. My husband has forsook me.


But. O perjury.


sist. Has taine my Jewels, and my Bracelets from me.


Tho. Vengeance, I played the thief for the money that bought em.


sist. Left me distressed, and thurst me forth a doors.


Tho. Damnation on him, I will here no more,
But for his wrong revenge me on my brother,
Degenerate, and was the cause of all,
He spent our portion, and I Will see his fall.

Ioh. O but Brother.


Tho. Persuade me not.
All hopes are shipwract, misery comes on,
The comfort we did look from him is frustrate,
All means, all maintenance, but grief is gone.
And all shall end by his destruction.

Exit. Ioh. I Will follow and prevent, what in this heat may happen,
His want makes sharp his sword, to greates the ill,
If that one brother should another kill.

Exit. But, And what will you do Mistress?

sist. I Will sit me down, sigh loud in stead of words,
And wound my self with grief as they with swords.
And for the sustenance that I should eat,
I Will feed on grief, it is woes best rellisht meat.

But. Good heart I pity you,
You shall not be so cruel to your self,
I have the poor Seruingmans allowance,
Twelve pence adaye to buy me sustenance,
One meal aday I Will eat, the tothet fast,
To give your wantes relief. And Mistress
Be this some comfort to your miseries,
I Will ha thin cheeks, ear you shall ha wet eyes.
Exeunt. Enter Scarrborrow. What is prodigallity? Faith like a Brush
That wears himself to flourish others clothes,
And having worn his heart even to the stump,
He Is thrown away like a deformed lump.
Oh such am I, I ha spent all the wealth
My ancestors did purchase, made others brave
In shape and riches, and my self a knave.
For tho my wealth raisd some to paint their door,
It Is shut against me, saying I am but poor:
Nay, even the greatest arm, whose hand has grast,
My presence to the eye of Majesty, shrinkes back,
His fingers cluch, and like to lead,
They are heavy to raise up my state, being dead.
By which I find, spend thriftes, and such am I,
Like strumpets flourish, but are foul within,
And they like Snakes, know when to cast their skin.

Enter Tho. Tho. Turn, draw, and dye, I come to kill thee.

Scar. What Is he that speaks? Like sickness: Oh is it you,
Sleep still, you cannot move me, fare you well.

Tho. Think not my fury slakes so, or my blood
Can cool it self to temper by refusal,
Turn or thou dyest.

Scar. Away.

Tho. I do not wish to kill thee like a slave,
That taps men in their cups, and broch their hearts,
Ear with a warning piece they have wakt their ears,
I would not like to powder shoot thee down,
To aflat grave, ere thou have thought to frown:
I am no Coward, but in manly terms,
And fairest oppositions vow to kill thee.

Scar. From whence proceeds this heat.

Tho. From sparkles bred by thee, that like a villian.

Sca. Ha.

Tho. I Will hallow it in thine ears till thy soul quake to hear it,
That like a villian have undone thy brothers.

Sca. Would thou were not so near me: yet farewell.

Tho. By nature, and her laws make us a kin,
As near as are these hands, or sin to sin.
Draw and defend thy self, or I Will forget
Thou art a man.

Scar. Would thou were not my Brother?

Tho. I disclaim them.

Scar. Are we not offspring of one parent wretch.

Tho. I do forget it, pardon me the dead,
I should deny the pains you bid for me.
My blood grows hot for vengeance, thou have spent
My lives revenues that our parents purchased.

Scar. O do not wrack me with remembrance ont.

Tho. Thou have made my life a Beggar in this world,
And I will make thee bankrout of thy breath:
Thou have bin so bad, the best I can give,
Thou art a Devil, not with men to live.

Scar. Then take a Devils payment.

Here they make a pass one upon another, when at Scarborrowes back. comes in
Ilford, Wentloe, and Bartley. Ilf. He Is here, draw Gentlemen.


Went. Bart. Die Scarborrow.


Scar. Girt round with death.


Tho. How set upon by three, Sfut fear not Brother, yon Cowards, three to one,
slaves, worse then Fensers that wear long weapons. You shall be fought withal,
you shall be fought withal.


Here the Brothers join, drive the rest out, and return. Scar. Brother I
thank you, for you now have bin
A patron of my life, forget the sin
I pray you, with my loose and wastfull hours,
Has made against your Fortunes, I repent em,
And wish I could new joint and strength your hopes,
Tho with indifferent ruin of mine own.
I have a many sins, the thought of which
Like finished Needles prick me to the soul,
But find your wrongs, to have the sharpest point.
If penitence your losses might repair,
You should be rich in wealth, and I in care.

Tho. I do believe you Sir, but I must tell you,
Evils the which are against an other done,
Repentance makes no satisfaction
To him that feels the smart. Our father sir,
Left in your trust my portion: you ha spent it,
And suffered me (whilst you in ryots house,
A drunken Tavern, spild my maintenance
Perhaps upon the ground with overflowed cups,
Like birds in hardest winter half starud, to fly)
And pick up any food, least I should die.

scar. I prithee let us be at peace together.

Tho. At peace for what? For spending my inheritance,
By yonder son that every soul has life by,
As sure as thou have life I Will fight with thee.

Scar. I Would not be moved vntoot.

Tho. I Will kill thee then, were thou now claspt
Within thy mother, wife, or childrens armea.

scar. Would homicide? art so degenerat?
Then let my blood grow hot.

Tho. For it shall cool.

scar. To kill rather then be killed is manhoods rule.

Enter John Scarborrow. Io. Stay let not your wraths meet.

Tho. Heart, what makst thou here?

Io. Say who are you, or you, are you not one,
That scarce can make a fit distinction
Betwixt each other. Are you not Brothers?

Tho. I renounce him.

scar. Shall not need.

Tho. Give way.

scar. Have at thee,

Io. Who sturs, which of you both has strength within his arm
To wound his own breast, whose so desperate,
To dam himself by killing of himself,
Are you not both one flesh?

Tho. Heart, give me way.

sca. Be not a bar betwixt us, or by my sword
I Will mete thy grave out.

Ioh. O do, for Gods sake do?
It Is happy death, if I may die and you
Not murder one another. O do but harken,
When dus the Sun and Moon borne in one frame
Contend, but they breed Earthquakes in men's hearts:
When any star prodigiously appears,
Tells it not fall of kings or fatal years.
And then if Brothers fight, what may men think,
Sin grows so high, it is time the world should sink.

scar. My heart grows cool again, I wish it not.

Tho. Stop not my fury, or by my life I swear,
I will reveal the robbery we ha done,
And take revenge on thee,
That hinders me to take revenge on him.

Io. I yield to that, but near consent to this,
I shall then die as mine own, sin affords,
Fall by the law, not by my Brothers swords.

Tho. Then by that light that guids me here I vow,
I Will straight to Sir John Harcop, and make known
We were the two that robbed him.

Io. Prethy do.

Tho. Sin has his shame, and thou shall ha thy due.

Exit. Io. Thus have I shown the nature of a Brother,
Tho you have proved unnatural to me.
He Is gone in heat to publish out the theft,
Which want and your unkindness forest us to,
If now I die that death and public shame,
Is a Corsiue to your soul, blot to your name.

Exit. scar. O it is too true, there is not a thought I think,
But must partake thy greefes, and drink
A relish of thy sorrow and misfortune,
With weight of others tears I am ore borne,
That scarce am Atlas to hold up mine own,
And al to good for me. A happy Creature
In my Cradle, and have made my self
The common curse of mankind by my life,
Undone my Brothers, made them thieves for bread,
And begot pretty children to live beggars,
O Conscience, how thou are stung to think vpont,
My Brothers unto shame must yield their blood,
My Babes at others stirrops beg their food,
Or else turn thieves to, and be choakt fort,
Die a Dogs death, be percht upon a tree,
Hang betwixt heaven and earth, as fit for neither,
The curse of heaven that's due to reprobates,
Discends upon my Brothers, and my children,
And I am parent to it, I, I am parent to it.

Enter Butler. But. Where are you Sir?


Scar. Why starest thou, what is thy have?


But. Heeres fellows swarm like flies to speak with you.


Scar. What are they?


But. Snakes I think Sir, for they come with stinges in their mouths, and
their tongues are turned to teeth to: They claw Villanously, they have eat up
your honest name, and honorable reputation by railing against you, and now
they come to devour your possessions.


Scar. In playner Euargy, what are they, speak?


But. Mantichoras, monstrous beasts, enemies to mankind, that ha double rows
of teeth in their mouths. They are Usurers, they come yawning for money, and
the Sheriff with them, is come to serve an extent upon you Land, and then
cease on your body by force of execution, they ha begirt the house round.


Scar. So that the roof our Ancestors did build
For their sons comfort, and their wives for Charity,
I dare not to look out.

But. Besides Sir, here is your poor children.

scar. Poor children they are indeed.

But. Come with fire and water: tears in their eyes, and burning grief in
their hearts, and desire to speak with you.


scar. Heap sorrow upon sorrow? Tell me, are
My brothers gone to execution?
For what I did, for every heinous sin,
Sits on his soul by whom it did begin.
And so did theirs by me. Tell me withal,
My children carry moisture in their eyes,
Whose speaking drops, say father, thus must we
Ask our relief, or die with infamy,
For you ha made us beggars. Yet when thy tale has killed me
to give my passage comfort from this stage,
Say all was done by inforst marriage:
My grave will then be welcome.

But. What shall we do sir?

scar. Do as the devil dus, hate panther-mankind,
And yet I lie: for devils sinners love,
When men hate men, tho good like some above.

Enter Scarborrowes wife Katherine with two Children. But. Your wifes come in
sir.

Sca. Thou lie, I ha not a wife. None can be called,
True man and wife, but those whom heaven instald. Say,

Kath. O my deer husband?

Sca. You are very welcome, peace: well ha complement.
Who are you Gentlewoman.

Kat. Sir your distressed wife, and these your children.

Sca. Mine? Where, how begot:
Prove me by certain instance that's divine,
That I should call them lawful, or the mine.

Kat. Were we not married sir?

Sca. No, tho we heard the words of Ceremony,
But had hands knit as fellons that wear fetters
Forsty upon them. For tell me woman,
Did ere my Love with sighs entreat thee mine,
Did ever I in willing conference,
Speak words, made half with tears that I did love thee.
Or was I ever
But glad to see thee as al Lovers are.
No, no, thou know I was not.

Ka. O me.

But. The mores the pity.

Scar. But when I came to Church, I did there stand
All water, whose forest breach had drowned my Land,
Are you my wife, or these my children?
Why it is impossible, for like the skies,
Without the suns light, so look al your eyes,
Dark, Clowdy, thick, and full of heaviness,
Within my Country there was hope to see
Me and my issue to be like our fathers,
Vpholders of our Country, al our life,
Which should ha bin, if I had wed a wife.
Where now,
As dropping leaves in Autumn you look al,
And I that should uphold you like to fall,

Ka. It Was, nor, shall be my fault. Heaven bear me witness.

Sca. Thou lie? stumpet thou lie?

Bu. O Sir.

Scar. Peace saucy Jack, strumpet I say thou lie,
For wife of mine thou art not, and these thy Basterds
Whom I begot of thee, with this unrest,
That Bastards borne, are borne not to be Blessed

Ka. One me pour al your wrath, but not on them.

Scar. On thee, and them, fot it is the end of lust,
To scourge it self, heaven lingering to be just:
Harlot.

Ka. Husband.

Scar. Bastardes.

Child. Father.

But. What heart not pitties this?

Scar. Even in your Cradle, you were accursed of heaven,
Thou an Adulteress in thy married arms.
And they that made the match, bawds to thy lust:
I, now you hang the head, should ha done so before,
Then these had not bin Bastards, thou a whore.

Bue. I cannot brookt no longer, Sir you do not well in this?

scar. Ha slave.

But. It Is not the aim of gentry to bring forth,
Such harsh vnrellisht fruit unto their wives,
And to their pretty pretty children by my troth.

Scar. How rascal.

But. Sir I must tell you, your progenitors
Two of the which these years were servant to,
Had not such mists before their understanding,
Thus to behave themselves.

Scar. And you will control me sir.

But. I, I, will.

Scar. You rogue.

But. I it is, I will tell you it is ungently done
Thus to defame your wife, abuse your children,
Wrong them, you wrong your self, are they not yours?

Sca. Pretty, pretty Impudence infaith,

But. Her whom your are bound to love, to rail against,
These whom you are bound to keep, to spurn like dogs,
And you were not my master, I would tell you.

Scar. What slave.

But. Put up your Bird-spit, tut I fear it not,
In doing deeds so base, so vild as these,
It Is but a Kna, kna, kna.

Scar. Roge.

But. Tut howsoever, it is a dishonest part,
And in defense of these I throw off duty

Scar. Good Butler.

But. Peace honest Mistress, I will say you are wronged,
Prove it upon him, even in his blood, his bones,
His guts, his Maw, his Throat, his Intrals.

Scar. You runnagate of threescore,

But. It Is better then a knave of three and twenty,

Scar. Patience be my Buckler,
As not to file my hands in villains blood,
You knave Slaue-trencher-groome
Who is your master?

But. You if you were a master.

scar. Off with your coat then, get you fort a doors.

But. My cote sir.

Scar. I your coat slave.

But. Sfut when you hate, it is but a threadbare coat,
And there it is for you: know that I scorn
To wear his Livery is so worthy borne,
And live so base a life, old as I am,
I Will rather be a beggar then your man,
And there is your service for you.

Exit scar. Away, out of my door: Away.
So, now your Champions gone, Minx thou had better ha gone
quick unto thy grave.

Ca. O me, that am no cause of it.

Sca. Then have subornd that slave to lift his hands against me.

Ka. O me, what shall become of me?

Sca. I Will teach you tricks for this, ha you a companion.

Enter Butler. But. My heart not suffer me to leave my honest Mistress and her
pretty children.


Scar. I Will mark thee for a strumpet, and thy Bastards.


But. What will you do to them Sir.


scar. The Devil in thy shape come back again.


But. No, but an honest servant Sir will take this cote,
And wear it with this sword to sauegard these,
And pity them, and I am woe for you,
But will not suffer
The husband Viper-like to pray on them.
That love her, and have cherisht him as these,
As they have you.

scar. Slave.

But. I will not humor you,
Fight with you, and loose my life or these
Shall taste your wrong whom you are bound to love.

scar. Out of my doors slave.

But. I will not, but will stay and wear this coat,
And do you service whether you will or no.
I Will wear this sword to, and be Champion,
To fight for her in spite of any man.

scar. You shall. You shall be my master Sir.

But. No, I desire it not,
I Will pay you duty even upon my knee,
But loose my life, ere these oppressed I Will see.

scar. Yes goodman slave, you shall be master,
Lie with my wife, and get more Bastards, do, do, do.

Ka. O me.

scar Turns the world vpside down, that men orebeare their
Masters, It dus, it dus.
For even as Judas sold his Master Christ,
Men buy and sell their wives at highest price,
What will you give me? what will you give me? what will you give me?
O, Mistress,
My soul weeps, tho mine eyes be dry,
To see his fall and your adversity,
Some means I have left, which I Will relieve you with,
Into your chamber, and if comfort be a kin
To such great grief, comfort your children.

scar. I thank thee Butler, heaven when he please,
Send death unto the troubled a blessed ease.

Exit with children. But. In Troth I know not if it be good or ill,
That with this endless toil I labor thus,
It Is but the old times Ancient conscience
That would do no man hurt, that makes me doot,
If it be sin that I do pity these,
If it be sin I have relieved his Brothers,
Have played the thief with them to get their food,
And made a lucklesse marriage for his Sister,
Intended for her good, heaven pardon me.
But if so, I am sure they are greater sinners,
That made this match, and were unhappy men,
For they caused all, and may heaven pardon them.

Enter sir William scarborrow. sir Will. Whose within here.

But. Sir William, kindly welcome.

sir Will. Where is my kinsman Scarborrow?

But. Sooth he is within sir, but not very well.

sir Will. His sickness?

But. The hell of sickness, troubled in his mind.

sir Will. I guess the cause of it,
But cannot now intend to visit him,
Great business for my sovereign hasts me hence,
Only this Letter from his Lord and Guardian to him,
Whose inside I do guess, tends to his good,
At my return I Will see him, so farewell.

Exit But. Whose inside I do guess turns to his good,
He shall not see it now then, for men's minds
Perplexed like his, are like Land-troubling-winds,
Who have no gracious temper.

Enter John Scarborrow. John. O Butler.

But. What Is the fryght now?

Irhn Help strait, or on the tree of shame
We both shall perish for the robbery.

But. What is it reueald man?

John Not yet good Butler, only my brother Thomas
In spleen to me* that would not suffer him
To kill our elder brother, had undone us
Is riding now to sir John Harcop straight, to disclose it.

But. Heart, who would rob with Sucklings:
Where did you leave him?

John Now taking horse to ride to Yorkshire.

But. I Will stay his journey, least I meet a hanging.

Exeunt Enter Scarrborrow. Scar. I Will parley with the Devil: I, I will,
He gives his council freely, and the cause
He for his Clyents pleads, goes always with them,
He in my cause shall deal then: and I Will ask him
Whether a Cormorant may have stuffed Chests
And see his brother starve: why heel say I,
The less they give, the more I gain thereby.

Enter Butler. Their souls, their souls, their souls.
How now master? Nay, you are my master?
Is my wives sheets warm? Dus she kiss well?
Bat. Good sir.

Scar. Foe, makt not strange for in these days,
There Is many men lie in their masters sheets,
And so may you in mine and yet: Your business sir?

But. There Is one in civil habit sir, would speak with you.

scar. In civil habit.

But: He is of seemly rank sir, and calls himself
By the name of Doctor Baxtor of Oxford.

scar. That man undid me, he did blossoms blow
Whose fruit proved poison, tho it was good in show,
With him I Will parley, and disrobe my thoughts
Of this wild phrensey that becoms me not:
A table, candles, stools, and all things fit,
I know he comes to chide me, and I Will hear him,
With our sad conference we will call up tears,
Teach Doctors rules, instruct succeeding years:
Usher him in:
Heaven spare a drop from thence where is bounties throng
Give patience to my soul, inflame my tongue.

Enter Doctor. Doct. God master Scarborow.

Sca. You are most kindly welcome, sooth ye are.

Doct. I ha important business to deliver you.

Sca. And I have leisure to attend your hearing.

Doct. Sir, you know I married you.

Sca. I know you did sir.

Doct. At which you promised both to God and men,
Your life unto your spouse should like snow,
That falls to comfort, not to overthrow,
And love unto your issue should be like
The deaw of heaven, that hurts not tho it strike,
When heaven and men did witness and record
It Was an eternal oath, no idle word*
Heaven being pleased therewith, bleste you with children,
And at heavens blessings, all good men rejoice.
So that Gods chair and footstool, heaven and earth
Made offering at your nuptials as a knot
To mind you of your vow, O break it not?

scar. It Is very true.

Doc. Now sir, from this your oath and band,
Faiths pledge, and seal of conscience you ha run,
Broken all contracts, and the forfeiture,
Justice has now in suit against your soul,
Angels are made the Iurots, who are witnesses
Unto the oath you took, and God himself
Maker of marriage, he that sealed the deed,
As a firm lease unto you during life,
Sirs now as judge of your transgression,
The world informs against you with this voice,
If such sins reign, what mortals can rejoice.

scar. What then ensues to me?

Doc. A heavy doom, whose executions
Now serud upon your conscience, that ever
You shall feel plagues whom time shall not disseuer,
As in a map your eyes see all your life,
Bad words, worse deeds, falce oths, and all the injuries,
You ha done unto your soul, then comes your wife,
Full of woes drops, and yet as full of pity,
Who tho she speaks not, yet her eyes are swords,
That cut your hart-strings, and then your children.

scar. Oh, oho, oh.

Doc. Who what they cannot say talk in their looks,
You have made us up, but as misfortunes books,
Whom other men may read in, when presently,
Taskt by your self, you are not like a Thief,
Astonished being accused, but scorch with grief,

scar. I, I, I.

Doct. Here stands your wives tears.

scar. Where?

Doc. And you fry for them, here lie your childrens wants.

Sca. Here?

Doct. For which you pine in conscience burn,
And wish you had bin better, or nere borne.

Scar. Dus all this happen to a wretch like me.

Doc. Both this and worse, your soul eternally
Shall live in torment, tho the body die.

Scar. I shall ha need of drink then Butler,

Doc. Nay all your sins are on your children laid,
For the offenses that the father made.

Scar. Are they Sir.

Doc. Besure they are.

Enter Butler. Scar. Butler.

But. Sir?

scar. Go fetch my wife and children hither.

But. I will sir.

sca. I Will read a Letter to the Doct. too, he is a Divine? I he is a Divine.


But. I see his mind is troubled, and have made bold with duty to read a
Letter tending to his good, have made his Brothers friends: both which I will
conceal til better temper: He sends me for his wife and children, shall I
fetch em.


scar. He Is a Divine, and this Divine did marry me, that's good, that's good,


Doc. Master Scarborrow.


Scar. I Will be with you straight Sir,


But. I will obey him,
If any thing does happen that is Ill,
Heaven bear me record it is against Butlers will.

Exit. scar. And this Divine did marry me,
Whose tongue should be the key to open truth,
As Gods Ambassador. Deliver, deliver, deliver.

Do. Naister Scarborrow.

sca. I Will be with you straight sir,
Salvation to afflicted consciences,
And not give torment to contented minds,
Who should be lamps to comfort out our way,
And not like Firedrakes to lead men astray,
I, I Will be with you straight sir.

Enter Butler. But. Here Is your wife and children sir?

scar. Give way then,
I ha my lesson perfect, leave us here*

But. Yes I will go, but I will be so near,
To hinder the mishap the which I fear.

Exit Butler. scar. Now sir, you know this Gentlewoman?

Doct. Kind mistress Scarborrow,

Scar. Nay pray you keep your seat, for you shall hear,
The same affliction you ha taught me fear,
Due to your self.

Doc. To me sir.

scar. To you sir,
You matched me to this Gentlewoman.

Doct. I know I did sir.

scar. And you will say she is my wife then.

Doc. I ha reason sir, because I married you.

scar. O that such tongues should ha the time to lie,
Who teach men how to live, and how to die,
Did not you know my soul had given my faith,
In contract to another, and yet you
Would ioyn^ this Loome unto unlawful twists.

Doct. Sir.

scar. But sir,
You that can see a Mote within my eye,
And with a Cassocke blind your own defects,
I Will teach you this, it is better to do ill,
That's never known to us, then of self will,
And these all these in thy seducing eye,
As scorning life make em be glad to die.

Doc. Me Scarborrow.

scar. Here will I write, that they which marry wives,
Unlawful live with strumpets al their lives.
Here will I seal the children that are born,
From wombes vnconsecrate, even when their soul
Has her infusion, it registers they are foul,
And shrinkes to dwell with them, and in my close,
I Will show the world, that such abortiue men,
Knit hands without free tongues look red like them
Stand you and you, to acts most Tragical,
Heaven has dry eyes, when sin, makes sinners fall.

Doc. Help master Scarborrow,

Child. Father.

Ka. Husband.

Sca. These for thy act should die, she for my Clare,
Whose wounds stare thus upon me for revenge.
These to be rid from misery, this from sin,
And thou thy self shall have a push amongst em,
That made heavens word a pack-horse to thy tongue.
Cotest scripture to make evils shine like good,
And as I send you thus with worms to dwell,
Angels applaud it as a deed done well.

Enter Butler. But* Stay him, stay him.
What will you do sir.

Scar. Make fat worms of stinking carcasses,
What have thou to do with it?

Enter Ilford and his wife, the two Brothers, and Sir William Scarborrow But.
Look who are here sir.

Sca. Injurious villen that preuentst me still.

But. They are your brothers and alliance Sir.

Scar. They are like full ordinance then, who once dischargd,
A far off give a warning to my soul,
That I had done them wrong.

sir Will Kinsman.

Brother and sister. Brother.

Ka. Husband.

Child. Father.

scar, Hark how their words like Bullets shoot me through
And tell me I have undone em, this side might say.
We are in want, and you are the cause of it,
This points at me, y^re shame unto your house,
This tung says nothing, but her looks do tell,
She Is married but as those that live in hell:
Whereby all eyes are but misfortunes pipe,
Filled full of woe by me, this feels the stripe.

But. Yet look Sir,
Heeres your Brothers hand in hand, whom I ha knit so.

Wife. And look Sir heeres my husbands hand in mine,
And I rejoice in him, and he in me.

sir will. I say Cose what is past, the way to bliss,
For they know best to mend, that know amiss,

Ka. We kneel, forget, and say if you but love us,
You gave us grief for future happiness.

scar. What all this to my Conscience?

But. Ease* prom^se of succeeding joy to you,
Read but this Letter.

sir Will. Which tells you that your Lord and Guardians dead.

But. Which tells you that he knew he did you wrong,
Was greeud fort, and for satisfaction
Has given you double of the wealth you had.

Bro. Increast our portions.

Wife. Given me a dowry too.

But. And that he knew,
Your sin was his, the punishment his due.

Sca. All this is here,
Is heaven so gracious to sinners then?

But. Heaven is, and has his gracious eyes,
To give men life not like intrapping spies.

scar. Your hand, yours, yours, to you my soul, to you a kiss,
In Troth I am sorry I ha straid amiss,
To whom shall I be thankful. All silent:
None speak: whist: why then to God,
That gives men comfort as he gives his rod,
Your portions I Will see paid, and I will love you,
You three I Will live withal, my soul shall love you,
You are an honest servant, sooth you are,
To whom, I these and all must pay amends,
But you I will admonish in cool terms,
Let not promotions hope, be as a string,
To tie your tongue, or let loose it to sting.

Doc. From hence it shall not Sir.

scar. Then husbands thus shall norish with their wives.

Kiss Ilf. As thou and I will wench.
Brothers in brotherly love thus link together,

Embrace. sca. Children and servants pay their duty thus.
bow and kneel. And all are pleased.

All. We are.

scar. Then if all these be so,
I am new wed so ends old marryage woe,
And in your eyes so lovingly being wed,
We hope your hands will bring us to our bed.

FINIS.

