A SERMON PREACHED at North-Hampton the 21. of June last past, before the Lord
Lieutenant of the County, and the rest of the Commissioners there assembled
upon occasion of the late Rebellion and Riots in those parts committed.

Prou. 22. 2 The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of
them all.

printer's device of John Flasket: a garb or wheatsheaf on a wreath (McKerrow
no. 356)

Printed at London for JOHN FLASKET. 1607.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Exeter, Lord Baron of Burleigh, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and Lord Lieutenant for the County of North-hampton.
RIght Honorable: It is not long since I came forth in a Merchants ship, and
now it is Gods providence, and your good pleasure, that I shall publish my
self in a storm: In the appeasing whereof, since it has pleased your Honor
to use my service as the word joined with the Sword, or rather as the Sword of
the Spirit with the Sword of Justice, I have discharged my self as
indifferently as I could to the cutting down of offense in all: It is true
that we are fallen into tempestuous and troublesome times, wherein the
excessive covetousness of some has caused extreme want to other, and that
want not well disgested has riotted to the hazard of all; yea and by these
storms we are cast among the rocks, even two the most dangerous rocks of
estate, Oppression of the mighty, and Rebellion of the many, by mischief
whereof many flourishing kingdoms and countries have miscarried, and so had we
in this undoubtedly, had not God by your good indeauors prevented it; and
therefore between these two rocks I sail, admonishing in the passage the one
sort, that is, the Mighty, that man lives by bread, but the other sort, that
is, the Many that man lives not by bread only, to the intent that they which
know the ordinary course of God in preserving nature might make a conscience of
impairing the means of man's preservation, and they likewise which know that
God has ways to preserve beyond the means of nature, might learn with
christian wisdom and patience to temper themselves in want: And because Right
Honorable we have obtained great quietness through you, and your worthy
Agents, and that great things are done unto our country through your
providence, God forbid, but that as Tertullus did to Foelix so we much more to
you should acknowledge it wholly, and in all places, and with all thanks: yet in
this we are bold to entreat you, that as you have bin means for the due
execution of justice upon the rebellious, so likewise (as opportunity shall
serve) to promote the cause and complaints of the expelled, half pined, and
distressed poor, that they rebel no more. It is the end of al men's exaltation
according to the proportion of their state and power to do works of mercy and
justice, for he that sat upon a throne did confess, that the thrones were set
up for judgment Psalm. 122. Now judgment looks both ways: and therefore as
it chastises the offender, so it represseth him likewise, by whose covetousness
and cruelty the offense comes: especially it will be looked for at your hands
(Right honorable) strongly to maintain the cause of corn and of bread, God
having given you a sheafe supported with Lions, as the highest top, and
chiefest eminence of your Honor. Neither is there any greater promise of
establishment made to the families and persons of me^, the^ by a religious
respect of the poor, which who so follows, his righteousness remains for
ever, and his horn shall be exalted with honor. Psa. 112. God continue and
increase in you an affection of the one, that you may be made partaker of the
other. And thus in my deepest devotion commending to God your self, your
state, and honorable family, I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors late Chaplain, and still devoted in all Christian duty. ROB:
WILKINSON.

A SERMON PREAched at North-Hampton upon occasion of the late Rebellion the 21.
of June. 1607.
Math. 4. 4. But he answering said: It is written, Man shall not live by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out off the mouth of GOD.
HE that said the whole life of man was nothing else but a time of temptation,
he said very fearefullie, and yet very truly; for we are tempted in old age,
and in our cradles we are not free; If any evil stand before us, we are
provoked to do it, and when at any time we have done well, we are even tempted
in it; if we abound as Adam did in Paradise, there be intismentes in that, or
if we want as Christ did in the wilderness, there may be death in that; so
expert is the enemy whom God has sent to exercise us, that according to time
and place, and to each man's state and nature, he has wherein to allure us, and
serves himself of al occasions. And because we are fallen into a time, wherein
poverty without patience has much disordred us, I have therefore chosen to
speak of the hungry temptation, and yet not of the temptation neither, each
man being apt enough to tempt himself, but rather of the answer to it; for the
devil finding Christ of late, first fasting, and then hungry in a desolate and
barren wilderness where nothing was to be had, advises him not to look up to
heaven, (from whence in extreme want all help is to be waited for) but rather
to take the way that was next at hand, and by a new kind of Alchimy, of stones
to make himself bread, and unto this Christ answers him with the text I have
read, man lives not by bread only, etc. and there is nothing in this whole
story so suitable, or so aptly speaking to the occasion and season of the time
as this; for it is said before, that Christ fasted, meaning a religious fast,
as few do now; and it is said likewise, that he was hungry, and no marvel,
for he was in a place, where was neither bred nor corn, as may be now; and it
is said likewise, that the^ the tempter came, that is, the Devil came, as all
the world sees he is up and abroad now; and some he tempts to turn bread
into stones, that is, to decay the plenty of the earth, as many rich and greedy
minded me^ do now; and some he tempts to turn stones into bread, that is, to
use unlawful means for their own releife, as the mad and rebelious multitude
does now; but in this verse Christ shows a bettet way for men's relief, that
is, by resting themselves in the pleasure and providence of God, which is for
all men an apt and godly answer, to such a diuilish and ungodly temptation. In
which answer 3. things may be considered; first, that Christ would answer the
Diuill, next the manner of his answer, which is by scriptu^ est, and then
lastly the substance of his answer, which is, that man lives not by bread
only, but by every word which comes out of the mouth of God. For the first,
a question may be moved, why Christ would vouchsafe to give the diuil any
answer at all; why did he not rather answer him with silence, as sometimes he
answered Caiphas and Pilate? to which I answer, that as he was therefore lead
into the wilderness, that he might be tempted, so was he therefore tempted
that he might give answer, and that partly to avouch his own wisdom by his
answer, and also to instruct us, that we in the like case must be able
likewise to make answer; Respondit tentatori docens te respondere tentatori,
says Saint Austin; Christ did answer the tempter to teach thee, that thou must
answer the tempter also; that as Gedeon said to his soldiers, What ye see
me do, do ye also. Judge. 7. 17. So we because we see our Captain to
answer, might also learn not Implicitam fidem, a faith folded up in the faith
of our fathers, or to believe as the Church believes, but be armed with reason
to answer also: In the field it is lamentable when the defendors of a just and
lawful cause are foiled and put to flight; O Lord, what shall I say (says
Joshua) when Israel turn their backs upon their enemies? Ioshu. 7. In the
Church it is shameful when men shall maintain a good cause as Job did, and
yet being opposed cannot find an answer: and God forbid we should avouch any
things in points of faith, for which being opposed we cannot answer. But in the
breast of man it is most fearful, when Satan shall come to tempt or terifie,
and we like Cain or Judas are overcome and cannot answer: for if we be bound to
answer every man that asks a reason of the hope that is in us. 1. Pet. 3. How
much more to answer this tempting and destroying Serpent, from whose temptation
no man can promise himself freedom or imunity. But say, Christ would answer
the Devil, yet why after so mild and gentle a fashion; why rather did he not
bid him be packing, as he did sometime to Peter? Get thee behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me. Mat. 16. Yea why did he not torment him for his pride
and presumption in tempting him? why did he not throw him into the deep for
laying unholy hands, and for breathing those impure blasts upon him? and thus
we imagine God like our selves; for Michael the Archangell though he strove
against the Devil, yet would not revile him. Iud. 9. nor would Christ call for
fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, albeit they shut their doors upon
him. Luc. 9. for he came not now to judge, but to save; he came not (as one day
he shall) with fire before him, but he came like a Lamb, lowly to his
inferiors, gentle to his enemies, and affable to all; which first adds
strength to the faith of man, in the act of Invocation, for if the enemy
received a gentle answer, even when he came to destroy, much more shall they
that devoutly seek unto him; beside, it gives to great personages, Judges and
Magistrates in their places, an honorable pattern of piety, cheerfully to
accept, and gently to answer, the cries, petitions and just complaints of the
poor, which stand in need of them, as they stand in need of God, and come
kneeling to them as they kneel to God; and when at any time they grow weary of
this, they may doubt they have forgotten him who exalted the^ for this, and
fear least they be forgotten when they fail in this. Now for the manner of
Christ's answer to the diuill; ye see, he does not teach us to repel or chase
him away (as they do at Rome, with Tapers, and holy water, or with hanging out
a crucifix, but by scriptum est, the written word of God; for what cares the
diuill for a candle, or for holy water, or what cares he for a Crucifix, which
is but an image of Christ, who according to some of their own doctors did not
fear to lay foul Hugo Cardin. sup. Math 4. Assumpsit eum bracchijs suis.
hands upon the sacred body of Christ: but as when Joshua fained to run away
from the men of Ai, he did by that means disranke them, and bring a greater
slaughter on them. John 8. so when the diuill faineth to be afraid of such
things, it is but a sly devise, to wrappe men more deeply in the snares of
superstition. Neither yet does Christ answer the Diuill by Factum est, by doing
the thing required, that is, turning stones into bread, but he answers him
by scriptu^ est, by showing him what is written; no doubt Christ could have
turned the stones, and the stones being commanded must have obeyed him, for
when the Prophet cried out against Ieroboams altar, the ashes fell out, and the
Altar rent in sunder. 1. King. 13. but behold a greater then the Prophet was
here, who when himself cried out his last cry upon the Cross, the vale of
the Temple rent, the earth did quake, and the stones did cleave in sunder Math.
27. yea surely he that of water made wine, could also (if it had so pleased
him) of stones have made bread; yea he could of stones have made men, even of
stones to raise up children unto Abraham, Math. 3. but why then did he not?
surely the Friars tell us a pretty reason; That Christ would not turn stones
into bread at the devils request, Royard. Dominica. 1. Quadragesimae.
but rather stay a year longer to turn water into wine, at his Mothers
request, that so to her, to the Virgin Mary, and not to the Diuill, might be
dedicated the first fruits of his miracles, as if Christ had dedicated
miracles to his Mother, or had in the miracle of water turned to wine, intended
the magnifying of his Mother, who when she moved unto him the want of wine,
received an answer something regardlesse of her; Woman what have I to do
with thee? Ioh. 2. 4. but a better reason of that miracle is gathered out of
the eleventh verse, where it is said, the miracle being done, that his
Disciples believed on him; but how? Nunquid crediturus erat diabolus? says
Saint Austin, would the Diuill have believed if Christ had turned stones into
bread? surely no; and therefore as he would show no miracle to Herod, because
he asked it idly and curiously, Luc. 23. so neither is any miracle to be
showed to the Diuill, nor any Pearl to be cast before such Swine, as there is
no hope to convert or edify; or say there were hope, yet Scriptum est, the Law
and the Prophets are more effectual (says Abraham) then if one should rise
from the dead; yea if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead. Luc. 16. and generally by
example of Christ, it is so much better to contend with authority of
scriptures, then with power of miracles, by how much Christ preferred Scriptum
est, before turning stones into bread. Neither yet does Christ answer the
Diuill by unwritten verities, as they do who thrust upon the faith of men,
dreams, and fables, and mere traditions, which is (says Theodoret) like the
Theodoret. quest. 9. in Leuit.
sin of Araons sons, to bring strange fire upon the Altar. Leuit. 10. but
he answers him by Scriptu^ est, It is written; and if it be not written, it
is sure no matter of faith, but men may choose whether they will believe it or
no: but if it be written, men must believe it, and build their faith, their
souls, and salvation upon it; for therefore ye err (says Christ) because
ye know not the scriptures. Mat. 22. but he that knows them, knows also
all needful wisdom in them; for speak we of matters of faith; Fidem Imperator
queris; says Hilary to Constance Hilar: ad Constant:
the Emperor, Seek ye to know the faith; then must ye understand it, not by
any new or late writings, but by the books of God. Or seek ye to know which
is the true and catholic church? Nullo modo cognoscitur, nisi tantummodo per
scripturas, there is no Chrisost. homil. super Math. and 46.
way to know it says S. Chrysostom. but only by the scriptures: or grows there
any doubt or controversy of opinion in the church? we may say to one another,
as S. Austin to Aug. contra Maximin. lib. 3. ca. 14.
Maximinus the Arrian, Nec ego Nicenu^ tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminense debes
proferre conciliu^, etc. neither will I object to you the counsel of Nice, nor
shall you to me the council of Ariminu^, but let the Scriptures end it; for
(eue^ our enemies being judges) when it is in question whether such a thing be
lawful or no, Ad sacram pagina^ recurrendu^ est, we must have recourse to
the holy scriptures, says Stella sup: Luc. 6. 3. because in them we may find,
Sufficienter et veraciter, both sufficiently and truly, Omnia que ad salutem
sunt necessaria, even al things whatsoever are needful to salvation, says
Bonauentura de profectu religiosor. lib. 1. cap. 6. both these men being Friars
and fautors of the church of Rome, and yet against the church of Rome,
maintaining sincerely the sufficiency of the scriptures; Therefore these are
the weapons of our warfare; scriptum est: the word of God (says S. Paul) is
the sword of the spirit. Ephesians. 6. yea this is the sword of the Lord and of
Gedeon.

The substance of this answer is, that Man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. The place is found. Deuteronomy.
8. 3. where Moses exhorting the Israelits in all their wants to depend upon the
providence of God, puts them in mind, how that being in the wilderness, where
was neither bread nor water, yet were they neither famisht with want, nor yet
compelled to use unlawful means for their relief, but they had a bread which
they knew not, even Manna sent from heaven, as in a tipe to show, that man's
life is maintained not by the means of bread, nor by the fruitfulness of the
earth, but from the house of Providence, that is, from heaven: and this does
Christ oppose as an answer to the Diuil, wherein 2. things may be distinctly
considered, First that man lives by bread, and then secondly that he lives
not by bread only, that is, that God has appointed man to live by means, and
yet he has not tied his life unto the means. That man lives by bread, is
inferred out of the very text; for even where he says, Not by bread only, it
follows of necessity, that amongst other means, yet by bread for one and
there be in these words three things likewise to be considered; First the
subject of God; providence, which is Man secondly the e^d of Gods providence,
that man must live: and thirdly the means of his providence, that he must live
by bread.

For the first, the diuil indeed propounded very cunningly a question
concerning the son of God; If thou be the son of God, command, etc: which
yet Christ neither denies, nor affirms himself to be, but clean beside
the matter, answers of man; man lives not; and sure Christ was not bound to
give direct answer to such an adversary, who came not to be satisfied, but to
deceive, and therefore to dazell and amaze him the more, he answers him at
random, and where he asked him of the son of God, he answere^h him of man,
and to let him see withal, what account God did make of man, whom he in
tempting the son of God, sought fundamentally to overthrow. And surely man is
a great mark in Gods eye, for God made man, and printed his own image in man,
and made the world for man, and ordained the Angels to guard man, was borne for
man, and in the end dyed for man, that David breaks out into admiration, What
is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou
regardest him. Psalm. 8. Only man to man is vile and of no account, and man is
Anthropomastix, one man the greatest scourge and plague of another. Man lives,
says Christ; therefore provision is here made for man, which may sustain in
this place a twofold opposition, first with the beasts and brute creatures,
before which in Gods providence Man is ever preferred, and then secondly with
particular men, for Man is not here taken for this or that man, but for Humanum
genus, Man for all mankind, and so it stands with reason that the whole kind
be evermore preferred before any one or a few cormorants in their kind.

If ye speak of the beasts; surely to that question of S. Paul, Does God take
care for Oxen. 1. Cor. 9. We may answer affirmatively, yes sure even for Oxen,
and for sheep, for so says David. Psalm. 36. Thou Lord do save Man and Beast;
yea and for little birds too, whereof two are sold for a farthing, Deuteronomy. 22. 6
even the great God has made protectiue laws, that man should not deal
unmercifully with them: yet we must take this withal, that whatsoever God has
done for the beasts, yet is it not for their own sakes principally, but for
man's, for whose use and service they were created, and not for them selves; and
is it not then unnatural (think ye) to see a man put out, to put in a beast,
and men turned out to bring in sheep, whereas God created the earth for men,
and not for sheep; therefore if ye will maintain large pastures and stock
them with sheep, then remember what God says by the mouth of Ezechiel, The
sheep of my pasture are men. Eze. 34. 31. yea and we are his people and the
sheep of his pasture. Psalm. 100. and the image of God in one man is more worth
then all the sheep in the world: and it is time, yea high time to speak of
this, the text of it already being written in blood; and no marvel if they
which feel it, run mad and wild upon it, since we which but see it are so
much amazed at it; for a stranger which coasteth these countries, and finds
here and there so many thousands and thousands of sheep, and nihil humani
generis, in so many miles not a thing like a Man, might take up a wonder, and
say with himself; what? has there bin some Sorceresse, or some Circe here
that has transformed men into beasts? or is it so, that men and beasts have
waged war together! but how was this battle fought, that sheep got the
field? or what men were these that ran away from sheep? yea rather what
sheep were these that throw down houses, towns, and churches? oh no: these
were no sheep, they were hogs by their rooting, ye forget him that made the
world for man.

Or be it that in this depopulation the beasts did not ouergo man, yet
whatsoever is done to the wasting of mankind for the benefit of a few in the
kind, is against the providence of God too: for God said not to Adam and to Eve
at the first, Increase, but Increase and multiply, yea and fill the earth. Genesis
1. 28. Fill it: how? not with clamors and with cries, with tears and with
blood, with mutinies and implacable rebellion as these men do; but fill it
with men, with the image of God, with the precious seed of the divine
generation: and seek not (as the Prophet says) by joining house to house, and
land to land to be alone upon the earth. Esaias. 5. Nor let your shepheardes say
to you as Diogines sometime said to Timon, O that there were none but thou and
I in the land; for in the end Timon will say to Diogines again, I like the
wish well, so as when Diogines thy brother, that thy brother may live with
thee. Not meaning that usury did kill men, but that it does undo men, and
undoing is a woeful kind of dying; for when a man dies, he is buried, and when
he is buried perhaps he is lamented, yet they that lamented him survive still,
but when a man is undone, he dies in his estate, he dies in his reputation, he
dies in his wife and children, and his whole house is like hell, even a heap
of misery, his cattle look poorly like Pharaos lean Kine; his Carts drive
heavily like Pharaohs Chariots without wheels; and his creditors follow him,
as Pharao followed the Isralites at their backs; so as such a man may seem to
live in Aegipt; nay it were better by far, to sit down and make bricks in
Aegipt; for this is not living, but lingering death, and many to avoid this,
choose rather to die. Therefore mark I beseech you; ye, to whom God has given
the Earth in possession, and learn to be merciful as your heaue^lie Father is
merciful. For when God at the Luke. 6. 36
beginning made man, first he breathed in his face the breath of life, and then
immediately he put him into the Garden which he had made Genes. 2. 7. 8. as
much as to say, that first God gave man life, and then presently gave him
living; yea Paradise was planted first, and Man created after; so careful was
God, not only of Man's life, but also of his living, that the thing which
maintained him was made before him, for if he had given him life before
living, the Father of providence should have seemed to deal vnprouidently, but
if he had given him life without living, the father of mercy should have
created his children unto misery. And if ye think it no sin to take away the
living where God has given life, ye may think it a less sin to take away
life, when ye have taken away the living. And let it be a lesson for all states
generally, not to grind the faces of the poor: but the master Esa. 3.
so to wage his servant that he may live; and the work-master so to wage the
laborer, that he may live, and the landlord not to rack, but so to rate his
tenant that he may live, not miserably, for so it were better to die, but as
themselves live plentifully under God, so they sufficiently and contentedly
under them; For let men be so oppressed, that they cannot live, and then they
come to the cry of the Steward, when he was put out off his Steward-ship; What
shall I do! Luke 16. and it is fearful to think, what men will do in the
end. His Master puttes him out off the Steward-shippe, and how then? I cannot
dig (says he) and yet now ye see men can dig when they be put out: and
to beg I am ashamed; yet Men are now ashamed of nothing yea affrayd of
nothing, but desperate estates breed they have turned not stones into bread,
but corn into grass, and done for a practice that which God threatened for a
plague, To take away the staff of bread; yea they have turned as Achab did
with Micaiah, the bread of food, into the bread of affliction. 1. King. 22. and
worse then so, they have turned men into beasts, and made them wild and
rebellious, which before were tame and obedient; yea and worse then so, they
have turned living bodies into dead carkases, which though they have justly
perished in their rebellion; yet as Christ says, Luc. 17. Woe be to them by
whom the offense comes.

The next point of the answer is, that though God have appointed man to live by
bread, yet not by bread only. Commonly we are thus affected to the outward
means, that if at any time they fail us, we are ready to curse, and finally
to renounce them, as the Israelites for the sinew that shranke in Jacobs thigh,
Genesis 32.
vowed never to eat of the sinew any more: but when they stand us in steed,
and do their several offices to us, we are ready, as the Aegiptians did with
their Sheep and Oxen, to deifie and make gods of them, and even to say, as
Exodus 32. These are thy Gods which brought thee, etc. Therefore to draw men
from immoderate admiration of these inferior means, Christ tells us, that
though by bread, yet not by bread only; for to effect things alone is proper
to GOD only, who only can say, as Esa. 63. I have trodden the Wine Press
alone, and of all the people there was none with me: and if man should live by
bread only, then were bread his God; and therefore even the same mouth which
commends to us the labors of our hands, condemns likewise all confidence
in our own endeavors; for even in the Church where Gods own work is done,
yet planting of it self, and watering of it self is nothing; In policies, and
in the commonwealth, Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches
but in vain: and they which asked a King to govern them, yet were no whit
better, but rather in worse case when they had him; Likewise in the field, A
Horse is a vain thing to save a man; and though a Bow and a Sword be mighty
weapons in the hands of the mighty, yet I will not trust in my Psalm. 44.
Bow, nor shall my Sword save me, says the Psalmist.

Again, in private Families, and in domestical affairs, It is in vain for
men to rise early, and go to bed late: yea and in the very body of man, The
Israelites which so lusted for meat, yet when they had meat, dyed with meat
in their mouths. Number. 11. yea and many, the more they have, the worse they
thrive, like Pharaohs lean Kine which did eat up the fat, and yet were
never the fatter when they had done; and therefore though much may be done by
bread, yet nothing by bread only.

Well then; If not by bread only, by what then? By every word that proceeds
out off the mouth of God; where because mention is made of every word, we are
to consider, that the word of God is manifold whereby we live, for first there
is Verbum scriptum: the written word of God, which feeds us with wisdom,
secondly there is the word of his blessing, which strengthens with goodness;
thirdly the word of especial power which mayntaineth by miracle; fourthly the
word of promise which supporteth by faith; and lastly even the word of denial
which vpholdeth us in patience.

Search the scriptures (says Christ) for they are they which testify of me,
and in them ye shall have life everlasting. John. 5. And it is a good bar
against the Devils temptation, when he tells us of bread, and turning
stones into bread, and all for bread, to tell him again, that there is
somewhat else to be cared for beside bread, that because God has given us a
soul to save, as well as a body to feed, and a belly to fill, that we
therefore should rather care to feed and instruct the soul, then to pamper the
body; especially to instruct the soul thus far against the body, that we may
learn to do no unlawful thing for natures necessity, nor to hazard an
immortal soul, for a mortal and dying body; And had many of us been as well
instructed in the word of God, and in their duty to God, the King and Country,
as they have been in the word of the diuill, and in unlawful means of
recovering bread, I think want of bread could never have raised such wicked
tumults as it has; but a man may truly say to the most hungry soul of this
tumultuous company, that when he was most oppressed, and most hungry, yet even
then he was better fed then taught.

Verbum benedictionis, the word of his blessing; it is true, that man lives
not by bread only, but chiefelie by the blessing of God, for every creature
(says S. Paul) is sanctified by the word of God. 1. Tim. 4. that is by the
blessing of God, as Ambrose and Theodoret expound it. And this appears to us
three ways, First because the very same thing blessed and not blessed, does
show forth power accordingly, as Exodus 16. when against the commandment of God
they reserved of the Mannah till the morning, it putrified and stanke, yet the
very same Mannah being kept by the commandment of God, was sweet and good many
years in the Arc; the reason of which difference was because God did give his
blessing to the one, and denied it to the other; Secondly, whereas we by
proportion feed our families, as David when he feasted the people, gave to
every one a piece of flesh, and a Cake of bread; 2. Sam. 6. that is, so many
Cakes of bread to so many people, yet God when he pleases, without all
proportion feeds man; for Math. 15. with seven loves he fed 4000. which was
much, but Math. 14. with 5. loaves he fed 5000. which was much more; the
miracle was great when it was at the least, but with the less provision to
feed the greater number makes it much greater; but the strangest miracle is
in the fragments, yea in the fragments three great miracles appeared; first
that out of so small a portion feeding so many, there should come any fragments
at al, next that out of the fewer loaves and the greater number to be fed,
there did arise the more fragments; and lastly that the redundance of the
fragments was more then the first stock or principal store of bread; and what
is all this, but the blessing of God? Thirdly, (which the diuill here
acknowledges) God ca^ when it pleases him, put the very strength of bread
into a stone, yea he that ca^ make a man of a stone, can feed him with a stone,
and nourish him more with meat of less nourishment, then with the more, as
Daniel and the rest, which lived with water and pulse, had their faces not so
fair, but fairer then they which lived of the Kings own table. Dan. 1. and
what is this likewise but the blessing of God: And had we not tied our life to
bread, and thought God could not have blessed us, but by filling our bellyes,
we should never have forsaken the blessing of God, to have fallen into the
curse of those conspiring brethren, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce,
etc. Ge^. 49. but it seems that these me^ when they had bread, they had it
without the blessing of God, and wanted grace to use it, and therefore now
having no bread, they want another blessing, and know not how to want it.

verbum potentiae, the word of his power; that word whereof it is said, he
spoke the word, and it was done, it is true likewise that man lives not by
bread only but many times by the special power of God; which appears also
three ways; first by raising up of extraordinary means, as when the
Israelites were in the wilderness where the earth did yield no bread, the Lord
did cause even the heaven to do the office of the earth, and to rain down
bread. Secondly, as he does strangely provide bread, so when it pleases him
he can preserve life without bread, for Moses of faith; for to him that
believes all things are possible. Mark. 9. Therefore if ye will have bread,
conspire not in mutinies, but conspire in mutual prayers; root not up
harmless hedges, nor rend up the bowels of the earth; but look up to heaven
from whence ye shall have bread; and though ye see no means how, yea though
ye see reason to despair, yet ye shall have bread; for he has said it who
cannot deceive, that he will not affamish the soul of the righteous. Pro. 10.

Verbum promittens, a word of promise to rest upon, and every man of ordinary
faith can stay himself on that, so is there likewise Verbum denegans, a word
of denial, whereby God says sometimes, ye shall have no bread at all, and
(which is the highest point of religion) we must learn to stand fast even in
that too; Thus stood David in that great distress by Absolon, If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, but if he say thus I
have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do as seems him good. 2.
Sam. 15. 25. 26. Thus affected likewise stood the three children in their fiery
trial, Our God whom we serve is able, yea and will deliver us out off thy
hands, but if not, yet be it known unto thee, that we will not serve thy
Gods etc. Dan. 3, 17. 18. And Job in the highest style and strength of
patience, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Job. 13. 15. For though
God be always merciful to give, yet in his wisdom he will not give
always, but sometime he will suffer, yea he will send men to take it from
us, for the exercise of our patience, the trial of our faith and for the
consummating the sins of the cruel; and no marvel if it be thus now, that
the cruel and tyrannos, or as Eliphas says, The mighty, and men of authority
have the earth in possession. Job. 22. 8. For thus it has been ever, and thus
it will be always; and as the the Apostle says of the Church Oportet esse
haereses, there must be heresies. 1. Cor. 11. so says Christ of the world,
Vae mundo a scandalis, woe to the world because of offenses, yet can it not be
avoided but that offenses will come. Mat. 18. yea it were rather to be
maruailed at, if offenses should not come, or that the world should be in
better state then it is, the Devil being the God, and governor of it; But how
then? shall we therefore shake off patience, and renounce obedience, and take
the sword into our own hands, because GOD will not plant another paradise
here, and make the world as we would have it? Now sure it is an easy thing
to hope when we have it at hand, and to be patient and quiet when we lack
nothing, and every man has thus much religion, when God gives him any thing,
to bless him for it: but to say with Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord
takes, and then Blessed be the name of the Lord: This is the perfection of
religion, even patience it self: and we must in patience possess our souls.
Luke. 21. and if we be not patient in our trial, all other our Religion is
nothing. Neither yet do famine and nakedness separate us from Christ. Romans 8.
35. But they bring us nearer unto Christ, and death nearest of all, since it is
the necessary office of Christian love for Christ's sake to be killed. verse. 36.
and when we are killed, yet are we more then conquerors, verse. 37. It was
truly said, non sunt hoc tempore finita, sed mutata martyria, martyrdom is
not now ended, but only changed, for in time past men were martyred for
profession of faith: but now they may be martyrs in the preservation of their
charity, yea we may be Martyrs says (S. Gregory) sine ferro and sanguine,
though neither sword touch us, nor blood come from us: and how is that? Si
patientia^ veraciter in animo custodimus, if faithfully we keep patience in
our minds: and we may say to the oppressors of our time, as Ciprian said to
the tyrants and persecutors of his time, Nobis ignominia non est pati a
fratribus etc. It is no shame to us to suffer of our brethren what Christ
suffered, nor glory to you to play that part which Judas played; yea rather
with Tertullian, Crudelitas vestra gloria nostra, the more cruelly ye afflict
us, the more ye honor us.

Therefore mark (good people) what honor God had offered to us, if patiently
we had borne the oppression which is put upon us, for by this reckoning
depopulators are persecutors, and oppression is persecution, and we by
oppression had come to martyrdom, if patiently we had borne it. But heaven and
earth are witnesses how far we are from bearing; yea bearing is come to
bearding, and because of a little want, men have buried their patience as they
buried hedges. Yea we are come to banding, Ephraim against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim; and now at last we are come to flat resisting; The
Thistle that is in Lebanon, to the Cedar that is in Lebanon; Come let us see
one another in the face; And as if brambles had bin anointed Kings, an
inferior Magistrate is now too mean, but the great King must come to compound
himself; or if he will not come, yet he must send A latere, a messenger from
his royal side; or if a Harold come, It is an easy matter to send a painted
coat; and when a Proclamation came, as good made under a hedge; and that which
is horrible to speak; A King of three great kingdoms must capitulate with a
Tinker, whether by Proclamation or by privy Seal he shall manifest his will
and pleasure: and yet all this is called Reforming; but such Rephaims are
Zanzummims, which as Plato told Diogines, he did tread upon his pride, Sed
maiori cum fastu, but with a greater pride, so these men reformed wickedness,
but with far greater wickedness; and whereas Rehoboam threatened his little
finger to be bigger then his Fathers loins, surely these men's little finger
would have bin bigger in the end the^ Rehoboams loins, for tyranny indeed is
heavy in the hands of a King, but it is intolerable in times of co^motion,
when every vile and base companion is a King; and to speak indifferently, I
think the sin of these men by many degrees to exceed the other, for Pasture-me^
indeed do horrible mischief, but they do it by degrees; first one breaks the
law; and then an other is bold to break it by example; now evils of such
passage are more easily prevented; but that which grows by mutinies being
sudden and violent, is less resistible. Pasture-men indeed destroy a few
towns, but mutiners by civil co^motion depopulate whole kingdoms, and that
partly by making way to foreign enemies, who usually increase their dominions
by such advantage, but chiefly by sacking and harrying their own country with
their own hands. And let men set what pretense and color they will, yet this
has bin from time to time the common proceeding of popular mutinies; first to
murmr upon some just cause, as the Isralites did at Moses when he brought
them where was neither water to drink, nor bread to eat. Ex. 15. 24. and Ex.
16. 3. Afterward when they had both to eat and to drink, yet (Nu^. 11.) they
murmured, not for want, but for wanto^nes, viz. for fish, and for flesh, for
apples, and for cowcumbers etc. Even as many of our maleco^tents do now, who
want not to drink, but want to make them daily drunk. But No^b. 14. their
murmuring came to that, that they would change the state, they would put off
Moses, and have an other to guide them: But Nomb. 16. in Coraths conspiracy
they came to that, that all the congregation was holy, they were all Jacobs
sons, and they would have no head at all; right as in the days of the
Judges, wherein there was no King in Israel, but every man did what was right
in his own eyes. Iud. 17. 6. Thus we find in Scriptures, thus in stories, yea
and thus in our own English stories, and I do not think it would have bin
otherwise now, unless it had bin worse; For mark I beseech ye, the course of
this creeping conspiracy; first they began in the night, as checked with fear
and conscience of a crime, but afterward they ca^e forth in the broad day, as
flesht and in this conspiracy some one quarrel had ceased, yet the rest had
run riot still; and then they which arose only to fill up ditches, must perhaps
have been compelled to entrench themselves a new from other conspirators: Nay
let me say more as Eliseus to his man, Is this a time to take bribes? to speak
simply, 2. Kin. 5.
there was no time at all for such a work, but at that time it was worst of
all, when some hope was offered of bringing home an idolatour to the Church; so
let me ask of these good people; Was this a time of all times to disturb the
peace of the land; now that King and state were so earnest in hand to unite two
kingdoms into one, now to attempt the rending of one kingdom into two? into
two? nay into ten; into ten thousand; and to bring it, not as Ierem. 2. 28. So
many Cities so many Gods, but so many men so many Kings, and to make confusion
of all; but as the saying is, Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas; better
one or a few to be punished, the^ a whole kingdom hazarded; and if in this
proceeding any have miscarried, they have perished right, as Saint Jude says,
even in the gaine-saying of Core. Iud. 11. and they have left this behind them,
that they were not killed, but as they killed themselves, the sword after a
strange manner asking peace of naked men, and mercy which should be sought, yet
seeking for admission with Cap in hand, and as it were creeping on her knees;
and so for the rest we leave them to God. And if any yet remain whom the
poison of this conspiracy has infected; I will not use many reasons to
diswade him; only let him take this for one, that if the bleeding bodies of
these slaughtered men did acknowledge, even as they lay bleeding and groaning
their last upon the ground, that they never felt they had offended God in the
present act till then, but then they did; and some upon the gallows asked
pardon of God, and confessed themselves penitent for that they had done: what a
fearful thing were it for us to live in that sin, which these poor
wretches detested when they dyed? therefore let us not tie knots which we must
untie again, nor commit that evil whereof we must again repent us, but rather
be thankful for those good things we have, and wait with patience for those
which yet we have not, and say in all things with Christ, Thy will be done,
that so at the last his kingdom may come, even the kingdom of righteousness
and grace in this life, and that of glory in the next.

Amen.
Pax in Christo.

