ISAHACS INHERITANCE; DEW TO OUR HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES THE SIXTH OF
SCOTLAND, OF ENGLAND, FRANCE AND IRELAND THE FIRST.

By E. W.

Fors vnita valet.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Imprinted for John Harrison, dwelling in Paternoster row at the
sign of the Unicorn and Bible. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful the Master, Maister-wardens, assistance, and other
the brethren of the most worshipful society of the Drapers in London: E. W.
wishes all happiness and aeternall felicity.
RIght Worshipful, though my unskillful Muse, praesuming in her infancy to
soar above her reach, feared at first the vulgar view of her vnpollish'd
lines, least her wings scortched like those of Icarus, her downe-fall should be
as great as Phaetons; knowing that snarling Zoylous will sooner bite with his
black tooth of envy, then any well-willer can read and judge with favorable
censure: yet soon resolving to make choice of your worships for her Mecaenas,
the aduancers of the virtuous, the mainteiners of the learned, friends to the
Muses, and helpers to all forward proceedings, thus far she is bold to peep
forth her head: assured nevertheless that some Agesilaus will tell her, he
will never prove sutorem expertum, qui paruo pedi magnos induat calceos, and
that she is no way to be commended, who tunes so high notes with so slender an
Oaten Pipe: But such she will answer that her will was better then her work,
and as the Painters (...) sometimes handles his Pensill, when he should but
grind his colors, so he that will prove his craftes-maister, must aim at
the famest: but those which shall be such cynicall censorers of her first
simtes, let them take the like task, mend hers, and she will yield up the
Bucklers. Thus not doubting of your worships fa^^^^able acceptance, craving no
more: friendly censure, hoping no (...) kind countenance the chief of her
wish: all which shall arm her against each foule-mouthd Momus, or carping
Diogenes, she commits the tuition of this her poor Orphan to your most worthy
protection. Resting

Your worships most humbly devoted Edw: Wilkinson.

ISAHACS INHERITANCE.
Dew To our high and mighty Prince James the sixth of Scotland, of England,
France and Ireland the first.
1.
WHen first our warlick Brute, AEneas great gransier of Brute.
sprung from the stock
Of grave Aeneas, stem of virtues race,
Abode the stock of Fortune like a rock,
Which surging billows would in vain displace,
And in his exile did the g^ues unlock
Of Trojan bondage, freeing from disgrace
His country men, who subiugate in Greece
Were there dispoyled of their golden fleece.
2.
He with this remnant, erst like wandering sheep
Dispersed amongst wolves, whose hide ous jaws did reeke
With luke war me blood of these, which often did sleep
Hid in the rock, cave, den, or rivers creek,
As safest place, in safety them to keep.
Poor captives, who to each vassaile were both meek,
Humble, and duteous, as we usual see
The bondsman is in his captivity.
3
With these (I say) our gran-sire took his course,
To seek new habitation, and aboade:
Whose ancestors ere while, without remorce
Were fired from the sight of Trojan road:
(Which to recite would crave too long discourse,)
And thus with Brute and's followers it stood,
They were all vagrant, though the Phrygian plain,
Did to their nation by due right pertain.
4
After a long and tedious Pilgrimage,
Straying now here, now there, each way uncertain,
Like to the straggling of Deucalions forage
After the inundation: and in vain
Spent being the flower of his youthful age,
Hopeless almost a country to regaine,
Where to implant a new the Troyans line,
Which now alack to low ebb did decline.
5
Joining his troops with Corinens band, (...) year (...)

A Trojan like himself, distressed as he,
At length arriving on this Western sand,
Displaying colors, showing victory
Had crowned him Monarch of old Albions land,
Her name he changed to worthy Britannie:
Which I Will being Spring then to their Winter past,
Promisd a harvest too, for aye to last.
6
Now blush proud Rome at thy aspyring mind,
That by thy Virgils Pen challengd'st descent
From Troyan issue, yea from Aeneas kind,
When by thy Sybils oracles 'twas meant
Brute should inhabit Britain, and we find
It proved true, to Albions great content:
Yet Maro I collaude thee, who would make
Thy Caesar his descent from Troy to take.
7
Thou aimedst fair, (...) which (...) told (...) ^^gustus ^^^^rily he (...) a
Ba^^^^^^ son.

but Caesar knew thou flatterd'st,
Wherefore with penny-dole thou wast rewarded:
Aeneas yet by lofty style thou made
T'arriue in Italy, and to Lauinia wedded.
The daughter of Latinus, this sure thou forgedst
With colorable gloze to have defended
Thy wits invention, yet Rome it self well knows,
Romulus her founder was, this her name shows.
8.
And Romulus nere sprang of Trojan line,
Rhea a Vestall virgin was his mother,
But who his father was doubtful has bin,
A silly shepherd nursed him, and his brother, Faustulus

When they were both rejected of their kin
Whom they for fire took, knowing none other:
But grant Aeneas did Laninia wedde
King Numitor nere from his loins descended. Father to Rhea.

9.
But whether wandrest thou so far my muse?
Muse not to think Rome forged so smooth a tale,
It is no changeling it will not refuse,
To forge a greater lie, if it avail
And serve her turn for profitable use,
And help her in her errors to prevail:
Cry, cry her mercy, it comes to her by kind,
To forge, deceive, and lie, as we well find.
10
Return I then to sing the soundest truth
Of Brute our sire, Ilions new reuiuer,
Who being arrived here with Trojan youth,
Few in number, and a small remainder
Of that they were, (which to rehearse breeds ruth.
And for such loss I tremble to remember)
Planted himself by destinies degree,
Finding this I Will his resting place to be.
11.
Here built he a new Troy, London our city,
For a remembrance of old Ilions wall:
Here did he establish laws both good and witty,
Which might th'audatious to orders good recall,
Here did he govern long with love and pity,
And naught in's reign but good did him befall
He governed as sole Monarch all the I Will,
Till death the soul of body did beguile.
12.
(...) (alas) for now new Britains bounds
(...) divided into sundry shares:
(...) sell the Western grounds,
(...) all the realm, (...)
which ere since bears
(...) of Cornwall, the sons of Brute here frowns,
(...) a diadem amongst them wears:
(...) nature thus far thought it meet,
(...) which felt the sower, should taste the sweet.
13.
(...) he has which must bear soueraingty,
(...) amongst them part the rest:
(...) hardly bear superiority,
(...) to have an equal thinks it best.
(...) diuides his signiority,
(...) else the brother should detest,
(...) sprung from one stock disdain to see,
(...) branches highest in degree.
14.
(...) end division which first bred,
(...) Humber to Seuerne smoothly gliding
(...) shard, wishing his brethren dead,
(...) have all for his own abiding,
(...) partners he must be contented,
(...) his cares it were no welcome tyding.
(...) S^uern back ward must bear sway
(...) from Humber takes his way.
15.
(...) shaking her dissheuiled hair,
(...) and snarl'd, composed with vipers brood,
(...) her venomous serpents in the air,
(...) their amity, which as yet firm stood:
(...) of brotherhood, brethren though they were
(...) forgot, being parted by the flood.
(...) not all, not many years were past,
(...) this middle region began to waste.
16
The brother which was eldest stood in doubt
The younger loved him not, but wished his death, Memsus slew (...) brother Ma^^^^

And to prevent all harms, he cast about
To save himself, and stop his brothers breath:
This bad example doubtless causd a route
Of stag-hairde Ruffians, careless to vnsheath
Their slicing fauchions, against their brothers throat,
If by his death they might set all on floate.
17
Scarce ages two in such disorder wasted, (...) who^ to quished (...) slew
(...) prison Morgan slame ^^ Cunedag^^^

But middle Britain swaide by woman's beck,
The fruits of her division too soon tasted,
When neighboring kingdoms sought to break her neck,
Albany, Camber, Cornwall hither hasted,
To spoil her of her plumes themselves to deck:
Soon after which themselves at variance fall,
And one being slain, the other gouernes all.
18
Thus Britain was reduced to her full force,
And governed by one Monarch as before,
Now florishd she, but soon having run that course, Porres Porres Porres
slame.

Dissension grew twixt brethren as of yore,
Alack it should be so, it breeds remorce
To think that Porrex should his brother gore,
But mothers hate, much greater ruth has bred, Jdion^ (...) Porres (...) which
Brut^^ line was extin guished.

Which slew the other sleeping in his bed.
19
Monster of women which could her own bowels tare,
And glut her with the blood of her own child,
Whom did she think, by offpring should repair
The ancient stock of Brute, now clean exiled?
Whom meant she should her Britain walls vpreare,
When she her hands with her sons gore defiled?
Whom though she should this desolate I Will defend,
When all her hopes on Brutes stock did depend?
20
Now lay she open to invasions,
To civil discord, mutinies, and iarres,
Now was she subject to intrusions,
As well to foreign as domesticke wars,
Now neighboring regions made incursions,
Now was she entangled dangerously in snares.
For so it falls, when kingdoms lack a guide,
Subject are harms, no good can them betide.
21
Much like they are to ship, where Pilots wanting,
Which tossed and turmoyld is in surging waves,
Subject to be ore whelmed, subject to splitting,
Against some hideous rock, when wind quite shaues
And tares away her fails, subject to drowning,
Making the depth to be the Sailors graves:
Such is the state of Realms, where heads are scant,
Britains this was thy grief, thy woe, thy want.
22
The giddie-headed multitude were glad,
They were exempted from a Kings command,
Thus laws dissolved the good scarce from the bad
Could be discerned; broke was all friendships band
In this tempestuous, dangerous, and sad
Tumultuous time, where none could surely stand,
Not yet his goods, or chattels safe possess,
Nor know where for his harms to seek redress.
23
Thus enemy to thy self thou long did live,
In ^^^^ll discord, shedding guiltleste blood:
When father envied that the son should thrive,
And haire-braind youth malign'd the ageds good,
When Politicians to surmount did strive,
But hindered by the vulgar, who as wood,
And raging in a madness, would permit
No base intruder in Caesar's throne to sit.
24
Until Mulmutius Duke of Cornewalls son,
Commiserating greatly thy distress,
Brought thee from many Monarchies to one,
From all thy troubles yielding thee release,
Peace-meale when thou wast totterd, broke, and torn,
He ioynted thee, and did thy greefes redress:
He constituted laws for thy tranquillity, Called Mulmutius laws.

Which kept thee after long in amity.
25
Nere till his time was worn a wreath of gold,
His temples were the first such metal bore,
This he deserved, for courage stern and bold
He was endued with, and what is more
Wisdom surpasde his courage twenty fould,
Which causd his fame both far and wide to fore.
Here Britain flourished, her storms were calmed,
Her wounds this king with sovereign oil embalmed.
26
Now trophies were vpreard for victory,
The Laurel bow in sign of peace she bare,
Now was she glittering in her cheifest glory,
For happiness none with her might compare,
Her father Neptune now no more is sorry, Britain inuirond with the sea.

But lulles her in his lap, (a thing most rare)
Gladly begirts her, hoping she is free,
From like distress, woe, or calamity.
27
England, and Scotland, Cornwall, Wales and all
Stands jointly now a Britain; And as then
A wise Mulmutius from the suns downe-fall,
Shone as a bright star to our countrymen,
Delivering them from that their present thrall,
Renewing their full liberty again,
Swaging their outrages for government,
And making laws to serve his good intent.
(...) 36.
An (...) does a kingdom better flourish
(...) united, and when part
(...) neither does diminish,
Any (...): well always fares the heart
(...) firmly knit, they it establish
(...) to endure each smart:
(...) the limbs will not the heart defend,
(...) thody soon will have an end.
37.
(...) with few years besides,
(...) since among our selves we had
(...) billows, surging waves
(...) between the white Rose and the red,
(...) seuerd kingdom had her sides
(...) self, her self her own blood shed
(...) civil mutinies: O grief
(...) hopeless of all relief.
38.
(...) Richmond lived to be thy guide,
(...) pilot to direct thy course
(...) heaven, which before were wide
(...) yea and which was worse,
(...) huge rocks, ready thy side
(...) sink thy self without remorce:
(...) Rose will^^^ ^^^ white uniting,
(...) aloft kept thee from sinking.
39.
(...) still long time in peace,
(...) his scepter long time swaide,
(...) in his reign did encrase,
(...) willing (...) Prince obeyed,
(...) behind him after his discease,
(...) of renown, (...) robes arrayed,
Who shone long time, especially the last,
Whose sempiternall fame shall never waste.
40.
But Richmonds issue female must continue
Our happiness begun: Margaret a gemme
Of peerless price, who past with her retinue
To Edenbrough, to a glorious stem
King James the fourth, who royally in lieu
Of kindness, crowned her with his diadem,
From whose fair Princely loins we fetch descent
Of James our king: King be he permanent.
41.
He and his Lineage Caesar's throne possess,
Whilst Sun gives light by day, or Moon by night,
Aeternall Joue with happiness them bless,
Enable them with power to keep their right,
Nere let their Monarchy again be less
Then now it is, even whole Britains might,
Enlarge it rather of thy heavenly grace,
And never let decay the Stewards race.
42.
James our dread King thy steward is on earth,
(According to our hopes just let him be,)
To execute his office here beneath,
That so his soul may gain eternity:
To him (O Lord) in mercy thou bequeath
A heart reple at with heavenly policy,
His Princely grace with wisdom (Lord) indue,
To root out vice, and wickedness subdue.
43.
Enable him with power to extirpate
All heresies, as he has ever done,
T'aduance thy truth, thy foes to subingate,
That they thy Church may never overrun,
Infuse thy sacred spirit in his heart
That wisperers against thy truth he shimmer
Let him unmask such, as in virtues cloak
Wrap up themselves, when all their deeds are smoke.
44
^^ shall we boast a Steward just thou have,
And my (though first we grieved) at our late change,
The sweet milk of thy Gospel we shall taste,
(...) ha'done, and not in errors range.
(...) obtain by mercy at the last
(...) Si^n: hen will thou not estrange
(...) us, but lovingly embrace
(...) look, receiving us to grace.
45
(...) we shall daily pray,
(...) of promise thou have placed him,
(...) spring never may decay:
(...) dowry thou have graced him,
(...) still flourish like the Baye,
(...) those that ever have de faced him:
(...) like years many let him see,
(...) and loyal subjects be.
FINIS.

