AN ANTILOGIE OR Counterplea to an Apologicall (he should have said)
Apologeticall Epistle published by a Favorite of the Roman separation, and (as
is supposed) one of the Ignatian Faction: Wherein two hundred untruths and
slanders are discovered, and many politic objections of the Romans
answered. Dedicated to the Kings most excellent Majesty by ANDREW WILLET,
Professor of Divinity.

2. TIM. 3.8.9. As Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith: but they shall
prevail no longer; for their madness shall be evident to all men, as theirs
also was.

AUGUST. EPIST. 177. Litera tuae nec ad reddenda conuitia me prouocare, nec a
reddendis literis me reuocare potuerunt.

Your letter could neither provoke me to render like railing speech, nor revoke
me from rendering an answer.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Man. 1603.

ILLVSTRISSIMO, POTENTISSIMO, ET piissimo Principi, IACOBO* Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regi, Domino suo colendissimo, multos annos tranquill^m
Imperium, pietatis and virtutis regiae incrementum in terris, and sempiternum
praemium in coelis concedat Deus opt. max. in Christo Jesus.
PIe monuit Ecclesiastes (illustrissime Princeps) vt Deo supplicantes paucis
verbis vtantur: Eccles. 5.1.
idem ad Principem accessuris, qui Dei loco in terris est, perpetuo obseruandum
videtur, vt breuiter perorarent. De Phocione fertur, (...).

Ad Domnionem.


quod secum deliberare solebat, an aliquid posset de sermon amputare, quem
habiturus esset ad populum: and Hieronymus de se profitetur, meliorem stili
partem legi quae deleret, quam quae scriberet. Id ego nunc facere instituebam,
vt paucissimis ad regiam vestram dignitatem praefaerer, and plura obelis
expungerem, quam literis obsignarem: sed rei necessitas, and amor vobiscum
diutius loquendi, vt ait Augustinus, me ita abripuerunt vt longius oration
excurreret. Certe (optime Rex) dum me ad scribendum accingo, cogitabam neque
res leaves and futiles afferendas esse, neque assentatorio sermon regijs
auribus abuti, neque quicquam omittere me debere, quod deceret scribere
theologum. Prolixitatem ergo scribentis excusabit rei necessitas and officij
ratio, fastidium legentis leuabit, vt spero, materiae varietas: praefatione iam
sequenti omnia fere complexus sum, quae mihi ad regem scribenti necessaria and
opportuna occurrebant: quae si paulo prolixius tractentur, non verborum
sterilis strepitus id facit, sed rerum continua series; non error scriptionis
est, sed scribentis feruor. No enim ita Nicias picturae suae perpoliendae
intentus fuit, qui saepe in opere oblitus est, pransusne esset: nec Archimedes
tanto studio lineis ducendis deditus fuisse fertur, quem vi auulsum serui
saepius vngebant: qua^to ego teneor regias virtutes tuas contemplandi
desiderio, Hieronym. ad Chromatium. 1. Reg 10.8. Eudoxus: (...).
vt vere cum Hieronymo eloquar: quid faciam? vocem pectori negare non audeo,
Epistolae breuitas co^pellit tacere, desideriu^ vestrum cogit loqui. Dixit
Regina Shebae ad Salomonem: Beati serui tui qui stant coram te iugiter and
audiunt sapientiam tuam. Eudoxus ille studiosus stellarum indagator, cum
Phaetonte comburi optauit, ea lege, vt liceret illi prius soli adstanti formam
and magnitudinem astri perdiscere: and nos gestimus sub pia vestra
administratione, and lucis (plusquam Solaris) Eua^gelij contemplatione aetatem
nostram and dies consumere. Accipe iam (benignissime Rex) regio illo tuo. i.
hilari and placido vultu, pauperis theologi tenue munusculum, seruitutis suae
(...) certissimum, parca manu sed amplo cord oblatum. Artaxerxes cum plebeius
aquam palma e fluuio sublatam exhibuisset, humaniter admisit: and solet
Maiestas tua pluris dantis animum quam doni pretium aestimare. Quod ad librum
hunc, non audeo polliceri, Existit. lib. 6.
quod Seneca de Amici cuiusdam libro profitetur, Tanta me dulcedine tenuit and
traxit, vt illum sine vlla dilatione perlegerem! Legentem tamen haec nostra,
spero id assequi posse, quod sibi inter legendum accidisse idem author refert:
tanquam lecturus ex commodo adaperui ac tantum degustare volui, deinde
bla^ditus est, vt longius procederem. Quod ad me: video and pontificijs me
odiosum esse, quod illorum superstitiones omnes aboleri cupiam; and alijs
nostratibus me displicere (cum neque Papista neque Puritanus sim) quod
Ecclesiam nostram adhuc venustiorem and pulchriorem reddi exoptem. Ad vestrum
patrocinium tanquam asylum confugio, vt me tantisper alarm vestrarum vmbra
tectum and munitu^ velit Maiestas tua, dum ego veritatis amans, and pacis
studiosus, id solum, quod honestum est, sequor: vt tanquam Clearchum alterum te
intuear, (...). Prou. 16.15.
de quo Xenophon scribit, quod hilari and placido vultu solebat milites
periclitantes reficere, and illis animos addere: and vere iam experiar quod
scribitur, In lucida regis facie vita est. Alijs detur, vt in patulae vestrae
arboris ramis, Dan. 4.9.
ta^qua^ auiculae cantillent: mihi satis est, si in vmbra humi repens vermis
requiescam. Quod si iam serenitati tuae mei conatus probentur, quicquid alii
senserint, (...).
vt Pithagoras pro Geometricis suis bouem mactauit, ita ego pro optimo
studiorum successu Deo gratias agam.

Maiestati tuae vita^ longam, regnum prosperum, prolem foelicem, vitam aeternam
ex animo precatur fidelissimus tuus subditus Andreas Willet.

The Preface to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
SAINT Paul that divine Apostle (most gracious and dread Sovereign) thus
concludes his second Epistle to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 1^.1.
This is the third time that I come unto you. In the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word stand. As he by his preaching and writing thrice
presented himself to the Corinthians to testify his love: so I have been bold
now thrice to exhibit my simple labors to your Highness; which as three
witnesses may, I trust, sufficiently express my joy for your Majesty's
peaceable entrance, and profess my service and duty in prayer for your
prosperous continuance.

Two years since I sent a book to your Highness into Scotland by your
Majesty's Printer, then set forth under Queen Elizabeth's name; since, I was
bold at your happy arrival into this land, to present the same under your
Highness own name: the first a new work, but not yours; the second yours,
but not new: this third is both, which in some sort may supply the foresaid
wants in the others.

The first miscarried, being not at all delivered. The second was delivered, but
not in season. And now I have sent this after the other, 1 Samuel 20.20
as Jonathan shot three arrows one to find another; and as the hewer having
lost his axe in the water, 2. King. 6.6.
sent the helue after the head, and found both: so I hope this simple present
added to the former, may make a way for me unto your Majesty, not to speak
for my self, but in the behalf of the Church of Christ.

Now because I know not, whether in this kind I may ever hereafter have
occasion to speak to your Majesty, let me be bold in the fear of God to
utter my mind to your Highness, not only with reverence as to a King; but
plainly in singleness of heart, as to a Christian, a good man, and lover of
Gods Church. (...).
Hierome of Sicile was wont to say, That none that spoke freely to him, did
importune him or was unseasonable: much more to your Christian Majesty free
and plain speech delivered in duty (I trust) shall not be unpleasing.

First then, as we all do praise God for your happy succession in the
kingdom, by whom we are undoubtedly persuaded religion and peace shall be
continued and maintained; that we have all cause to say with Israel, Psalm.
126.3.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice: the times fall out
much better, and the change more happy then was of some feared, of others
expected. It has not happened unto us, as aged Leontines foretold to the
Antiochians, who pointing to his gray and white hairs, said: When this snow is
melted, Hac niue liquefacta mul tu^ erit luti. Sozomen. 3.19* (...).

Numantinus ad Scipione^.


much mire will follow: that is, sedition and trouble. But after the
dissolution of the white snowie hairs of our last aged Sovereign, no such
trouble (God be thanked) has followed: the Lord has not left us as sheep
without a shepherd: We are the same sheep to be led forth still to the
waters of life, though another shepherd.

As the Church of England acknowledges Gods great goodness herein: so your
Christian Majesty shall do well to recogitate with your self (as you do) the
Lords great mercies toward you; who in your infancy from many perils most
prouidently preserved you, and in your former reign from many dangers
miraculously delivered you, and now to a most flourishing kingdom most
honorably advanced you. I doubt not, but as your Highness has the like
occasion, so with the Prophet you will utter the same affection: My soul
praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits; Psalm. 103.2.
as well appears to the great comfort of us all, by that religious weekly
erected exercise in your Highness Court. Your Majesty well remembers Moses
counsel to the king: Deuteronomy. 17.20.
that he should read in the law of God all the days of his life, that his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren. Princes are set in slipperie places:
if God stay them not, abundance of honor, pleasure, wealth may soon entangle
the^. This appeared in Solomon, who strangely fell and declined from his
integrity. Alexanders example in foreign stories is notable, who in justice,
temperance, chastity was a mirror to all Princes before he tasted of the
pleasures of Asia. (...).
Dionysius for a while delighted in Plato, and seemed to be studious of
Philosophy, but he quickly fell away; therein well resembled to a book,
wherein that which was before written, was soon blotted out. But in
Christians, the mutabilitie of nature is corrected by the stabilitie of grace;
and God with whom there is no variableness, nor shadowing by turning, Iam. 1.7.
shall so strengthen your royal heart, as that it be neither ouer-cast with
shadow, nor turned by change.

There are two enemies to Christian constancy envy and flattery: the one
practices, the other persuades; that pulls back, this lets to go
forward; the last is the worst, the first least to be feared. Envy follows
virtue, flattery nourishes vice: the first Themistocles well perceived, who
being yet young, (...).
said he had done no excellent thing, because he was not envied: the other
Phocion was not ignorant of, to whom when the people gave applause for his
oration: What (says he to his friends) have I spoken any thing amiss
unawares? (...).
showing that popular applause and flattery does often work upon some
infirmity. Many have prevented treachery, that could not take heed of
flattery. David whom neither Abner and Amasaes valor, 2. Sam. 16.3. 2. Sam 11.
nor Achitophels wit could subdue, Ziba his false tale seduced, and smiling
ease and prosperity corrupted. Nehemiah could well beware of Tobiah and
Sanballat, Nehe. 6.10.14.
that were threatening adversaries, but he was most in danger by Shemaiah and
Noadiah dissembling Prophets. The way for Princes to avoid such flatterers, is
to have faithful servants and followers, as David says: The faithful in the
land shall dwell with me, the upright in heart shall serve me. Psalm. 101.6.
Lysippus the Caruer did worthily reprove Apelles the Painter, because he had
made Alexanders picture with a thunderbolt in his hand as a God; the other with
a spear, honoring him as a valiant Prince. I doubt not but they are more
pleasing to your Highness, that give you that is due, then which ascribe that
you will not take. Against envy and treachery your Majesty must oppose your
Christian innocence and careful circumspection: against flattery, your
Princely humility. Obliuiscitur se rege^ esse, vbi Deu^ omnium regem
pertimescit: mira res, du^ abiicit purpuram, and se regem hominum esse non
meminit, rex esse incipit iustitiae, religiosus Princeps, no^ perdidit imperiu^
sed mutauit. Sam. 40. Genesis 49. v. 23 24.

(...).


As Ambrose well describes the penitent king of Niniuie that humbled himself
in sackcloth: He forgets himself to be a king, while he fears God the
king of al: a strange thing, while he casts away his purple robes, and
remembers not that he is a king, he begins to be a king of Justice, he did
not lose his kingdom, but changed it to the better. God grant that to your
Princely humility and Christian piety may be added divine constancy, that
although archers shoot at you, some with darts of envy and treachery, some with
the bolts of flattery; yet with Joseph your bow may abide strong, and the
hands of your arms strengthened to the end. Agesilaus well said: I do so use
my self, that in no change I be changed. We all trust that this speech will
be more truly verified in your Christian Majesty then in that heathen Prince:
which your firm, and (we hope) unchangeable constancy has manifested it
self in your steadfast resolution for the continuance of religion in sincerity
without mixture. Some have preas^ed already, if not presumed, to make request
for toleration of their Mass, or rather Misse-seruice, for all is amiss in
it: but they might know that the Arc and Dagon cannot dwell together: that
Hezechiah will not suffer the brazen serpent to stand, nor Josias permit the
Chemarims to execute their idolatrous service. They would seem to condition
with your Majesty, whose lands and persons are at your courtesy; much like
the Athenians, who being forced to give up their city to the Spartans, desired
that Samos might be left: to whom one wittily answered: (...).
When you are not your own, you would have others to be yours. Whereupon grew
this Proverb: He that has not himself, would have Samos. We have an English
byword, Beggars must be no choosers, so neither must petitioners be
prescribers. Your Majesty can answer such importunate and unreasonable
suitors, as Zerubabel answered the adversaries of Judah, that offered their
service craftily to build the temple: It is not for you, but for us to build
the house unto our God. Ezra. 4.3.
And as Valentinian made answer to the Roman Ambassadors that made petition
for the restoring of the idol temples: That which my brother (Gratian) takes
away, Quod pius frater cripuit, quomodo putatis a me reddendum, cum in eo and
religio and frater laedatur? in obit. Valen.
how can you think I should restore? In so doing I should both hurt religion,
and do my brother wrong. Postulet parens Roma, alia quaecunque desideret: Let
our mother city Rome ask any thing else which she desires. This good
Emperor Valentinian being yet but young, was so resolute to continue the
purity of religion, that notwithstanding the instance of the Roman Orators,
and the counsel of all his Senators that approved their petition, he would
not grant any liberty to Roman idolatry. Lycurgus answer was very fit to
one that persuaded, that the government might be committed to the people:
(...).
Do thou first make trial in thy house, giving thy servants the rule: So these
that would have diverse religions in the Co^mon-weale, yet mislike that there
should be any but their own profession in their houses and families, their
children and servants being for the most part, if they may have their desires,
like affected to themselves. We thank God for your Majesty's firmness and
constancy herein; praying heartily for the increase of Christian zeal,
strength and courage in your princely heart.

But as your excellent resolution is to have the state of the Church and
Commonwealth no worse: so we rejoice to hear of your princely consultation to
make them both better. Always the noble Princes Reformers have added somewhat
to their predecessors work; and where the other left, they began: David
brought the Priests and Leuits to order: 2. Chro. 14.3. 2. Chro. 17.6. 2. King.
18.4. 2. Chr. 35.18.
Solomon built the Temple: Asa took away Idolatry: Iehosaphat removed the
high places: Hezekiah brake down the brazen Serpent: Josias restored the feast
of the Passover to his first integrity: under Nehemiah the feast of
Tabernacles was revived: Neh. 18.5.
So in England Henry the eight expelled the Pope, and abolished Idolatry:
King Edward proceeded, and abrogated the Mass: Queen Elizabeth went yet
further, took order for recusants, seminary seducing Priests, and Iudasits: and
somewhat it may be is yet remaining, either to be amended or added by your
Majesty; for we doubt not, but that you have set your heart to seek the Lord;
and with Hezekiah, 2. King. 20.3.
to do that which is good in his sight. That saying of Alexander does well fit
a Christian Prince: It profits not to possess all things, (...).
and to do nothing. As we joy to see you a possessor of the Crown, (...).
so we desire to behold you an agent in Christ's Church: we joy from our hearts
to see what reformation your M^^estie has begun in the Commonwealth, in
staying of monopolies, redressing of oppression and extortion by officers,
restraining unlawful games upon the Lords day. We do also as much rejoice to
think of your princely resolution for matters Ecclesiastical, In restoring
the revenues of the Church, and misliking the law of Annexation, in maintaining
the three estates of Parliament, (...). 43. l. 1. p. 43. l. 10. vide l. 23.
in seeing that all Churches in your dominions be planted with good Pastors.
And that every Church may be thus planted with a good Pastor, one should no
longer be suffered to have many; nor he that is no good Pastor nor able to
teach, any: and if the Pastor must be planted in his Church, then to be plucked
and pulled from thence by long absence, is not fit. Thus so many hundred
Churches that want teachers shall be supplied; and diverse hundred Preachers not
yet called abroad, shall be employed. But seeing a great cause of an unlearned
Ministry is want of maintenance, we thank God for your Highness Christian
care also herein, p. 44. l. 1.
that sufficient provision be made for the sustentation of Ministers: which may
be fitly done, if patrons were urged to bestow their livings freely, and better
order were taken for impropriations; that such as are of the Churches fee, be
demised for the old rent to the incumbent Preacher; such as belong to others,
be charged with some convenient portion to issue forth for the maintenance of
the Pastor. But I presume not to prescribe a course, but only to give my
simple advice. To our great comfort also your Majesty has declared your
princely care and desire, p. 43. l. 26.
that the doctrine and discipline be preserved according to Gods word: whereas
the first has bin in this Church by some with unsound teaching corrupted, as I
have partly showed in the Preface following; the other by some much neglected,
by others not used well. There are books abroad maintaining offensive
doctrine, too much declining to popery, which have done great hurt: it might
please your Majesty that such dangerous books might be inhibited; and because
they are dispersed into many hands, that they receive some answer by public
allowance, or sufficient satisfaction from the authors, lest the infection
spread further.

We also with thanks to God take knowledge of your Highness Christian
disposition to peace, Pr^s. p. 11. ^. 16
that no contention should be in the Church about ceremonies in your princely
judgment, indifferent; whereabout the Church of England has been much
distracted. Lycurgus is said, to avoid drunkenness to have forbid the use of
vines. Your Highness in good time may more easily remove the just occasions of
offense: or so indifferently moderate them, that they breed no strife. God
give your Majesty strength in due time to reform both those, and what other
abuses are in Church or Commonwealth. Some perhaps would have your Majesty to
minister no physic at all, as though the Church ayled nothing: which were
nothing else, but (with Herodotus Selymbrianus in Plato) to make a long and
lingering sickness; who falling into an incurable disease, Plato (...).
devised how to prolong death where he could not prevent it. Some would have
Heraclitus physic used to do nothing but purge; who being sick of a dropsy,
desired the Physician to purge him thoroughly, to turn the abundance of showers
into drought: (...).
so they would have all purged, not the superfluous humors only, but some
profitable parts; as the very calling it self of reverend Pastors and Bishops:
who while they attend the sincere preaching of the word, and the vncorrupt
administration of discipline, may (no doubt) do the Church much good. But the
better sort desire neither with Heroditus nothing to be purged, nor with
Heraclitus all things to be euacuated and purged; but rather approve
Hippocrates method, that, what is evil may be purged, the rest to be comforted
and strengthened. This was Saint Paul's course, to purge out the old leaven,
that there might be a new lump. 1. Cor. 5.7.
We would not the leaven, lump of dough, and all to be cast out; but the lump
to be renewed, the old sower leaven to be rejected. Thus shall your Majesty
show your self as Hierome says of one, to be Hippocrates Christianorum, A
right Hippocrates of Christians indeed; that you may say with the kingly
Prophet David: Psalm. 75.3.
The earth and the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, but I will establish the
pillars of it. Your Majesty as another Moses, can only appease the strife
between the Hebrews; and as another Constantine, to reconcile the
Church-ministers, who wrote thus unto them: Let me enjoy good days and quiet
nights without care; Date mihi dies tranquillos and noctes cura expertes: quod
si min^s contingat, necessum est ingemiscere. Socr. 1.4
if not, my grief will be the more. When your Highness has wrought this cure,
you shall be no more troubled with petitions by day, nor careful meditations by
night. Aristippus and Aeschines being fallen out, one asked the first, what was
now become of their friendship; he answered: It was asleep, but he would awake
it. When your Highness has awaked the peace of the Church, (...).
you shall sleep more quietly your self, and not be troubled any more with
Constantines careful nights. You are our Solomon to judge between us: they
that love division, and to contend causlesse, let them have the least part.
Theodosius, Socrat. 5.10.
when Catholics and Heretics put up their libels to him, prayed God to direct
him: so your Majesty well knows that your direction herein must come from
God. Diverse complaints as lots, are cast into your Princely lap, but the
disposition thereof is of the Lord. God (we trust, Prou. 16.33.
and for the same pray) will so dispose your royal heart, that the best cause
may have the first lot, the most honest suite the happiest issue, and the
iustest quarrel the fairest trial. Fail not their godly desire herein (most
gracious Prince) that never would have failed you: who were resolved (I speak
herein of mine own knowledge) to have adventured their lives and states for
your Majesty's just title: who waited for you, as for the rain, Job. 29.23.
and for the consolation of Israel. Fail not then (O noble King) the hope of
Christ's Church, yea the expectation of Angels, yea the trust that Christ has
committed unto you, to be a faithful servant, as Moses in his house: so, as one
says, The eyes of men are not only cast upon you, Heb. 3.2. In te vnu^ puta
cunctoru^ oculos conuersos, and ad spectaculu^ vitae tota^ consedisse Angliam:
Deus ipse cum omni Angeloru^ militia certamen tuum expectat. Hier. ad Demetr.
August. conf. lib. 3. ca. 12.
and the whole land settled to behold your life; but God and Angels expect your
faithful service. God, we verily trust will not fail you with his spirit: but
as the Prophet says, Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved: so your prayers and tears which you pour unto God, shall both save you
and your people; as one said to Augustines mother, Non potest perire tantarum
lachrymarum filius: the child of such prayers and tears cannot possibly perish
or fall away.

Now as to our great comfort we enjoy your Majesty, a norishing father of
Christ's Church at home; so your Highness is expected to be a succor and
comfort to other afflicted Churches abroad: though you are not as a head to
direct them, yet you may be as a hand to help them; though not a root to give
them life and sap, Genesis 49.22.
yet as a wall for the small branches to run upon, to stay them up: as it is
said of Joseph. It was Joshua his honor, to aid the Gibeonites their
confederates, Joshua. 10.5.
against the combined Kings of Canaan. David was a captain to all that were
distressed and afflicted. 1. Sam. 22:2:
Hercules is honored in heathen stories, because he traveled through the
world to remove cruel governors. (...).
Noble Alexander is famous for the same, who conquered a great part of the
world, reducing rude and barbarous people to civil life: who charged all to
esteem the whole world as their country; (...). Fox page 228. col. 2.
good men, as their countrymen; the bad, as aliens and strangers. Our English
Chronicles do blame Henry the second for refusing to take the protection, and
defense of the distressed Christians in Jerusalem, offered unto him by
Heraclius the Patriarch; the troubles that befell him at home are ascribed to
that cause. But Ecclesiastical stories make honorable mention of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, Socrat. 7.23.
whose love was such to the afflicted people of God, that being present to
behold certain public sights and shows, and there hearing of the death of
one Ioannes, a cruel rebel and tyrant, presently left the plays, and went to
the Church to give thanks to God. Queen Elizabeth was a foster mother to all
distressed Christians; and I doubt not, but all Protestants in the world shall
receive comfort (in the cause of Religion) from your Majesty's favor, in being
a mediator for their peace, or succor for their relief.

But of all other, we the poor company of scholars and students, have
greatest cause to rejoice in your Majesty, whom now we have obtained a learned
and judicial patron of our labors and writings: whereas before, no gift or
present was held to be more base, nor less regarded of all hands. Scholars
books, the travail of the soul, the weakening of the body, the care of the
day, and study of the night, were not not so welcome to the most, as a Lawyers
fee from the client, or a tenants new-yeares gift to his Landlord. I your
Majesty's poor subject could speak herein by experience, what small hartening
I have had in the world for my poor travels in the Church: but I will be
sparing in mine own cause. And yet I speak not this as though we expected our
reward from men (though we be men, and had need of terrene encouragement:) but
I am bold, a poor writer of this Church of England, to pour forth the common
grief and complaint of students in this behalf, into your princely bosom.
Books were grown into such small request, that many would scarce vouchsafe
the reading of them; but few bear in mind who presented them: they were laid
aside by the walls, or set up only to make a show, as one says: Senec. lib.
1. de tranquillitate vitae.
Sacrorum opera ingeniorum in speciem and cultum parietum comparantur; The
labors of sacred wits were used only to beautify the walls.

But now we trust, as Homers Iliads were accepted of Alexander, which he made
(...), the furniture of his journey; Terence works of Scipio; Origens books
of Ambrosius, whom he called (...), because he continually provoked him to
write; and as Hieromes writings were esteemed of Damasus: so I doubt not, but
scholars labors shall be as welcome to your Majesty, as any other subjects
presents. And in this confidence I have been bold again to offer my service to
your Majesty. For as he that made that harp wherewith Thales appeased the
tumult of the Lacedaemonians; and he that built the ship wherewith Themistocles
did defend Greece, had cause more to rejoice therein, then in any work beside:
so to none else we more willingly present our labors, then to your sacred
Majesty, a general procurer of our peace, and defender of Church and
country; whose vigilant heart cares for all, whose diligent eye sees for
all, whose liberal hand reaches unto all. And not only at this present, but
while I live, have I purposed to consecrate my pen to the honor of your
Majesty (if God will and you please:) And I say with Hierome: Prefat. in
Danielem.
Quamdiu in hoc corpusculo sum, scribam aliquid gratum vobis, vtile Ecclesiae,
dignum posteris.

But here one thing I cannot pretermit, to celebrate the great joy of your
Majesty's subjects for your princely acceptance of poor men's complaints, and
the ready access to your royal person. It has pleased your Majesty to
signify herein, that it is your gracious pleasure and mind in giving access
to be so open and affable to every rank of honest persons, (...). 46. l. 12.
as that they may make their own suits to you them selves, and not to employ
others to be their intercessors. Therefore the King is said to go out and in
before the people, 1. King. 3.7.
that they may have free access unto him in time and place convenient: that
though it be not for the safety of the Prince to be so open as the Roman
Tribunes, whose doors night and day were open to all suitors; nor yet fit to be
locked up and retired as the Persian kings; or as Clearchus of Pontus, Plutarc.
quaest. Romans 81. p. 12. l. 19.
that did hide himself and sleep in a chest; or Aristodemus king of the
Argiues, that did clime up into his hanging bed by a ladder, that no man should
come unto him: yet is it honorable (as your Majesty well knows, and we hope
will practice) for the Prince often to show himself to his people, that they
may flock unto him tanquam ad salutare sydus; Seneca. (...).
as to a comfortable star, as one says; and to be free for all to come unto,
as the altar. We shall not need then (especially the Ministers of the Gospel)
to complain with Ambrose, who suing to the Emperor for one Higmus an ancient
Bishop adjudged to exile, Epist. 27.
ne sine vest and plumario pateretur extrudi, extrusus est ipse: that he
should not be thrust out without his bed and clothes, was thrust out himself.
But we praise God for your Majesty, as the same father does for the good
Emperor Gratian, of whom he says: Epist. 126.
Scripsisti tua totam Epistolam manu, You wrote an Epistle with your own hand:
whom he compares to Abraham which killed a calfe with his own hands to
entertain the Angels: Nec in ministerio religioso aliorum adiumenta quaesiuit;
And in a religious work sought not another help. For the like merciful
disposition in your Majesty, in vouchsafing your self to attend the causes of
your subjects, we say with S. Paul to Onesiphorus: 2. Tim. 1.18.
The Lord grant that you may find mercy with the Lord in that day.

Now lastly I crave pardon for my boldness and plainness of speech, not
doubting but that your Majesty approves that saying of Ambrose uttered of
noble Theodosius: Epist. 29^
Neque imperiale est, libertatem dicendi negare; neque sacerdotale, quod sentit
non dicere: It is nether princelike, to deny liberty of speech; nor
ministerlike, not to speak what he thinks. And we are not ignorant of your
royal disposition herein, to love those best that are plainest with you:
(...). p. 71. l. 3.
which emboldneth me to say with Hierome, Mallem apud te verecundia parumper,
quam causa periclitari; I had rather hazard my credit then the cause: but I
trust I shall hazard neither, by any thing which out of a single heart, and
loyal affection I have uttered. I have delivered my conscience, discharged my
duty, and (I hope) not written otherwise then became me. I leave the rest to
your princely consideration, according to that saying in the Proverbs: Prou.
9.9.
Da sapienti occasionem, and sapiet amplius. Thus I end with hearty prayer
unto God, so to strengthen your Majesty with his grace, that you may be
constant in all goodness to the end, zealous of his glory to amend what is
amiss, to supply what is wanting, to cherish the good, suppress the evil,
relieve the oppressed: so shall your Highness do that which shall be
acceptable unto God, honorable to your self, profitable to his Church,
comfortable and joyous to your own soul in the end. Go forward then, noble
King, in your wel-begun course; follow your own Christian judgment, to
practice as you have prescribed, to perform as you have purposed; consider
that all the people of this land are your sheep: the Lord has made you the
chief ouerseer and Steward, according to your princely name, both of Church
and Commonwealth. Of this Stewardship you must one day render account unto
God: provide then, O Christian Prince, that you may do it with joy. The Persian
Kings always appointed one in the morning to call unto them; Arise, O King,
(...).
and take care of these things which Oromasdes bids thee be careful of. But
your Majesty's own thankful remembrance of Gods mercies, will suffice within
to put you in mind, and sing as it were in your ears, what God requires and
you have promised: and to think of Mordecay his speech to Queen Esther, Who
knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time? Esther 4.14.
As for us, we trust by Gods grace to see so happy a change by this change,
that whereas we had thought our selves undone, we may truly say as Themistocles
did, who being exiled his country was better entertained in the Persian court,
(...).
We had perished, if we had not perished.

God grant to your Majesty a long and prosperous reign; to your noble Queen
happy continuance with you; and length of days to your honorable son,
Prince Henry, increase of all princely graces with growth of years; and to
your royal posterity to reign over this land, if it be Gods will, unto the
worlds end: and unto you all an endless reward in heaven, for your faithful
service to Christ here on earth. And so I conclude with Ambrose: Ipse me citius
quam vos obliuiscar; and si vnquam sermo tacebit, loquetur affectus (Iacobe and
Henrice) in vestris nominibus adhaerere iuuat, (Gratiane, Valentiniane) apud
Ambr.
and delectat in vestri commemoratione requiescere.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, Andrew Willet.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
THE wise man in the Proverbs says, He that medleth with a strife that
belongs not unto him, is as one that takes a dog by the ears. Prou. 26.17.
Theagenes was laughed to scorn of all, because he would be meddling in every
matter, and trying maisteries with every one in running, wrestling, fencing;
as though it were not lawful for any to have the victory where he was present.
(...).
Lest therefore I might be thought to be busy in other men's matters, and to
intermeddle where I need not, to speak in a cause where I was not retained,
and to defend a wrong where I was not injured: first mine answer is this, that
the defense of the truth belongs to all: as an injury offered to the body,
every member is ready to propulse; and an enemy inuading the country, it is
every man's part to resist. Hierome well says: Feci vt hosts ecclesiae, mei
quoque hosts fierent; I always endeavored that the enemies of the Church
should also become mine enemies. Augustine also says, August. Hier. Epist. 9.
Incomparabiliter pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum:
The verity of the Christians is far more fair then Helene of the Grecians:
We ought therefore more to strive for it, then they did for the other. Beside,
I have not held up my shield at a shadow, no man striking me; or made answer,
where no man called me; or run forward, no man thrusting me: p. 63. l. 11. p.
88 l. 15. p. 119. l. 15
for in three several places it has pleased this Popes champion to challenge
me: and so has to my thinking bid me the base, and cast down his gauntlet for
me to take it up. I considered that it was not fit in this case to do as
children, (...).
that being stricken, do lay their hands upon the sore place and cry: but to
requite him with the like that first gave the adventure, and to return the
smart of the blow upon his face that first bent his fist. Hieron. ad Theoph.
I say therefore with Hierome, Si superbum sit respondisse, multo sit superbius
accusasse: If it be thought an insolent part to answer, it is much more to
accuse: and he is judged contentious, not which preuenteth a further mischief,
but first provoke thereunto. Neither can I conceal, that to this enterprise
I was incited and stirred up by the reverend Lord Bishop of London, by whose
advise and counsel I addressed my self thereunto: De 5. Haeres. 1.
saying with Augustine, Ad compellendum non potest esse molestus exactor,
quando ad reddendum deuotus est debtor: The exactor is not troublesome in
requiring, when the debtor is willing in rendering. I have hitherto showed the
motives that induced me to this work: now also I will briefly declare what I
have done. I have discovered in this treatise above two hundred untruths and
slanders, by this libeller without al conscience forged, and without all
modesty uttered: I have answered all the politic objections, by him
cunningly against the Protestants faith devised: I have his own engines,
wherewith he would have battered ours, upon his own forts returned. The
business (I thank God) was not great, which I found in the unfolding of this
Alogicall (I should say, Apologicall) Epistle. But as Caesar said of a certain
city, which at the very first view he overcame, Veni, vidi, vici: I came to
it, I saw it, I took it: so may I say with Hierome, Sententias eius
prodidisse, superasse est: The very laying open of his sayings, is a sufficient
confutation. His objections required no long time to answer: to refell his
arguments, it was sufficient to see them: and to overthrow his cause, it was
enough to open his book. And as Lueullus said of his enemies, that came against
him in complete harness: (...).
That it would be more labor to spoil them, then to foil them: so had I as
much a do to collect his reasons, as to confute the^. The gaining of diverse
pieces of this book which were negligently lost, was more trouble to me, the^
the first framing of that which I had carefully written.

Now I have also the more willingly thrust my self into this business, to
make known to the people of God, the Lords unspeakable goodness toward us,
who has given us a Prince resolved to profess in himself and protect in us
the same faith of the Gospel, which was by Q. Elizabeth maintained: that still
we may exercise our pens against the common adversary. Of his Majesty's reign
we may truly pronounce, as the Prophet of Salomons: In his days shall the
righteous flourish. Psalm. 72.7. All those shall be sure, we verily trust, to
live in peace and enjoy his favor, that love the truth and follow
righteousness. God has sent us another Theodosius, of who^ Ambrose says: Cum
omnes homines vobis militent, tum ipsi vos omnipotenti Deo, and sacrae fidei
militatis: As al men do war and fight for you, so you for Almighty God and the
sacred Faith. Ambros. existit. 30. ad. Theodos.
Phocion being asked of the Orators, what benefit he had bestowed upon the
city: None but this (says he) that while I was governor, none of you had cause
to make a funeral Oration: (...).
So I trust, that Religion has gotten such an honorable patron, that
Preachers the Orators of Christians, shall have no cause to mourn for the
persecution, trouble and imprisonment of such as profess the Gospel, as in
former times of persecution under Popish tyranny, but to rejoice in the
peaceable fruition of the Gospel. And how much are we to joy in so Christian a
Prince, who does not only publickely profess himself to be no Papist: (...).
p. 10.
but has declared so sound a judgment in some questions controuersed among
Protestants, that we may all from his princely mouth take out a new lesson, and
learn to reform our erroneous conceits? Our kingly Ecclesiastes says, That
all that is necessary to salvation, is contained in the Scriptures, (...). p.
19: otherwise then some have affirmed, that the light of nature and the light
of Scripture jointly, not severally, are complete to salvation: for hence it
follows, that the Scripture severally and alone is not complete to salvation.

We are taught to use only Scripture for interpretation of Scripture, Medit.
in 20. c. Reu. p. 3. ar. 7
if we would never swerve from the analogy of faith in expounding: as
Scripture is interpreted by Scripture, so the Scripture is drawn by Scripture,
not by the authority of the Church. Beware to believe with the Papists the
Churches authority, better then your own knowledge. (...). p. 18.
How say some then, that the word cannot possibly assure us, that we do well to
think that it is the word of God?

No man is able to keep the law or any part thereof, as the Apostle says:
(...). p. 7.
That which was impossible to the law, inasmuch as it was weak because of the
flesh, etc. how then, is it not impossible (in any sense) to be preserved from
all sin in this life? How can a man do more, and God approve more then is
commanded (as some have taught) if we come far short of that which is
commanded?

If Faith only justifies, as Protestants hold, and since we could not be
saved by doing, we might at the least be saved by believing: (...). p. 8. how
then can our works be any means to blot out sin, or to procure pardon?

If it be the property of faith to apply the promises: (for faith is a sure
persuasion and apprehension of the promises of God, applying them to our soul.
p. 11. as the Apostle says: By grace are ye saved through faith. Ephesians. 2.8.)
how can the Sacraments give grace, and be causes of Justification, and as
necessary in their place as belief it self?

If whatsoever is not of faith, is sin* Romans 14.23. (...). p. 13. how can
natural works be acceptable to God?

Medita. in 20. Reu. par. 1.
If we cannot think any thing as of our selves 2. Cor. 3.5.
: and if all that do good, are inspired of God thereto: how is ma^s will apt
naturally to take or refuse any particular object whatsoever?

Medita. in ^0. Reu. par. 2.
If the Pope be Antichrist, and the head of a false and hypocritical Church: how
then ca^ the Church of Rome be the family of Christ? I hope Antichrist the head
of that false Church, is no member of the Church of Christ, or belonging to his
family.

Thus in these and diverse other such questions, wherein we have bin distracted,
our princely Ecclesiastes, as another Constantine, that decided the
controversies between the Christian Bishops, has taken up the strife: like as
Archidamus being chosen an vmpire between two, brought them to the temple,
charging them not to depart till they were agreed. If there yet be remaining
any question or controversy in our Church, let his Majesty judge between us:
his Catholic and Christian judgment may reduce us to unity and consent in
religion. I say then with S. Paul: Philip. 3.1^.
Let us therefore as many as are perfect be thus minded; and if we be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal the same unto us. Augustine says well to Hierome:
Quiescamus ab his co^te^tionib. nostre vitae salutique parcamus; minus certe
assequatur illa, quae inflat, dum no^ offendatur illa, quae aedificat: Let us
cease from these contentions, and favor our life and health; let that which
puffs up be amended, while that which edifieth be not offended.

Now to such as have a long time stood out, and refused to communicate with the
Church of England, I would exhort them now at the length to be wiser, and not
to suffer themselves any longer to be abused by that Romish generation, of whom
that saying of the Prophet is true: Qui ducunt, seducunt vos; They that guide
you, beguile you. Isay. 3.12. The variance and enmity that has bin of late
between your false teachers, the ignatian Friars and Seminary priests, does
show that they seek not you, but themselves: you may say of them as Tully of
Pompey and Caesar, that were fallen out: Nosse se quem fugere, ignorare quem
sequi debeat; That he knew whom to shun, but not whom to follow. Hieronym. ad
Ctesiphont.
I would they did embrace Hieromes counsel: In mentem tibi veniat, tunicam
Saluatoris non a militibus fuisse conscissam; fratrum inter se cernis iurgia
and laetaris: imitari Ionam, and dicito, Si propter me ista est te^pestas,
tollite me, etc. Remember that our Saviors coat was not rent of the
soldiers; but you see the falling out of brethren, and rejoice at it: imitate
Jonas and say, If this tempest be because of me, take me and cast me into the
sea. I do not wish these seditious sect-masters of Rome to be cast into the
sea; but I would have them cast out of the land, and sent over the sea, that our
Church be no more troubled with them. England would do full well without them,
it has no need of their Physic: (...).
as Pausanias answered a certain Physician, that said he ayled nothing:
Because (says he) I use not you for my Physician.

Come then Gentlemen and loving countrymen, let us go up to Gods house
together; beware hereafter of the Pharisees leaven: Let them alone, they be
blind leaders of the blind. Mat. 13.14. Why should you pin your faith upon the
Popes sleeue? has not the Apostle said: Ye are bought with a price, be not the
servants of men. 1. Cor. 7.23? See you not how that Caiphas of Rome seeks his
own glory and dignity: and would make kings and Princes his vassails and
subjects? Hierome said well: Si pacem habere non potest cum fratre, nisi cum
subdito, ostendit se non tam pacem cupere, Hieronym. ad Theophil.
quam sub pacis condition vindictam; If he will no peace with his brother, but
as with a subject, he shows that he desires not peace, but under the color
of peace, revenge: this may better be pronounced of the proud Pope of Rome,
then of the ambitious Patriarch of Jerusalem, of whom it was first uttered.

Thank God, which has sent a Prince that will reform your error, and not
nourish you in your superstition still: and God be blessed that has raised us
up so Christian a king, that is as able by reason to persuade to the truth, as
by law to enforce: for his constant resolution for religion we can never
sufficiently be thankeful. He shall never need with Constantius that favored
the Arrians, to repent, Theodor. 33. In Ant. Valentinian.
fidem a se immutata^, that he had changed his predecessors faith: but as
Ambrose says of Valentinian: A fratre nollet se pietate superari; he would not
be exceeded of his brother Gratian in piety: so his Majesty is not inferior,
for care of religion, to his late renoumed sister Q. Elizabeth. God give unto
his Christian Majesty long continuance, and strength to proceed in his happy
course, and constancy to hold out his godly purpose to the end: Psalm. 72.6.
that he may still come down like the rain upon the mowe^ grass, and as the
showers that water the earth; to be a comfort to his subjects, and a refreshing
to the Church: that as we find him a careful Governor, a godly Prince, a
loving father, an example of all virtue and goodness better then the rest (as
Leonidas king of Sparta said, (...).
I had not been your King, if I had not bin better then you:) so we again may
show our selves obedient and dutiful subjects, to pray for him continually, and
daily bless him. Psalm. 72.15. That we never be unthankful to God, or undutiful
to him; nor unmindful of these great blessings of peace, continuance of
religion, administration of justice; nor weary of so happy a government, as is
expected; as the inconstant Athenians were of Themistocles, (...).
to whom he well said: Are you wearied in receiving of so many benefits from
one man? but that it may truly be said of us, and all the faithful subjects of
the land: They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endures, from
generation to generation. Pal. 72.5. That his Majesty now, and his royal
posterity over us, may reign in all happiness, godliness and peace, from
generation to generation; which God grant.

THE ANSWER TO THE FIRST SECTION OF the Apological Epistle. Sect. 1. The
frailty and pronenes of man to sin after the fall of Adam.
WE see here verified the saying of S. Paul, That false Apostles are deceitful
workers, and transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 11.14.
and as Satan does transform himself into an Angel of light; so his ministers
can transform themselves, as though they were the ministers of righteousness:
so plays this cunning epistler, Heretical cunning to utter some truth, to
make way for error.
who deuoting himself in this Libell to the service of Satan, in defacing the
truth, and disgracing the true Church of Christ which professes it; yet makes
a colorable entrance and plausible beginning, setting in the forefront of this
beadrole of lies, an evident, known and confessed truth of the fall of Adam,
and the general corruption and deprauation of nature from thence issuing. But
as Hierome says, Venenum sub melle latet: Ad Damas.
There lies poison hid under honey; and as Ambrose, Quia sub nomine suo
culturam suadere non potest, In Coloss. 2.
sub alterius nomine suam conatur implere voluntatem, Because Satan cannot
persuade his religion under his own name, by another color he works his
will: So does this Sophister under this cloak of uttering some truth, seek
to shrowde and hide an heap of lies and untruths that follow; and seeks to
win credit and insinuate himself by speaking the truth, that he may be
believed when he tells a lie: So well has he learned Democritus lesson,
(...)
that it behooves a man either to be good, or to dissemble.

In this first section I find some contradictions between this popish
champion, and other writers of that side; I note also some errors.

Contrad. 1. He affirms, that by Adams fall humane nature is left to it self
naked and disabled among so many enemies. Herein he speaks truly, yet
otherwise, then some of his fellows: for Bellarmine says, that man is of
freewill now, Tom. 3. lib. 4. de great. and libr. arb. c. 7. ar. 6.
si fuit ante lapsum, if he were before his fall. He thinks that man has
freewill in good things as well since his fall as before. He also affirms,
that man's freewill, with the help of grace and without it, Difference about
freewill.
if it be not urged by some tentation, Suis viribus bonum aliquod morale ita
perficere, etc. by it own power can make perfect some moral good thing that
no sin therein be admitted. Lib. 5. de great. cap. 4. in fine.
If man's will can bring forth of it self, without the help of grace, a
virtuous and good action without sin, as Bellarmine says; then is not man's
nature left naked and disabled, as our countrieman here says: these speeches
agree not.

Contrad. 2. Touching sin and iniquity (he says) no spiritual law
promulged by Adam, Contradiction among the Papists.
Noe, Lot, Job, Moses, could weed it out: p. 3. and Christ Jesus, etc. that
had been both able and worthy to have washed away, not only the malice and
venom of sin, etc. yet it pleased the divine wisdom to leave them as a
penitential memorial of our former demerite, etc. p. 4. Here the Apologist
affirms, that sin by no law is weeded out, no not by the law of Grace under
Christ, but that the venom and malice of sin still remains. Wherein he
thwarteth the Rhemish Doctors, who teach, that good men keep all Gods
commandments, Luke 1. sect. 6. and that the commandment of loving God with
all our heart may be kept and fulfilled, as far as is requisite in this life,
Luke 10. sect. 5. They seem also to be of opinion, that some in this life may
be so just, that they need no repentance: for they understand that place Luke
15. ver. 7. of just men in deed, not of those, which are so in their own
judgment, such as the Pharisees were: if some men need no repentance, then it
follows they have no sin: for where sin is, repentance is needful: and if
all the commandments are kept of good men, then none are transgressed; and
where no transgression of the law is, there is no sin: for (...), sin, is
(...), transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 3.4.

But their evasion here will be this, that though every sin be a
transgression of the law, yet e conuerso, the contrary is not true, that every
transgression of the law is sin: and though the Apostle say, every iniquity is
sin, 1. Ioh. 5. verse. 17. yet there the Greek word is not (...), as before,
but (...), by which he means man's actual and proper transgression, Rhemist.
annot. 1. Ioh. 3. v. 4.

Ans. 1. Your Latin text translateth both these Greek words, iniquity,
showing thereby, that in effect they signify the same thing: The Latin text
refused.
so that every iniquity or transgression of the law is sin. And let it here
be noted, that they refuse in this place their own Latin text.

2. That (...), injustice, is all one with (...), iniquity, or transgression
of the law, it may be proved by S. Paul, Romans 7.12. where he says, the
commandment is just, (...), whatsoever then is against the law is unjust: if
every keeping of the law be a point of justice, every breach of the law is a
point of injustice.

3. Where the Apostle defines sin to be a transgression of the law, and
according to the rule of schools, definitio and definitum, the definition and
thing defined are conuertible, it follows that every transgression of the law
is sin. And if it should be doubted whether the Apostle do here set down a
definition of sin, both Augustine and Ambrose do follow the same definition:
the first defines sin to be, Omne dictum, factum vel concupitum contra legem
Dei: Sin is every word, work, or thought against the law of God. Ambrose
says, Quid est peccatum, nisi diuinae legis praeuaricatio? What is sin, but
the preuarication of the divine law? ex citation. Pet. Lombard. lib. 2.
distinct. 35. a.

Contrad. 3. He calls sin and other infirmities remaining, Difference about
natural corruption and infirmities.
the penitential memorial of our first demerite, p. 4. The Rhemists affirm,
that the motions of the flesh in a just man do not any whit defile the
operations of the spirit, but often make them more meritorious for the
continual combat, that he has with them, Romans chap. 7. sect. 10. If they be
the occasion of greater merit, how are they a penitential memorial? they are
rather to be rejoiced in, then repented for, as occasioning and furthering
meritorious works. Thus well does this regular Friar, and those seculars of
Rhemes agree in their doctrine. As he runs into contradictions, so he
lasheth forth at the first into diverse errors.

Err. 1. He seems to think that original sin was only derived from Adam
in these words: The transgression of the first law-breaker was so venomous a
seed to bring forth wickedness, page 3. Whereas it is certain that original
sin takes beginning from the transgression of both our first parents Adam
and Eve: for as the Apostle says, The woman was in the transgression, 1. Tim.
2. verse. 14. therefore the man only transgressed not, and so consequently was
not the author only of sin and transgression to his posterity. Original
sin derived both from Adam and Eve.
Thus Ambrose witnesses, Adam and Eua primi illi vt generis, ita erroris
parents: Adam and Eua the first parents, as of our generation, so of our
error, in Luc. 13. And whereas it is said, By one man sin entered into the
world, Romans 5.12. that is so spoken, because man is the principal in the
carnal generation, as Origin says: Non enim ex muliere posteritas, sed ex
viro nominatur; non enim est vir ex muliere, sed mulier ex viro: For the
posterity is not named of the woman, but of the man: for the man is not of the
woman, but the woman of the man, Origin. lib. 5. in epist. ad Roman.

Page 4. lin. 8.
Err. 2. The least drop of his immaculate and invaluable blood, or the meanest
of his so many infinitely meritorious operations, All Christ's sufferings
needful for man's redemption.
had been both able and worthy to have washed away, etc.

We grant, that in respect of Gods omnipotent power less might have sufficed,
then Christ for us suffered; but in regard of Gods justice, God could not
otherwise have bin fully satisfied, if Christ had not both in his body and
soul the whole punishment due unto us sustained: as the Apostle says, It
became him etc. to make perfect the prince of our salvation through affliction,
Hebr. 2.10. And again, the same Apostle testifies, that both Christ himself
was perfited, (...), by those things which he suffered, Hebr. 5.9. and by his
one oblation (...), has perfited those that are sanctified, Hebr. 10.14. So
then, unless Christ had died, the work of our redemption had not been
perfited: for in his death and not before he said, (...), it is finished or
consummate, John 19.30. Then as Origin says, Quod ad potentiam Dei omnia
possibilia, quod ad iustitiam Dei possibilia solum quae iusta sunt, In respect
of Gods power all things are possible, in regard of his justice those things
only are possible, which are just. In Math. Tract. 35. So in respect of Gods
absolute power Christ might have suffered less, but his justice considered, it
became him to suffer all he did: simply then to affirm, that the least drop
had been sufficient, is erroneous, for then all his other passions and
operations had been superfluous.

Err. 3. All sexes and ages, men, women, Page 4. lin. 22.
children (except some one or few excepted by a special writing of divine
exemption) little or much, originallie, or actuallie, have been defiled, P. 4.
I pray you, where find you this special writing of exemption, whereby more
then one (which is Christ) were ever freed from sin? I am sure no such
writing of privilege can be found in the scriptures. Your meaning is, that the
Virgin Mary was freed from all sin both original and actual: but the
scripture concludes all men under sin, 1. King. 8.46. Christ only exempted
from sin.
There is no man that sins not. And Origene says, Solus Christus sine
macula est, qui peccatum non fecit etc. Only Christ is without spot, which did
no sin etc. Hom. 1. in Leuitic. The Virgin Mary not privileged from sin.
Mary confesses her self to have need of a Savior, Luke 1.47. My spirit
rejoices in God my Savior: But Christ saves us from our sins, Matthew. 1.21.
then Mary had sin, from the which she was saved. So Ambrose says, Non mirum
si Dominus redempturus mundum diuinam operationem suam inchoauit a matre, vt
per quam salus ab omnib. parabatur, eadem prima fructum salutis hauriret ex
pignore: No marvel if the Lord, being to redeem the world, did begin his
heavenly work in his Mother, that by whom salvation was prepared for all,
she first should draw salvation from her pledge, Ambr. lib. 2. in 1. cap. Luc.

Thus the Epistler with contradictions and errors begins his plea for the
Pope-catholike religion: if he make such a beginning, what is the end like to
be? Sca^rus in Seneca was wont to say, De clamat. lib. 9.
It was as great a virtue, scire desinere, quam scire dicere, to know where to
end, as to know how to speak. But I may say to this Orator, that it is as
great a virtue scire incipere, quam scire desinere, to know how to begin, as to
know how to end: if he trip thus in the beginning of his race, and thus
enterfeare at the first setting forth, he is like to stumble and fall before he
come to the end. Seneca, with whose sentence he closes up the first section,
says, Nemo tam timidus est vt malit semper pendere, quam semel cadere: No man
is so timorous, that he had rather always hang, then fall down at once:
Epist. 22. And it had been much better for him to have as a restie jade fallen
down flat at the first and given over, then as a tired hackney to go on as he
does, continually tripping and stumbling. May we not say unto him, as Hierome
of Ruffinus: Persuadeas homini ne vescentium dentib. edentulus inuideat, and
oculos caprarum talpa contemnat, Persuade the man that being toothlesse, he
envy not those that have teeth; and being as blind as a mole, despise not
those that are goate-eyed: Hieron. Magno. Such counsel had been good for this
Romish Rabbin, not to find fault with other men's sight being blind himself,
nor to reprove them of error, being so erroneous himself. Dionysius advice had
not been amiss for him: (...), either say somewhat better then silence, or
else keep silence.

Yet one thing more I have to say to this Apologicall champion, before I leave
this section, that I marvel that he being, as I understand, of the Ignatian
order, which holds skorne to learn any thing at the secular Priests hands,
should borrow this whole section (the first twenty lines only excepted) word
for word, with very little alteration from the preface to the book, entitled,
A Dialogue betwixt a secular Priest and a lay Gentleman, which was made by W.W.
a secular Mass Priest as it should seem, against the ambitious practices of
the Iudasites: Or if he be ashamed to acknowledge a secular Popish Priest to be
his good Master, then it is like they both stole it from some other author,
which is most like. And then I may say unto him as Archidamas to Periander,
That being a good Physician, made evil favored verses, (...);
what moved thee, to desire of a good Physician to be counted an evil Poet?
So I say to him, that he was much ouerseene of a reasonable good translator, to
take upon him to be a bad author, thrusting that simply under his name as his
own, which he might with more honesty confess to have been borrowed.
Hierome could have taught him otherwise: Ego, qui plus conscientiae meae, quam
nomini defero, furari tamen titulum eius, qui operis fundamentum iecit and
construendi adificij materiam praebuit, rectum non puto: I, which yield more to
my conscience then credit, thought it not right to steal the title from him,
that first laid the foundation of the work, and provided the stuff for the
building, Perorat. epist. Origin. ad Roman.

The Answer to the second Section: That not this age of Protestants, but of
Papists rather exceeds all other in errors and practical impieties.
THis Apologicall discourser, in this section takes upon him to discover
diverse errors and practical impieties among the Protestants* which he does so
confusedly for the manner, and so weakelie for his proofs and matter, that
we may say to him, as Hierome of Iouinian, Magis misericordia dignus, quam
inuidia: He is more worthy of pity then envy, Dialog. 1. aduers. Pelagian.
And if he be the author which is supposed, antiquu^ obtinet, he keeps the old
wont of his fellow Ignatius, whose writings some of their own fellows
complain to be so confusedly hudled together, Secular priests reply to F.
Parsons libell. page 44. b.
that the pains are greater to marshall them into any good order, then to
answer them. The same part he plays here, heaping up many things disorderly,
and carrying all along before him as with a violent stream of words: Like as
Theocritus was wont to say of Anaximenes; (...): now begins the flood of
words, and but a drop of wit: first I will examine his accusation of errors,
and bring it into some order, using still his own words: That is no true
Church or Religion, wherein many heresies and infidelities reigning are
condemned and disclosed. P. 6. lin. 17.24.

But among the Protestants many heresies and infidelities have been condemned
and disclosed, which reigned among them. Ergo etc.



First, if the proposition were true, then should not the Church of the
Corinthians have been the Church of Christ, among whom there were diverse
heresies, according as S. Paul said unto them, 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies among you, that they which are approved may be known.

2 By the same reason the Pagane Idolaters might have condemned the Christians,
because there did spring up among them far more sects, The reason why there
are sects and heresies among Christians.
divisions, and heresies, then among the Gentiles, whereof Augustine shows
the reason, Non praeferant nobis quasi concordiam suam, hostem quippe, quem
patimur illi non patiuntur, Let them not tell us of their concord, for they
feel not that enemy whom we suffer. Quid illi lucri est quia litigant, aut
quid damni, quod non litigant: What should it profit Satan, if they were at
strife, or what hindrance were it, if they contend not? eos vnum licet
sentientes possidet, he possesses them, though in unity, de vtilitat. ieiun.
tom. 9. In like sort, it were not to be marvelled at, though Papists were not
divided, for Satan seeing them to agree together in a false religion, has no
need by other means and engines to win them: But where he sees the true
faith and doctrine to be received, there he bestirreth himself, by sects,
schisms and divisions to hinder the growth thereof.

3. I pray you, which is more like to be the true Church that which condemns
heresies, that they do not reign among them, as the Protestants have done, or
that which suffers and endures them, as the Popish Church tolerateth Jews,
Paganes, Mahometanes, Maranes.

The Popish Church does not only suffer, Jews, Mahometanes, Pagans tolerated
among Papists
but practice Iudaisme: for every year their use is to consecrate a Paschall
lamb, in Missal. Roman. in fine. Under Adrian the 6. Demetrius an idolatrous
Grecian, when the pestilence raged in Rome, was permitted under the Popes nose,
Pestilentiae placando numini taurum immolare, to sacrifice a bull to appease
the Goddess pestilence, Paul. Iouius lib. 21. in fine. And as for the Marani,
being driven out of Spain, they were received in Rome by Pope Alexander 6.
much against the mind of King Ferdinandus: Onuphr. in eius vita: And at this
day in Spain that abominable sect abounds: That Church then is rather to be
reproved, which tolerateth such profane enormities, then that which
condemns and restrains them. As the Church of Ephesus is commended for
hating the works of the Nicolaitanes, Revel. 2.8. but the Church of Thyatira
is rebuked for suffering the woman Iezabel, that named her self a Prophetisse,
Revel. 2. verse. 20.

4. These are contradictorie and repugnant speeches, for heresies at the same
time to reign and to be condemned: for in that they are condemned and
disclosed, it is evident, that they reign not: for where heresy reigns, it
is approved, not condemned. Thus much of the proposition.

Secondly, let us see the probations of the assumption. 1. Untruth.
1. This unhappy age (says he) has hatched more errors, 1. Proof.
(he means among the Protestants) then ever any age or generation did in the
school and regiment of Christ, etc. p. 5. lin. 26.27.

Whether more heresies have risen since the Gospel revived, then in any age
before.
Ans. 1. Though he could show more errors to have risen in this age, yet shall
he never prove them to have been hatched, fostred, or nourished by the
Gospel or the doctrine thereof. 2. Neither can it be justified that more
errors and heresies have been invented in this age, then in any before: for
within the space of two hundred years after Christ, more then an hundred gross
errors were broched. In these latter times the heresies that are, be neither in
number so many (setting some diversities in opinion aside, which are no
heresies) nor yet of so great weight, and the most of them, are but the old
heresies revived.

2. Proof.
from the Records and Registers of London, Norwich, from the first protestant
Synod, etc. wherein so many heresies are condemned, etc. page 6.

ann. Edward. 6.4. 1551. that Ione Butcher was brent for heresy, that Christ
took no flesh of the Virgin Marie: and ann. Elizab. 3. 1561. as he notes in
the margin, one John Moore was whipped for making himself Christ, and one
William Geffrey, for saying he was the Disciple of Christ, till they both
confessed, that Christ was in heaven. Will you from hence conclude, that the
Church of England is no true Church, because it punishes heretics and
fantastical spirits? S. Paul may as well fall under your reproof, for
excommunicating Alexander and Hymenaeus, which had made shipwreck of the
faith, 1. Timoth. 1.20. and for condemning the heresy of Philetus and
Hymenaeus, 2. Timoth. 2.17. But this objection of Ione Butcher condemned for
heresy among Protestants, might well have been spared by this Ignatian Friar,
if he had remembered the like practice or course of one William Postell in
France, a brother of his own order, with an old superstitious beldame called
Mother Jane: concerning whom he writ a book called, The victory of women,
wherein he maintained, that as Christ died for man, so his mother Jane was sent
of God to save women, and that the soul of John Baptist was transfused into
her. Jesuit. catech. lib. 1. cap. 10.
This wicked woman for these impieties was burned alive by the sentence of the
Parliament of Tolosa. But her devilish instructor escaped, which had been more
worthy of that punishment.

Now, whereas we are referred to our Chronicles anno 1554. which was the 2. of
Queen Mary, if his meaning be to impute all errors and heresies, that spring
up, to the Church, where they begin, this instance touches the popish Church
then flourishing, it tends not to Protestants disgrace. If he send us to the
story of one Elizabeth Croft there mentioned by Stow, which counterfeited a
spirit speaking in a wall, and uttered diverse words against the Queen, the
Mass and confession, Stow anno 2. of Queen Mary.
etc: we can requite this narration, with a like story of another Elizabeth
surnamed Barton, a Nun, called the holy maid of Kent, in King Henry the 8.
his reign, which faining her self to be in a trance, as though she had been
inspired of the holy Ghost, spoke diverse things against the King, and his
proceedings, inueighing also against the Gospel, which she called heresy: With
this hypocrite diverse Priests and Monks were confederate, Fox. p. 1055.
and among the rest your great champion Bishop Fisher: whereof some were
attainted of treason, and justly executed: the Bishop with other were
condemned to prison and forfeited their goods: you cannot show us such a
conspiracy of Protestants, with the first Elizabeth, as it is evident there
was of Papists with this latter. Now sir, tell us, what have you gained by
referring us to this place of the Chronicle?

2. The Registers of London and Norwich will tell us, Ket for Arrianisme and
other impieties, and that reverend Synod mentioned has condemned both these
and other heresies: what of all this? upon these premises will you infer the
Protestants of England, that ^oe thus proceed against heretics, to have no
true Church. And that this (Epistler) may see his own folly, by the same
reason one may conclude, that because the first Nicene Synod condemned the
Arrians, the first Constantinopolitane the Macedonians, the Ephesine the
Nestorians, the Council Chalcedonens. the Eutychians, the 2. Constantinopolit.
the Trinity- or Patripassians, the 3. Constantin. the Monothelites: because
Augustine condemns 90. heresies, Jsidor. lib. 8. Etymologiar. cap. 5.
and Isidore as many, that therefore these were not of the true Church. Shall
the Protestants Synod be reproved for condemning the same heresies, which in
general Councels were anathematized? and by the same reason that the Canons of
our Synod are censured, may not Gratianes decrees (their own darling) be
controlled, which condemn 90. heresies, Cause 24. q. 3. c. 39. these are but
loose arguments: he shoots at the mark, as a blind man at crows, and as
that unskillful archer, who shooting wide, Stratonicus the Harper standing by,
ran and stood at the mark, and being asked why, answered (...), that I be
not hit: as little need we to fear this blind archers darts, for they come not
near us. But as Hierome said to Vigilantius: Risimus in te prouerbium, vidimus
camelum saltitantem: We smile to see the proverb verified upon you, a Camel
dancing: So as soon may we see a Camel dance, as this Cauiller perform
what he takes in hand.

3. His third probation is from a particular enumeration of diverse heresies and
infidelities pretended to be amongst us: 3. Proof.
as Arrians, Eunomians, Vigilantians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Grecians, etc.
page 6.

Ans. 1. Some of these heresies, are malicious slanders of our Church:
Slander or untruth. 2.
as Arrians, Eunomians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Grecians, Anabaptists,
Catharists, Hernicians, Iulianes, our Church neither knows their names, or
any called by them, nor yet their heretical opinions: We neither deny the
divine nature of Christ with the Arrians and Eunomians, nor divide his person
with the Nestorians, or confound his natures with the Eutychians, nor deny his
humanity with the Anabaptists, nor the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the
Son with the Grecians: neither do we hold any to be pure without sin as
the Catharists, nor deny the grace of baptism to children with the
Hernicians; neither make two beginnings one of good, another of evil, as the
Manichees; nor affirm with the Donatists, the Church of God to be limited
unto a certain place, as they to Africa: all these heresies we accurse, and
utterly condemn.

But the Papists are the men rather, which are blemished and spotted with these
heretical opinions: Papists come nearer Arria^s, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc.
then Protestants.
with the Arrians they hold Christ not to be God of himself: with the
Nestorians they in effect make two Christ's, one offered in the sacrifice of the
Mass, another to whom they offer in heaven: with the Eutychians they take away
the truenes of Christ's body, making it to be in a thousand places at once:
with the Anabaptists they extenuate his humanity, denying that he opened his
mothers womb: they affirm that the commandments may be kept, and so in
effect are Catharists; for where the law is not transgressed, there is no
sin: they make a Sacrament of Confirmation, as a supplement Par. 3. distin.
5. c. 1. Vrbanus denies that we are pleni Christiani, full Christians without
confirmation.
of Baptism, and so deny grace of Baptism to be sufficient, and are herein
like the Hernicians: with the Manichees they condemn the marriage of Priests:
as the Donatists did tie the Church to Africa, so they to the Papacy of Rome.

Some of these, as they are imputed to Protestants, we deny to be heresies at
all: as that of Vig^lantius, that relics are not to be adored: of Iouinian,
that neither fasting, nor virginity is meritorious: of Aerius, that prayer is
not to be made for the dead: of Wickleffe such opinions we receive, as are
agreeable to the Scriptures: if either he, or any of those before named, held
any thing unsoundly, not warranted by the word, we bind not our selves to
their opinions.

Some of the heresies and schisms rehearsed, the Church of England condemns,
though such, we deny not, but have been found amongst us: as Brownists,
Barrowists, Kettists, not many pretenders, to be Prophets very few. Papists
one charge an other with Anabaptisme, Atheism.


Some of them are objected to the popish sectaries by their own fellow
popelings, as Anabaptists, Antichrists, damned crew, Atheists.

Jesuit. catechis. lib. 3. c. 1.
The Jesuits are charged with Anabaptistrie by their fellow Catholics, binding
themselves so by the vow of obedience to their superiors, that they are
disloyal to their Princes. Lanquets Chronic. ann. 1534.
And it is certain that the Anabaptists hold the Pope to be better then
Luther, which shows that Popery comes nearer to Anabaptistrie, then
Protestancie.

They also call the Jesuits the chief captains of Antichrist, Preface to
Jesuits catechism fol. 6. a. in margin. Manifestat. page 112. a. page 86.2.
out of whose sect it is very probable (say they) that man of sin shall rise.

In like sort the Priests call the Jesuits plots the infernal consistory.
The Jesuits say, some of the Priests stand in the state of perdition, thus by
their own testimony it appears who is the damned crew.

Likewise who are the Macheuils and Atheists of these days, they shall speak
themselves. The Priests say of the Jesuits, that they are the society of the
Devil, and school of Macheuelisme. And Parsons charge all them again to be
Atheists, Relat. p. 42.
Heretics, Apostataes, that inueigh against him.

Reply to manifestat. p. 91. a. Manifestat. p. 32. b* Reply p. 38. b.
The Popish Priests call the Jesuits Donatists, revived Arrians: the Jesuits
again charge the Priests with Anabaptisme. Thus then we see by the confession
of our adversaries themselves, who are the Atheists, Antichrists, damned crew,
the Anabaptists, Arrians, Donatists of these days. May we not now say unto him
with the words of the Gospel, with thy mouth will I judge thee, o evil
servant? And as Hierome says, Luke 19.22.
Sententias vestras prodidisse* superasse est: Ad Ctesiphont.
Your own confession is your conviction. And herein our adversaries as
Democritus said, (...): they bring forth blind accusations, as bitches do
blind whelps: so being blinded with malice against the Gospel, they lay those
things to our charge, which they themselves are guilty of.

4 His fourth probation is from the writings of diverse chief Protestants in
Germany, 4. Proof.
who do condemn every one another to hell for heresy and infidelity in the
greatest question of justification, sacraments, original sin,
predestination, of faith, of the law, of the Gospel, of the nature of Christ,
Untruth 3. see the answer.
his descending to hell, etc. p. 7.

Ans. First, these dissensions given in instance, are between those which are
called Lutheranes and us, who wherein they differ and dissent from us, come
nearer to the Papists, then Protestants, as in the opinions of the corporal
presence in the Eucharist, of the vbiquitie or omnipresence of Christ's body,
of free will, universal grace, hypotheticall election, faith of infants, and
such like: but among the Protestants that purely profess the Gospel of
Christ, and especially in England, there is no difference or dissent in any of
these points, or those before objected, or in any other substantial point of
faith. If it shall be objected that among us some question there is concerning
the descent into hell, The article of Christ's descension into Hell denied of no
Protestant.
it is not of the truth and substance of the article, which no Protestant
denies, but of the manner only, wherein there is as great a difference in the
popish Church, for Durand a principal Doctor of that side maintains
contrary to the opinion of the rest, that Christ did not descend into hell, M.
3. did. 22. qu. 3.
secundum substantiam suam, sed per effectus quosdam, not in the substance (of
his soul) but only by certain effects, Bell. lib. 4. de Christo. c. 15.
whom Bellarmine of purpose confuteth.

Secondly, neither needs the adversary to object against Protestants this
division between them and the Lutheranes, seeing there is as great a rent in
the Papal Church: for the whole Church of France dissenteth from the common
opinion of the Romanists, in very principal points: they to this day do not
acknowledge the Pope to be above general Councels: and for this cause they do
not submit themselves to the decrees of the late Tridenti^e Synod, Dissension
in the Church of Rome.
neither take it for a general Council. They refuse also the sixth book of
the Decretals, and of late by a public Edict they have expelled the whole
order of Jesuits out of the kingdom of France, Decree of the Parliament of
Paris an. 1594 against the Jesuits.
who are in other places of the Popes dominion of greatest credit and
estimation.

Thirdly, though the intemperate heat of some Lutheran writers can not be
excused against the Ministers of the reformed Churches, as failing both in the
cause which they handle, and in the manner of handling (for among our selves
such bitter inuectiues are not used) yet of all other the railing of popish
sectaries one against another most exceeds, as may plentifully appear in
the late writings and books of the Popish Priests and Jesuits set forth
against themselves.

The Priests call their Iesuited Archpriest traitorous, a vassal, Papists
rail one upon an other.
parasite, idol of the Jesuits, a puppie dancing after the Jesuits pipe,
Manifestat. p. 25. a. The Jesuits they call knaves, conspiring companions,
Man. p. 32. b. They charge them with traitorous, blasphemous words, Man's. p.
35* a. with coggerie, blasphemy, Manifes. 53. b. with erroneous and heretical
doctrine, Manif. p. 106. a. damned for heretics, p. 105. a. progeny of
vipers, blasphemous wretches, proud pharisees. Man. 108. a. traitorous
positions hatched in hell. Reply, p. 67. a.

Against Friar Robert Parsons in particular the Priests thus bestirre them,
Friar Parsons set out in his colors.
they compare him to Robin Goodfellow, Rep. p. 79. b. they call him the foxed
father, Rep. 67. a. a diabolical, unnatural, wicked fellow. Man. p. 107. a.
cursed be the hour wherein he was borne, this child of sin, of sacrilege,
of iniquity of the devil. ib. b. he has shaped the declaration of the spirit
of Satan, Rep. p. 102. a. And of all the Jesuits in general they thus speak
and write, the Jesuitical ghosts, and such wicked spirits, as tra^sforming
themselves into angels of light, do lead more souls to hell, then the feends
of most ugly shape appearing in their own proper colors. Man. p. 81. b.

Now on the other side let us see how Friar Parsons requiteth their kindness, he
charge them with folly, phrenzie, Man. fol. 11. with erroneous heretical
positions. f. 13. perfidious sycophants. f. ^7. with lies, false calumniations,
little conscience. f. 41. He further says, they lie notoriously against their
conscience. f. 46. egregious foolerie. Man. f. 65. wicked companions,
consciencelesse railing people. f. 90. frantic* possessed, mad, insolent. f.
94. Apostata in heart, traitorous and Judas like natures. f. 98. used of the
devil. f. 83. devilish detraction. f. 94. devilish hatred. f. 98. assault of
Satan under Priests coats, etc. f. 99. So I trust, that the saying of Christ
will shortly be verified upon this Sathanicall brood, as it begins, thanks
be to God, to be in part fulfilled in England already, that because Satan
makes insurrection against Satan, his kingdom is at an end, Mark. 3.26.

Now, I hope, by this it is evident, who they are, that condemn each other to
hell, not Protestants but Papists: for thus, as we see, they hew one at
another, and one whet an other, as, (...), one iron sharpneth an other, as
Solomon says, Prou. 27.17. and though their toongs be also whet against the
truth, yet shall they not prevail: the more they hew at it, the more shall it
flourish, like as the plant: (...): which being cut, does sprout and contendeth
with iron. But because they brag in their talk, and swords are in their lips,
Psalm. 59.7. this reward they shall have (which we see now come to pass) their
own tongue shall fall upon them, Psalm. 64.8. And as Origin says, surget gens
contra gentem, i. haeresis contra haeresin, Tractat. 28. in Matthew.
one nation shall rise against another, that is, one heresy against another,
as the heresy of the Jesuits against the Priests.

The fifth probation is from a particular induction of diverse sects among the
Germans to the number of 37. and affirmed by the computation of Caspar
Vlenbergius to be 260. known sects: 5. Proof.
Vlenberg. cause. 22.
by Oecolampadius 77. divisions are confessed, and Luther is produced a
witness, Untruth. 4.
affirming as many religions to be among them as men. p. 7.

Ans. 1. If all this were admitted without contradiction, that so many
divisions were among the Protestants, it were no sufficient argument to
condemn our religion: for then by the same rule, the Idolatrous Paganes might
have disproued the Christians faith, because they were divided into so many
sundry sects, Simonians, Menandrians, Basilidians, Nicolaites, Gnostickes,
Carpocratians, Corinthians, Augustine de haeresibus ad Quod vult Deum.
Nazarites, Ebionites, Valentinians, and diverse others, to the number of
fourscore and ten, rehearsed by Augustine.

2. These sects by him noted having their beginning in Germany, disgrace not
the Protestancie of England, that is not so distracted. And whereas the
freedom of that country, and of many chief cities there, forcing no man's
conscience, but tolerating diverse religions, might seem to give way to this
diversity, therein the fault is rather to be imputed to the politic state,
then to the Religion professed.

3. It is untrue that Vlenbergius, Cause. 22. numbreth 260. divisions among
Protestants: for in that place he treats of no such thing. And Cause. 9. where
he professedly sets forth the sects among Protestants, Sects among
Protestants neither many nor in matters of weight.
he by searching every corner, by devising and inuenting new sects, and new
names of sects, can find in all but 34. whereof fourteen are divisions among
the Anabaptists: among whom by the testimony of Sebastianus Francus, Vlenberg.
Cause. 9. p. 322.
there alleged by Vlenberge, there were 70. several schisms at the least.
But what is that to us? Those 77. differences which Oecolampadius mentions,
Oecolampad. aequa respons. ad Luther praefation.
are objected to the Lutherans, and concern not English Protestants, and they
were but in the diverse explications of Scriptures, and, in quibusdam
phantasijs, in certain fantasies, as he says, not in any substantial points
of faith. Neither is the testimony of Vlenbergius much to be weighed against
Protestants, being himself a professed Romanist, and domestical, as it were
of that family: and the law says, Domestici non sunt idonei testes: Cod lib.
4. tit. 20. l. 2. Valerian.
The Domesticals, or of the same household, are not fit witnesses.

4. Caspar Vlenberg, and this shameless detractor from his mouth, have used
great slight and cunning in mustering of these sects together: for sixteen of
this number do all belong to the Anabaptists: Muncerians, Apostolicks,
Separates, Catharists, Silentiares, Enthusiasts, Ecstasists, Free brethren,
Adamites, Hutites, Augustinians, Monasterians, Bocaldians, Hoffmanists,
Georgia^s, Memnists. What unfaithful dealing is this, to impute unto the
Protestants those heresies, which are by them condemned, both by the writings
of Heidelbergens praefat. ad colloqu. Franckenthalens.
Protestants, and by their judicial proceedings? as Muncerus was beheaded in
Thuring, Hoffman imprisoned at Strausburgh, and died in prison: David George
dying at Basile, was taken up after he was buried, and by the sentence of the
Senate burned anno 1556. all which Vlenberge, was not ignorant of. Beside,
among the ten sects of the Lutheranes, there are falsely reckoned up by
Vlenberg, the Antinomians which were adversaries to the law, Mansfeildens. tit.
de Antinom. fol. 89. Mansfeildens. tit. de Osiandrin. fol. 226.
and the Osiandrines whose error was, that men are no otherwise made just, then
by Gods essential justice: both which heresies are condemned by the
Lutheranes. And as for Stancarus, they may take him and his followers on their
own side: for he approves neither Luther, Melancthon, Bullinger or Calvin,
liking better of Popish writers: for thus he writes: Lib. contra Tigurinos.
Plus valet vnus Petrus Lombardus quam centum Lutheri, etc. One Peter Lombard
is of more value, then an hundred Luthers, two hundred Melancthons, three
hundred Bullingers, four hundred Peter Matyrs, five hundred Caluines, who if
they were all pounded together, there would not come forth one ounce of true
Theology.

In the fourth place he produces the Maiorists, so called of George Mayor: who
did hold, that good works are necessary to salvation: Vlenberg. cause. 9. sect.
Lutheran. 5.
as though ever any Protestant held otherwise. And where he imputes to the
Flacianes, that good works are not necessary, but rather perniciosa ad
salutem, pernicious to salvation, it is an impudent slander: and yet of these
two he makes diverse sects. The Lutheranes, Adiaphorists, who retain diverse
ceremonies, and Vbiquitists, that hold the omnipresence of Christ, are al one:
yet he would cunningly make three sects of them. The Substantiarians,
Accidentarians, the first holding original sin to be of the substance of
man, the other but an accident, were no sects, but private opinions of some
men, as the first is imputed to Flacius Illyricus, of whom he once before named
the Flacians.

Concerning the division among Caluinists, which are ten in all: Caspar.
Vlenberg. cause. 9. sect. sacramenter.
he either makes some particular opinions into sects, as Caralostadians,
Zuinglians, Oecolampadians: or urges some differences in external matters,
not in religion, as Consistorials, non Consistorials: (for Puritanes and
Caluino-papists, are terms of his own devising) or in proceeding, as
Clancularians, that live secretly among the Lutheranes, and yet dissent from
them; Politikes, that love peace; Causarians, that are turbulent: which two
last terms are fitter for their politic Papists and secular Priests, and
Causarian or turbulent Iebusites, then for Protestants.

5. He reckons up men's particular opinions, and makes so many sects of them:
as the Stancarianes, Flacians, Maiorists, Tetrastyl. pill. 4 part. 4. Synops.
Pap. in fine 2. table. Lib. 7. de iustit. qu. 1. art. 3. De concord. lib. 2.
cap. 5. Peers. de tradit. par. 3. Durand. in 4. did. 11. q. 3. Lib. 3. de
interpret. scriptur. cap. 3. In 2. distin. 40. Alph. lib. 11. cont. haeres. 3.
Cathar. apolog. cont. Dominic. a Soto. Gab. lec. 57. in can. Miss.

Diversity of opinion in the Roman Church.


Caralostadians, Zuinglians, Oecolampadians: which reckoning, if it may go for
payment, in multitude of sects, the Popish Church shall far exceed: there
are already more then 300. differences of opinion noted, and found out among
Popish writers: As Arius Montanus holds, against the common opinion, that the
Hebrew Scriptures only of the Old Testament are canonical: Dominicus a Soto,
that things commanded of God may be vowed: Nichol. Cusanus, that Popes have
erred: Peresius, that it is unlawful to make the image of God: Durand, that
the bread in matter is not changed, or transubstantiate: Lindanus, that the
canon of the Mass redundat, is in some points superfluous: Capreolus, that
co^trition does not merit: Alphonsus, that matrimony is no Sacrament of the
New Testament: Catharinus, that a man may be sure by faith of remission of
sins: Gabriel, that indulgences do not profit the dead. In these and some
hundred such points, diverse particular writers of the Popish profession do
dissent from the common opinion: we might with greater reason charge them with
so many sects, of Montanists, Sotists, Cusanians, Peresians, Durandists,
Lindanians, Capreolists, Alphonsians, Catharinists, Gabrielians, and such
other, then they have invented new names of strange sects, not heard of among
us, upon some men's private opinions and fantasies.

6. Beside, there are in the Popish Church an hundred known sects of Monks
and Friars: Augustinians, Carmelites, Carthusians, Dominicans, Franciscans,
Celestines, Cistercians, Hieronymites, and the rest, Fox. p. 260. Divisions in
the Church of Rome.
the true Catalogue whereof to the number of 101. is set down by Master Fox,
that worthy Chronologer. Further, 23. schisms have been already in the
Papal Sea, that we say nothing of the divisions in the Popish Church between
the Guelphs and Gibelines, Thomists and Scotists, Divines and Canonists,
Nominals and Reals: between the gray Friars and Doctors of Paris: the
Dominicks and Franciscans about the conception of the Virgin Mary, anno 1509.
Math. Paris. fol. 167.
And now between the secular Priests, and irregular Jesuits.

Now, let this (Pistle-maker) cast his accounts, and I think he will find, yt
he has gained nothing by this accusation of the multiplicitie of schisms: he
should first have pulled out this beam out of the eye of their Church, before
he had taken upon him to espy a mote in ours. But it falls out to him, as
Euripides says: (...), An angry man never consulteth any thing well: So his
rage and malice against the Church of Christ, carries him to utter things
against himself: for this false charge of schism and heresy, is truly
returned upon their Church: to the which that saying of Ambrose may fitly be
applied: Haeresis veluti quaedam hydra fabularum vulneribus suis creuit, and
dum saepe reciditur pullulauit: Heresy (amongst them) as that Serpent Hydra in
the fable increases by the wounds thereof, and where it is cut, Lib. 1. de
fid. cap. 4.
it sprouteth forth again. Thus much of the first part of this section,
concerning the objection of errors.

The second part of practical impieties.
FOr the strengthening of this accusation, three proofs are produced. First,
the multiplicitie of suites. Secondly, the multitude of statutes. Thirdly, the
testimony of Protestant writers that complain of the impiety of these times,
page 8.9.

A loose argument.
For the first, he appealeth to the testimony of Judges, records of Courts,
etc. contentions between tenant and tenant, Lord and Lord, Lord and tenant,
etc. to the rich estate of so many Lawyers, page 8.

Ans. 1. Although the multiplying of suites, and aptnes to go to law, and that
for trifles, be not commendable, yet it is no sufficient argument, to disable
and make a nullitie of a Church: for even the Corinthians, to whom S. Paul
doubts not to ascribe the name of the Church of God, 1. Cor. 1.2.
were contentious, and full of quarrels: as the Apostle says unto them: Now
therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with
another, why rather suffer you not wrong, etc. 1. Cor. 6.7.

2. If suites have increased, since the expulsion of the Popes jurisdiction out
of England, Religion not the cause of multiplicitie of suites among Protestants.
religion is not the cause thereof, but other probable reasons may be yielded,
without any blame to the Church or Religion: first, because since the
dissolution of Abbeys, and the dispersing of those lands into many men's hands,
which before were united and annexed to those Corporations, it could not
otherwise be chosen, but that questions about titles, and privileges should
grow: as infinite were the suites, which were commenced before, between Abbots
and Bishops, the Priors and their Couents, between one Cell and another: which
controversies have had their time, and now begin to slake, as Westminster Hall
can testify, and in the next succeeding age, are like to be fewer, and we wish
they may so be. As for Lawyers wealth, it is no disparagement to the Gospel,
though it may be a blot to their conscience, if it be not rightfully gotten:
neither are there many that have of late days gained so much by the law
(though some I confess, by the confluence of Clients, and if I may so say, the
monopoly of causes, have gotten enough) for it is thought, that scarce the
tenth man, of the whole number, that are called to the Bar, do get their
maintenance by it. And it is well known, that some of your friends and
welwillers (Friar Robert or Richard, or what else the first letter of your name
R. betokens) have helped to share and shave in the law among the rest.

Secondly, whereas many appeals were made to the Sea of Rome, and infinite
causes promoted thither, Bishops fetched up their Chapters, Priors their Couents
by process to Rome, Archbishops their Suffraganes, yea sometime the subjects
their King: Is there not great cause since this foreign course, in prosecuting
of suites was stopped, that much more business thereby be procured at home? so
that the floods of causes which streamed into that sea, being turned an other
way, must needs make an inundation and ouerflowing of suites at home.

Thirdly, the Gospel has not caused such multiplicitie of suites; but it is
an abuse of this long peace which has increased the wealth of the land: and
riches breed quarrels, and make men impatient of wrongs. I make no doubt, but
that in our neighbor kingdom of France, suites have been multiplied, and
Lawyers thereby far more aduantaged, since the appeasing of the civil wars
then in many years before, which change can not be laid upon their religion,
which is not there changed, but upon the alteration of the times. This then is
not an effect of the Gospel, but a defect in those that know not to make use
of this peace and abundance procured by the Gospel.

3 This objection of unkind and unnatural suites and debates does most fitly
rebound upon their own heads, for never was the Clergy fuller of stomach,
nor more ready to revenge, and apt to quarrel, then under the yoke of
Popery. What contentions then happened? sometime between the King and the
Archbishop, as between King William and Lanfranke; King Henry the first, and
Anselme; King Stephen and Richard; Henry the second, See M. Fox of this matter
Monum. Pa. 241.
and Becket; King John, and Ste. Lancton; King Henry the third, and Boniface:
sometime between Archbishops and their Suffraganes, Bishops and Monks, Deane
and Chapter, secular Priests and Monks, between Friars of one sort, and Friars
of another. The broils and turbulent stirs in the Roman Church.
Such were the sturres and broils between the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Richard of York, between Lanfranke, and Archbishop Thomas: between Theobald
A. B. of Canterbury, and Siluester Abbot of S. Austens: between William of
Canturbury, and Ieremias Prior: between Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Canons of S. Paul: between the said Boniface, and the Monks of S.
Bartlemew, that sat there in harness in his visitation: between the Abbots
of Westminster, and the Monks of the same house: between William of Winchester,
and Boniface of Canterbury: between the said Boniface and the Canons of
Lincoln: between the Monks of Canterbury, and Canons of Liechfield: a number
of such hot contentions, and frivolous quarrels might be produced, which have
reigned in Popery: what Bishops sea, what Abbey, Nunrie, Chapel, what Church
cathedral, conuentuall, or collegiate, was free from these broils? And as
these contentions were many, Fox ibid.
so they grew upon small occasions: as between Boniface of Canterbury, and the
Canons of Lincoln, for giving of a prebend: between Edmond of Canterbury, and
the Monks of Rochester for the election of the Bishop: between Gilbert of
Rochester and Robert the Popes Legate for sitting at his right hand: between
the Abbot of Bardney and the said Robert for the visitation of the Abbey:
between William of Elie and the Canons of York, for not receiving him with
Procession. Thus the Popish Clergy, upon the wagging of every straw, were
ready one to offend an other.

And concerning unnatural suites among kinsfolks, brethren, parents and
children, and for insufferable abuses, he might for shame here have held his
peace, seeing all these have so abounded and ouerflowed in Popery: when the
husband became a betrayer and persecutor of his wife, Unnatural strife in
Popery.

Fox p. 1276. P. 2050.


as John Greebill of Agnes his wife: a poor woman that was burned at Exceter
was persecuted of her husband: the father betrayed his children, P. 1986. col.
1.
as Woodman his son Richard: the children accused their parents, as
Christopher and John Greebill, their mother Agnes Greebill: children were
constrained to set fire to their parents, P. 1277. col. 1.
as Ioane Clearke to her natural father William Tilsworth: P. 774. col. 1. P.
838. col. 1.
and the children of John Scriuener did the like: the brother conspired his
brothers death, as Alphonsus Diazius a Spaniard, Sleidan. lib. 17.
most trayterouslie sent up his man with a Carpenters axe, wherewith he killed
his brother Ioannes Diazius at Nuburge in Germany, himself staying and
waiting below till the bloody act was performed.

Who sees not now how shameless and impudent these men are, to object these
things to the Protestants untruly, which are verified and justified upon
themselves. Such unnatural and wicked practices as these are, shall they never
be able to produce against us. This accusation therefore as a stone that is
rolled, Prou. 26. v. 27.
shall return upon themselves: and as Hierome says, sicut sagitta si in
lapidem mittatur nonnunquam in mittentem reuertitur: Hieron. ad Rustic.
as an arrow, shot against a stone, recoyleth upon the shooter: and like as the
smoke as Plutarke says, (...), though it rise much at the beginning, yet when
the fire burns clear, vanishes: so the truth shining forth, shall chase
away this smoakie calumniation.

Secondly, he proves the intolerable vices of this age, by the public acts
and statutes of Parliament, since the revolt of King Henry 8. wherein more
insufferable abuses, etc. both for number and strangeness have been recorded
and condemned, then were in all the Parliaments of her Majesty's christian
predecessors. p. 8.

Ans. 1. If this were a good argument against the Protestants Church, A loose
argument.
because they have by public laws condemned more vices: then the age, wherein
Moses lived should be convinced to be worse then any before, because he brought
in a number of laws, not known or heard of in the ages preceding: then shall
the reign of the Christian Emperors from Constantine, give place to the
regiment of the heathenish idolatrous Emperors: who brought in more laws
(twenty to one) then were under Pagane Governors decreed. Cod. Justin. lib. 1.
tit. 5.6.7.8.9. and deinceps. Lib. 2. per omnes titulos, and so in the rest.
Examine the Code who please, he shall find more laws promulgated in the
space of one hundred years under the christian Emperors Constantinus,
Constantius, Iouinian, Theodosius, Valentinian, Arcadius, Honorius, and others,
then in three hundred years before, under all the Pagane Emperors.

The reason of many laws in the time of protestancie.
2 The reason is evident, why the times of reformation have brought forth more
laws, because diverse enormities which were tolerated before, by the light of
truth being discovered, began also by wholesome laws to be restrained.
Hereunto do bear witness, the laws and statutes enacted against the
incontinencie of Priests: Henry 8. an. 32 ca. 10. Ann. 21. cap. 6. Ann. 21.
cap. 5. Ann. 28. ca. 13. Ibid. Ann. 33. cap. 9. Ann. 37. cap. 9. Ann. 32. cap.
9.
against the unreasonable exaction of Mortuaries: concerning the probate of
testaments: against the non-residence of Ministers: to restrain pluralities
and heaping together many spiritual promotions: against unlawful games and
plays: against usury: against perjury. These and twenty more abuses, either
in popery neglected, or else but slenderly corrected, by the care of good
magistrates thereunto by the word of God incited and stirred, have been by wise
and godly laws prohibited and provided against. So that this tends rather to
the commendation of Christian Princes professing the Gospel, to stay the
course of ungodliness by their christian care and prudence, then to suffer them
to increase, as their predecessors did by careless conniuence.

3 This objection also may be retorted upon themselves: for the constitutions
and canons can not easily be numbered, which have been made in the Roman
Church, against the monstrous abuses in those times both in the Clergy and lay
sort. As to give an instance of some: That Prelates should not sell their
offices for money, Synod. Coloniens. sub Adulph. med. 3. cap. 3. That they
should be content with one Archdeaconrie, Corruption of manners in the Church
of Rome.
Lateran. part. 24. c. 5. That Clergymen should not sell Ale by measure, or
keep an Inn or house of lodging, Synod* Hildeshem. c. 14. That they should
not beat or wound one an other, Synod. Maguntin. c. 100. That they haunt not
Tauernes, or play at dice, Senonens. decret. 25. That they should not wear
gilded spurs, or golden buttons, Lateran. sub Innocent. 3.16. That stage
plays be not brought into the Church, Coloniens. par. 3. c. 26. Against
Clergymen, that forswear themselves, Lateranens. 17.4. Against such as
blaspheme and curse God, Reformat. Ratisp. c. 29. That Clerks sing not filthy
songs, Senonens. decret. mor. 25. That they play not the Iesters at rich men's
tables, Colon. part. 2. cap. 32. That they use not drinkings ad aequales
haustus, by stinted draughts, Coloniens. par. 5. c. 6. Against those that
exercising jurisdiction, take pensions of Clergymen, keeping concubines,
Lateran. sub Leon. 10. sess. 11. An hundred such decrees may be found in the
late Synodes of the Papal Church, which do bewray the unclean and corrupt
lives of the Roman Clergy: so that we may say of them, as the Apostle of
some, it is a shame to speak of the things which are done of them in secret.
And as Hierome says, Ephesians. 5.12.
magis vitam tuam ordinare disce quam alienam carpere, Hieron. ad Celant.
learn rather to order your own life, then to carp at an others. So our
adversaries should learn first to amend their own errors, before they
complain of Protestants disorders. This multitude indeed of Popish provisions
is an argument of their manifold corruptions: as Arcesilaus said, as where many
Phisicians are, many diseases reign, (...): so, where many laws are, much
injustice also is found.

3 The third proof is from the testimony of some Protestant writers, of
Luther, Calvin, Musculus, Iacobus Andreas, John Riuiu^, which complain of
Epicures, knaves, dissolute persons, men of a beastly life, of outrageous
wickedness, that it appears that Atheism and Epicurisme has invaded the life
of man, Devils rather incarnate, then reformed, and all these in the cities and
places, where the Gospel is professed, Apolog. p. 9.10.

Answ. 1. Is not this now a goodly argument, there are Epicures, Atheists,
Devils incarnate, in the places where the Gospel is received, therefore no
Church among them, A loose argument.
nor true Religion? Was there not among the Apostles Judas a Devil incarnate?
and among the Corinthians some Epicures, that said, Let us eat and drink, 1.
Cor. 15.32. Verse 34.
for to morrow we shall dye? Some Atheists, that had not the knowledge of God,
and doubted of the resurrection: 2. Cor. 12.21.
There were also unclean persons and fornicators: will you therefore infer
that all the Corinthians were cut off from the Church of God? Even Cyprian
complained in his time in a lamentable oration, of the corrupt manners of
Christians being then under persecution, There is no devout religion in
Priests, no sound faith in Ministers, no charity showed in good works, no
form of godliness in their conditions, men are become effeminate, and women's
beauty is counterfeit. If Christians were such exercised with persecution, it
is no marvel that some among Protestants envying peace, become carnal and
secure. And though we justly complain of the profanenes of these times, and
of the ouerflowing of iniquity, even where religion is most purely professed;
yet are we neither Catharists, nor Donatists, to think, that the Church of God
is perfect in this life, and consists of all Saints, without the medley of
hypocrites, worldly and carnal persons. We mourn for such with the Apostle,
Many walk, of whom I have told you often, Philipp. 2.18.
and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ. And
we say with Augustine, Contr. Gaudent. lib. 3.
Si mali sunt in ecclesia, profecto eos aut ignorant boni, aut suis iudicijs
manifestatos ecclesiasticis legib. damnant; aut si eos nouerint, nec damnare
possunt, pro ecclesiae pace tolerant, If there be evil men in the Church,
either the good know them not, or being convinced by ecclesiastical laws,
condemn them; or if they know them, and can not by punishment bind them, they
do for the peace of the Church bear them.

Complaint of evil and corrupt manners among Papists.
2 Whereas there are five Protestants brought in, complaining of corruptions
among the^, five times five popish writers might be alleged, that with open
mouth have cried out against the filthy abuses of the Sea of Rome: some of
them let us hear speak in their own words.

Adrianus 6. confesses, In sancta sede aliquot annis multa abominanda fuisse,
In instruction* ad Cherega^.
omneque malum a culmine pontificis manare: That many abominable evils have
been some diverse years in the holy Sea, and that all mischief has flowed
from the pontifical throne. Gulielmus Holcot calls them, Sacerdotes Priapi,
Dagonis, angelos abyssi: Lect. 182. in lib. Sapient.
The Priests of Priapus, of Dagon, the Angels of the bottomless pit. Petrus de
Aliaco: Ad hunc statum venisse ecclesiam, vt non sit digna regi, nisi per
reprobos: De reformat* eccles.
That the Church is come to yt pass, that it is not worthy to be governed,
but by the reprobate. Budaeus: Pontifices Roman. crapula, Budaeus de ass.
luxu, spurcissim. libidinibus, etc. pessimum quemque superare: That the
Bishops of Rome, in gluttony, riot, filthy lusts, do exceed the worst men
that are. Lib. 6. de imper. gest. cap. 6.
Luitprand. Aulam pontificis factam esse prostibulum meretricum: That the Popes
Court is made a stews of harlots. Agrippa thus writes of Sixtus 4. Lupanaria
vtrique veneri erexit, Cardinalique cuidam masculae veneris vsum certis mensib.
indulsit: De vanitat. scient. c. de l^* nocin.
He erected brothell houses for both kinds (of men and women) and granted to a
certain Cardinal the use of masculine venerie for certain months.

Huldericus Augustan. Plures non tantum adulteria, In epist. ad Nicolaum.
stupra and fornicationes, verum etiam incaestus, and peccata contra naturam
commisisse: That many have committed not only adulteries, whoredom,
fornications, but also incest and sins against nature. Ambros. Ausbertus:
Archidiaconi a presbyteris adulteris pretium accipiunt: Jn Apoc. c. 18.
Archdeacons do take a fee of adulterous Priests. Lateranens. sub Leon. 10.
sess. 11. In some places they which have ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
Pecuniarios quaestus a concubinarijs percipere non erubescunt, Are not ashamed
to make a money gain of Priests keeping concubines. Ann. 1565. After a view
taken, there were found 28. thousand Courteza^s or strumpets in Rome: Juel.
defens. Apol. p. 436. Constit. Othon. de concubin. Cleric^r. remouend.
and the Pope takes a yearly rent of them* Marescallus Papae de facto exigit
tributum a meretricibus: The Popes Marshall does exact tribute of the
strumpets. And what great holiness is exercised in Rome, these verses do
testify: Pasquill.
Roma vale, satis est vidisse, reuertar,
Cum leno, aut meretrix, scurra Cinaedus ero.
Now farewell Rome, it is enough thee for to see;
I will return, when bawd or whore, or buggerer I mean to be.
And such as is the sanctity of that Sea, of the same disposition are the
rest: Christ. Franch. collat. Jesuit. in fine. Hieron. ad Furiam.
for in Italy, this name Christian is a word of derision, taken for a fool,
or idiot. Such like prophanenes Hierome notes of some in his time: Vbicunque
viderint Christianum statim illud de triui^, (...), Graecus impostor: As soon
as they see a Christian, behold, say they, a Greek deceiuer.

Now what familiarity that Sea has with Satan, and how near they are to
devils incarnate, themselves shall bear witness: for thus the secular priests
do write of Parsons: Now all Catholics must depend upon the Archpriest,
Quodlib. p. 151
and the Archpriest upon Fa. Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons upon
the Devil: So Parsons as summus pontifex, Page 156.
or judge paramont in earth under the devil of hell. The whole order of
Jesuits they call, the barbarous and savage generation of Belials brood: a
most seditious, infamous, pragmaticall, Page 83. Page 150.
treacherous, diabolical faction. Neither is Friar Parsons behind with his
part, charging the Priests with hellish hatred, Manifest. f. 89. a, b.
serpentine tongues, devils envy, devilish device. What better testimony,
then from their own lips, what more pregnant witness, then from themselves?
And now to make up the Friars mouth, I will conclude with a story out of
Christianus Massaeus, who thus reports, Lib. 20. histor.
that anno 1491. the devils began to inhabit and possess the Monastery,
Dominarum Quercetensium, of the Quercetensian Nuns, whom four years and
four months they miserably vexed. And thus we see in part, that prophecy in
the Revelation to be fulfilled: Revel. 18.2.
that Babylon is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of foul
spirits. How say you now (Friar R.) where are the Epicures, Atheists,
adulterous and unclean persons and devils incarnate to be found in greater
abundance, then in the bosom and lap of your Babylonish Church the mother of
fornications? It is a simple part in an adversary to object that to another,
which reboundeth upon the accuser; as Aeschylus says, (...): He might better
have bit his lip, then uttered these words, or forged this accusation. But, I
will prove (says he) those which give this evidence of the rest to be worst
of all themselves, page 27. lin. 2. As though it were an hard matter to show
this Libeller (which is supposed to be of the Ignatian order) by the sentence
of their secular Priests, in Machiauillan practices to be well exercised,
unless he be unlike all the rest of that faction. But as Augustine says to
Julian: Ista communia, quae dici ex vtraque part possunt, quamuis veraciter ex
vtraque part dici non possunt, de medio, si placet auferamus: Those common
matters, Lib. 1. cont. Julian.
which may be objected of either side, though not truly of each part, let us
take, if you will, out of the way. And concerning the licentious life, and
evil manners of diverse in the reformed Churches, which give the enemy cause
to blaspheme their holy profession, though I doubt not, but they are more
wicked, that herein vpbraide the Protestants, I pray God give grace to all
degrees and sorts of men amongst us, that as the Apostle says, 1. Thessal. c.
4.12. 1. Pet. 3.1.
they may behave themselves honestly toward those which are without: that they
which obey not the word, without the word may be won by our conversation. And
as Hierome well says: Nos modo id agamus, vt male de nobis loqui nemo sine
mendacio possit: Let us do this, Hieron ad Celant.
that no man may speak evil of us, unless he lie.

THE ANSWER TO THE THIRD Section: How neither errors nor abuses among
Protestants, proceed by disunion from the Pope Catholic Church.
SOcrates being demanded why he wrote nothing, answered: (...): Because I see
the paper is worth more, then the things I should write. The same I may more
truly say of this section, that it is not so much worth, as the paper, which it
has blotted, with many bold, Relat. page 1. pref. of Blackwell.
vain and untrue assertions: and if I might be so bold, as use their own
words, as many lies, as lines.

Untruth. 5.
1. He calls himself a Catholic subject of England, page 11. lin. 16. his
meaning is, that he is half a subject, as he is English to the Prince,
Traiterous positions of Jesuits.
as he is Catholic to the Pope: for if he be a Jesuit that thus writes, how
can they be faithful subjects, which call these positions, wicked,
pernicious, Manifestat. fol. 13. a.b.
erroneous, heretical, traiterous: that the Pope has no authority to
restrain, punish, or force by way of arms, either by himself or others, any
temporal prince for heresy, Apostasy, etc. that if the Pope attempt any such
matter, he may be resisted by Catholic subjects: that if they should know of
any designement or treatise of the Pope by way of force in England, they would
reveal the same. Thus these popish Iudasites count those heretics and
traitors, that are not traitors to their Prince.

Traiterous conclusions agreed upon at Salamanca. 1602.

Reply to the Manfest. fol. 66 a.b.


From this ground have proceeded these diabolical, not theological conclusions
resolved upon at Salamanca 7. of March 1602. concerning the inuading of
Ireland: 1. That the Catholics in Ireland may favor the Earl of Tyrone in
his wars, and that with great merit and hope of everlasting reward. 2. All
Catholics sin mortallie that take part with the English against Tyrone. 3.
They are in the same case, that help the English with any victuals. 4. The
Catholics of Ireland, that fight against the Queen, are by no construction
Rebels: To these Articles subscribed the Popish Divines and preachers, John de
Sequenza, Emmanuel de Royas, Jasper de Mena, Peter Osorio. Lo these are the
Iesuited Catholic subjects of England.

If he be a secular Priest, that thus professes himself a Catholic subject:
he shall give us leave also to doubt of his obedience and loyalty: for what
profession soever they make of their faithful service and subjection to the
Princes Majesty, I fear me their hearts are not sound. For whereas, the
Priests are charged by Parsons to say, that the Pope has no authority by way
of force or arms immediately or by others, to restrain, punish or repress any
temporal prince for heresy, Reply f. 36. b.
etc. they utterly renounce this position, and call it a spiteful collection.
They say further, that the Popes indirect authority, in temporalibus, Reply
fol. 40.
in temporal things, is not called in question: neither is the power of
deposing of princes examined. And whereas Parsons labors to prove, that
although the Pope directly have no temporal dominion or jurisdiction over
Christian temporal princes, etc. yet indirectly for conservation and defense
of religion, etc. he may also use the sword or help of temporal forces,
Manifest. fol. 16. a.
either immediately from himself, or by other princes, at his direction, etc.
The Priests to this answer, that they labor about a matter not in
controversy. So then it is their opinion, Reply. f. 40.
that although the Pope not as a Bishop or Ecclesiastical person, yet as a
temporal Prince, may depose Kings, and invade kingdoms. Then it is to be
vehemently feared, least that this should be their evasion, that if the Pope
should make an invasion, they would obey him, though not as a spiritual
Prelate, yet as a temporal Prince: I may therefore here say with Hierome: Non
bonae suspicionis est, Ad Damas.
cum in eodem sensu verba dissentiunt: It is no good suspicion, when as in the
same sense the words differ. For this cunning circumlocution of words bewrays
a diverse sense.

May we not now think, that these Catholic subjects are like unto the Popish
Bishops in King Henry the 8. his time, that professed themselves good subjects
to the king, and yet were obliged by oath to the Pope, swearing in this manner:
Their counsel to me credited by them, their messengers or letters, The oath of
Popish Bishops to the Pope.
I shall not willingly discover to any person: the Popedom of Rome, the
regalities of S. Peter, I shall help and retain and defend against all men:
the rights, honors, privileges, authorities of the Church of Rome, of the
Pope and his successors, I shall cause to be conserved, etc. I shall not be in
council, treaty, or any act, in the which any thing shall be imagined against
him, or the Church of Rome, Fox. Monum. page 2053.
their rites, states, honors, etc. if I know any such to be moved, I shall
resist it to my power, etc. Let any man now judge, whether any taking this oath
to the Pope, could be good subjects to their Prince, no more can they, that
stand for the regalities, privileges and jurisdiction of the Church of Rome,
as both Priests and Jesuits do, for ought I can see.

2. He calls this the decaying and withering age of the Protestants, Untruth.
6.
page 11. lin. 18.

It is strange to see how bold and confident these vain people are, that
notwithstanding God has hitherto subverted all their traiterous devices, and
made frustrate their vain hope: yet they do flatter themselves in their
purposes, and do expect an increase of their kingdom* and a decay and
extirpation of the Gospel.

The vain hope of Papists.

Manifest. fol. 18. a. Manifest. fol. 57. a.


The Priest he dreameth, that Priests may be raised up out of our own
Universities, and from among the Ministers themselves. But Parsons himself
says, that this is a reason to be laughed at.

But the Jesuit is yet more bold: God will at his time appointed most
certainly restore the realm of England to the Catholic (he means Popish)
faith. And again: We shall not find that difficulty and resistance by the
grace of God in England, which good men do find in other countries, for
bringing in of any reformation, Page 58. a.
that is attempted. Yea he takes upon him to prescribe what his Catholic
Prince shall do (when he has him) and how he shall demean himself toward
his Nobility. Manifest. p. 62. a.


Indeed we will go thus far, with Friar Robert, that God at the time
appointed, may restore etc. But we verily trust, that no such time is
appointed, or shall ever come: and by the grace of God, as they have found (I
think) more difficulty hitherto to plant Popish religion in England, then in
any other country, so shall they find still. And concerning his Catholic
Prince (whom Parsons still means to be the Catholic King of Spain, or some
to be brought in by him) I will answer him with their own Priests words,
Reply fol. 74. a. lin. 3.
God forbid that time should ever come: neither do I trust in God it ever
shall.

And that it may yet further appear, what a vain hope is hatched in their
breasts, first during her Majesty's days, they had small reason to look for
reiuing of superstition: whose constant resolution, and settled judgment
against al mixture or toleration of contrary religion, we al were persuaded of
while she lived they needed not to doubt, her Majesty her self had professed
in the late Proclamation not long before her peaceable departure, to the
comfort of all her subjects.

And the Jesuit himself further confesses, that there is no hope that the
King of Scotland (now our Sovereign Lord King of England, Scotland, France,
Manifest. fol. 49. a.
and Ireland) will be a Catholic, which the whole Church of England believed
before, and now to their great comfort sees, and with thanks to Jesus Christ
acknowledges. The Priests also thus write, That there is no competitor unto
the Crown of England that is a Catholic, in whom any probability in the
world of enjoying the Crown can be imagined, as al men know. Repl. f. 76. a.


Thus the Mass Priests were bold to write not long since, but simply and
suspiciouslie, as though England would afford any competitor to stand up
against the lawful title of his Majesty, who only by his royal descent had
enterest to succeed in the Crown, which God be thanked we see to all our
comforts, without any contradiction, or opposition to be peaceably derived
unto his Majesty, which long may he possess with honor to Gods glory.

We trust then that God, which in his mercy has sanctified this land to
profess his Gospel, will consecrate it as his Temple, to be the pillar of
truth, and candlestick to hold out the light of his word to the worlds end:
and that he will put into the heart of our gracious Sovereign, and honorable
Counselors so to provide, that true Religion may be transmitted unto
posterity, and so bless the Kings royal posterity, and especially his
Majesty's dearest son and heir apparent Prince Henry, that Religion may be
so planted in his princely youth, that it may grow up and increase with him. It
ioyeth me here to remember that courageous farewell, which that renowned King
Henry the 8. gave to the Pope: England has taken her leave of popish crafts
for ever, never to be deluded with them hereafter. Roman Bishops have nothing
to do with English people, Fox. p. 1083.
the one does not traffike with the other, at the least though they will have
to do with us, we will none of their merchandice, none of their stuff, we will
receive them of our council no more. This Prophecy rather then Proclamation
of that magnanimous King, we gladly accept, and with all joyful acclamation,
say Amen unto it.

Add unto this the prophetical exclamation of Roger Clearke Martyr at his
condemnation an. 1546. at Ipswich, fight for your God, Fox. Martyrlo. p. 1232.
col. 1. edit. 1583. Revel. 18.2.
for he has not long to continue. But most of all are we secured by the
prophecy of the Revelation, that Babylon is fallen, which we see in part
already fulfilled; for the tenth part of the city is fallen already: that
is, Revel. 11.13.
the tenth part of that politic body of Antichrist, which consisted of Monks,
The kingdom of Antichrist decaying.
Friars, Nuns, with their Abbeyes, Priories, Celles, Chauntries, is
overthrown, as by a mighty earthquake in the kingdoms of England, Scotland,
Ireland. And we further are most sure, that after Babylon begins to fall,
Revel. 18.21.
it shall not rise again, nor be found no more. And howsoever God may in
justice deal with some nation in particular for their unthankful receiving of
the Gospel, to suffer them to be misled again, yet we make no doubt but the
general body of Antichrist is decaying, and has received a wound
irrecouerable. Wherefore be it known unto you ye Papists, that your kingdom
is withering and decaying, and ye are they that wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived, 1. Tim. 3.12. but the Gospel of Christ shall flourish, and
they that love him, shall be as the sun that rises in his strength: Iud.
5.31.
Only let us that profess the Gospel be of good courage, let us keep the
profession of our hope without wavering: Hebr. 10.24. Hebr. 12.12.
let us lift up our hands that hung down, and our weak knees. Let us not be
like, as Hierome says, to those that slack their rowing, Lib. 3. aduers.
Pelagian.
Quomodo qui aduerso flumine lembum trahit, si remiserit manus, retro labitur,
and fluentib. aquis, quo non vult ducitur: Like as he which haleth a boat
against the stream, if he let go his hands, falls back, and is carried
whither he would not; so he that is remiss in religion, is in danger to fall
back to superstition: but the worst I hope is past, the beginning of
reformation is harder then the perfection, as Lampis said of the getting of
riches, (...): that he got great wealth easily, and small hardly: So we hope
in God, that true religion may more easily be continued, then it was at the
first founded.

3 This Iesuited, or rather Iudasited Friar (for of that rebellious and
exorbitant order he is supposed to be) proceeds on in his frierlie vain of
lying: Untruth. 7.
he brings in John Riuius to say, that they (meaning all Protestants) be
Atheists, Epicures, deniers of the souls immortality, p. 11. l. 21. Whereas
neither he speaks of all Protestants, but only of certain dissolute livers
among them; neither yet affirms them to be deniers, etc. but that they do
run headlong into sin, as though they did think etc. that the foul
perishes with the body. There is great difference between him that openly
denies the immortality of the soul, and him, that by his licentious life may
be thought not to believe the soul to be immortal. Indeed we read that in
the Council of Constance it was objected to one of your Popes, whom ye hold
can not err, namely, John 23. Quinimo dixit and pertinaciter credidit, animam
hominis cum corpore humano mori etc. Moreover he said, and obstinately
believed, that the soul of man dies together with the body, and is
extinguished* as the soul of brute beasts. But from among the Protestants you
shall not be able to show one that ever so affirmed, or believed.

4 Where he says, Untruth. 8.
their own general and approved doctrine especially in England, that true
faith and good works are inseparable, con^oc. Lond^n. 1562. art. 12. condemns
such men for infidels and misbeleeuers, p. 12. l. 7. First, Evil livers among
Christians are not straightway infidels.
it is untrue that those words are found in that article* though we admit and
receive the doctrine: that article faith indeed, that good works spring out
necessarily of a true and lively faith, but it condemns them not straight for
infidels, that have not this working and lively faith: for there is great
difference between him that has the right knowledge of God, though not
effectual or working, and him that has no knowledge, or the same erroneous.
And if it be admitted, that some infidels, or misbeleeuers might be found among
Protestants, and where the Gospel is professed, is that any derogation
(master Friar) to the Church of God, or profession of the Gospel, which
condemns such? Did the Church of Corinth cease to be a Church, 1. Cor. 15.13.
because some among them had not the knowledge of God, and denied the
resurrection? Or is the popish Church free from infidels and misbeleeuers? I
would Atheism and prophanenes had not invaded the Popes chair. I think that
Pope was little better then an infidel and misbeleeuer, that said to one of
his Cardinals, Leo. 10. to Cardinal Bembus. Ex Balaeo. Sclaunder 9.
quantum nobis profuit fabula ista d^ Christo, how much has this fable of
Christ aduantaged us?

5 Of the like credit and truth are these words that follow, that the
Protestants have been the only cause of so many Infidelities, Atheismes,
Epicurismes, Iudaismes, p. 12. l. 20. that every man among us is left to his
own private deduction, Sclaunder 10.
and deceitful judgment, ibid. lin. 27. If this fellow were not past all
fear of God, and shame of man, he would have trembled thus to have blasphemed
the servants of God. Paganish infidelity, Atheism, and Epicurisme we detest.
Judicial ceremonies and superstitions we have renounced with popish trash. No
man is permitted of his own head to coin a new faith. The word of God is a
rule and direction to Protestants how to believe, and how to live. These are
but popish sclaunders, and frierlike inventions. Where truth fails you, your
uncharitable tongue helps out, which was proud Diotrephes practice against
the Apostle, prattling against us (says S. John) with malicious words. John.
3.10. Ad Celant.
But as Hierome says Scillaeos canes obdurata aure transibo, I will stop mine
ear (against those backbiters) as the Scillaean dogs and Sea Monsters; he may
for shame hold his peace: for as Sophocles says of the thief:

(...): He that is manifestly taken stealing, had need hold his peace: So he
that is deprehended in a lie, for shame may be silent.

6. This Catholic Friar goes about, as well as he can, to prove the religion
of Protestants, to be the cause of Epicurisme, Atheism, etc. his confused
prattle, and disordred hudling up of much homely stuff, I will reduce into
some order if I can: his simple reason, if it be any at all, stands thus:
That religion, wherein a man sees so many divisions and no agreement, which is
uncertain and ineuident, is a palpable provocation and allurement to Atheism,
Epicurisme, infidelity, Apolog. p. 14. lin. 3.4.16.

But such is the religion of Protestants: Ergo, etc.

The proposition or first part of this reason being admitted, the assumption,
that the religion of the Protestants is uncertain, full of divisions, having
no agreement: he labors diversely to persuade.

The first Probation.
HE reasons thus from the less to the greater, a minore ad mains, as we say
in Schools: If in arts Alchymie be refused because of the uncertainty: if for
matters of story, the diversity of opinions about the original of the
Britains, has caused many to think there never was any Brute at all: if
because some writers, as Hierome, Orosius, Fasciculus temporum differ about the
coming of Peter to Rome, some Protestants are not afraid to affirm he was
never at Rome: if for the same reason, the Protestants deny the books of
Macchabees, Judith, Tobias to be Canonical scripture, p. 13. much more may
that religion be doubted of, which is so full of uncertainties, etc.

The Solution.
HE had need be a good Alchymist, that out of this leaden argument should draw
any sound or solid reason.

First, where the foundation is false, the building must needs be deceitful:
this durtie dawber works with untempered mortar, and patcheth up his matter
with false grounds: 1. For neither do the Protestants deny that Peter was at
Rome, but that he neither came thither so soon (the 2. year of Claudius) nor
continued there so long (namely 25. years) as the Popish Church holds:
Untruth 11.
He should have named such Protestants, whom he charge with this denial of
Peter's being at Rome. Untruth 12.
2. These doubts and objections moved by Protestants, arise not only now
chiefly by reason of some difference in the historian writers, but are grounded
upon certain places of Scripture, which they shall have much ado to answer,
as is elsewhere declared. Synops. p. 141.
3. The books of Tobie and the Macchabees are not refused only for that
cause, Untruth 13.
for that they cannot be assigned to any certain time, but for other reasons,
both for the matter, which is fabulous and erroneous, in many points; and the
manner, diverse speeches and places being repugnant and contradictorie. Synops.
p. 12.15.
So then he has rapped forth three untruths together: such a plentiful forge
this Friar has, to coin his Alchymicall stuff.

Secondly, be it known unto him, that the Protestants faith relieth upon a
more sure ground, then either Alchymie in Arts, or in story Brutes being in
England, or Peter's coming to Rome: the first is fantastical, the second
coniecturall, the third historical: the first but an invention; the second a
tradition; the third a collection or collation of times. But the faith of the
Gospel, is grounded upon the Scriptures, not upon man's vain fantasy, or
blind traditions, or uncertain collections: therefore this reason has no show
of probability, nor force of consequence: the argument is denied. I think the
Friar was telling over his beads, or busy about his Memento, when he thus
argued: somewhat he would say if he knew what. Like as Hierome says of one:
Pisoniano vitio laborat, Hieron. ad Oc^an.
eum loqui nesciret, tacere non posset* He has Piso his fault, he knows not
how to speak, and yet cannot hold his peace. And as Diogenes compares such,
which understand not what they say: (...): Like as Harpes making a great sound
without any sense.

The second Probation.
THis Popish champion in the next place, by way of comparison between the
Pope-catholike Church and the Protestants, endeavors to show the uncertainty
of the one, by the certain and infallible authority of the other. The
Cacolike, or as he says, Catholic Church, for whose election, calling,
preserving from error and consummation, the whole mystery of Christ was
wrought, has condemned and utterly extirped 400. heresies, and by the same
infallible authority and censure in diverse general Councels, where the whole
Christian world was assembled, reproved and anathematized those that reign in
Protestants, page 14. and in this their Catholic Church there was never (says
he) or is any disagreement or contradiction in matter of believing* page 15.
lin. 17.18.

The Solution.
FIrst, in that he says, the mystery of Christ was wrought for the Catholic
Church: where his meaning seems to be, that Christ died only for the Church:
as we acknowledge this to be an evident truth, if by Catholic Church, the
true Church of Christ, Contradiction in Popish teachers.
and not the Roman only to be understood: so herein he contradicts and
gainsaith his fellow Friars: for Bellarmine confesses, though now a Cardinal,
yet then an Ignatian Friar, when he so writ, that Christ's blood was shed, for
Turks, Jews, Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 4. c. 25 Dialog. 5* p. 498
Infidels, and quibuscunque impijs, and all wicked men whatsoever. Friar
Feuardentius also proves, that Christ suffered, pro cunctis in vniuersum
hominibus, for all men universally.

2. But where by the Catholic Church, he understands the Roman Church,
that receives the B. of Rome, as the head of Christ's Church: and to this
Roman Church he applies and appropriateth the mystery of Christ's work in
the redemption of the world: What a gross absurdity is here uttered, Untruth
14.
and how inglorious to Christ, that he died for none, but for those which are
under the Roman jurisdiction? As though it were at the Popes devotion, who
should be partakers of redemption in Christ: the Scripture says, He that
believes in Christ, shall not be condemned, Ioh. 3.18. But now, though a man
believe in Christ, Romanists, Donatists, Marcionists, Luciferians, limit the
Church of God to countries.

Augustine. de vnitat. eccles. cap. 14.


by this Frierly gloss, it is not enough, unless he also believe the Pope to
be Christ's Vicar. Even like as these Romanists would have all Churches depend
upon Rome in the West: so the Donatists being carried with the like humor, did
contend for the South, that the Church of God was only to be found in Africa,
thereto abusing that text, Cantic. 1.6. Vbi pascis, vbi cubas meridie: Where
feedest thou, and li^st at noone, or in the South, as they interpreted. By the
same reason says Augustine; Marcion, upon that text, Psalm. 48.2. Mons Sion,
latera Aquilonis, De vnitat. eccles. cap. 19.
Mount Sion, the sides of the North, might also challenge a privilege for the
North: quia ponticus dicitur fuisse, quae parts ad Aquilonem sunt: Because he
is said to have been of Pontus, which is toward the North. As these Heretics
did strive for the South and North: so the Luciferians would have the Church of
God only at Sardis in the East: unto whom Hierome says: Non ob Sardorum
tantum mastrucam filium Dei descendisse: Cont. Luciferianos.
That the son of God did not only descend for a Sardish mantill; that is, to
save only the Sardians: Even so did he not only die to redeem the Romans.
Yea, if any sect among Christians have divided and cut themselves off from
Christ, the Papists that challenge most to be privileged, are most like to be
excluded: 1. Idolaters shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9.
such are Papists notoriously known to be. 2. Heresies also do shut men out
from the kingdom of God, Galath. 5.20.21. But the Church of Rome holds and
professes many apparent heresies, as even now shall be showed. 3. The Apostle
says, Ye are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by the law,
Galath. 5.4. Papists cut off from the true Church.
But the Papists do seek to be justified by the righteousness of the law: for
these are their own words, True justice is by keeping the law, Rhemist in 2.
Romans sect. 5.4. The scripture says, If any man shall add unto these things, I
will add unto him the plagues written in this book, Revel. 21.18. They which
add unto the scriptures, can not be saved: Such are the Papists, that beside
the written word, do receive many traditions, which they call verbum Dei, non
scriptum; the word not written. By these and sundry other reasons, which might
be produced, the pope-catholike is found to have the least part in Christ,
unless they do revoke their errors, and repent them of their misbeliefe.

3 True it is, that Christ will so preserve his Church, and every faithful
member thereof from error, as that they shall not fail in the foundation: but
as to infirmities of life, so to errors of doctrine, which are not
fundamental, even the true Church of Christ is subject, till God by his word
do otherwise teach them, Philip. 3.15.
as the Apostle says, if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal the same
unto you. But concerning any particular visible Church, such as the Roman and
the Latin Church is, Untruth. 15.
it is untrue that it is absolutely preserved from error, but so long only, and
so farre-forth as it does yield and submit it self to be guided by the
direction of Gods word. The visible Church may err.
For what privilege has one local Church more then an other? What can Rome
challenge more for it self, then Ephesus, Sardis, Smyrna, and the other
Churches of Asia, to whom our Savior directed his Epistles, Revel. 2.3. whose
candlesticks are now removed. The earthly Jerusalem had greater assurance for
their continuance, and more ample promises, then ever Rome had: for the Psalm
testifies thus, the Lord has chosen Sion, and loves to dwell in it, saying,
Psalm. 13^. v. 13.14.
this is my rest for ever: yet is Sion now forsaken, and Jerusalem become
desolate: for the promise is conditional, if thy sons keep my covenants,
etc. v. 12. Let not reachles Rome therefore presume before Jerusalem, even unto
the Romans does the Apostle speak, Romans 11. v. 21.
if God spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not
thee. Let the Romanists therefore take heed, least it happen unto them, Tract.
35. in Math.
as unto the Jews, as Origene says, alapa Christum caedentes, alapam aeternam
receperunt, ab omni prophetia percussi and priuati: for giving Christ a blow,
they received an everlasting blow, being shaken from, and deprived of all
prophecy. The like deadly stroke proud Rome must expect to be deprived of all
prophetical spirit and true judgment, for striking and persecuting Christ in
his members.

Untruth. 16.
4 Untrue also it is, that the Church of Rome has condemned and extirped 400.
heresies, seeing that it may easily be proved, Roman Church reteineth and
maintains many heresies.
that it does maintain at this present one hundred at the least of those
ancient heresies which have been in former time condemned by Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Hierome, Augustine, Epiphanius, Damascene, and other of the Fathers.

From Marcellina the companion of Carpocrates they have received the adoration
of Images: August. here is. 7 Here Is. 16. Here Is. 24.
of the Heracleonites extreme unction: with the Tatians, they condemn
marriage: with the Pepuzians they allow women to be priests, Here Is. 27.
in that they authorize them to baptize: with the Catharists, that some are so
just, that they need no repentance: Here Is. 38.
with the Angelici, they worship Angels: Here Is. 39.
with the Apostolici they admit none to orders, as they did not to their
communion, that had wives: with the Hierarchites they have brought in Monks and
Nuns: Here Is. 46.
Here Is. 47.
with the Euchites canonical hours: with the Priscillianists they make
Apocryphal writings equal to the scriptures: Here Is. 17. Here Is. 70. Here Is. 50.
Here Is. 88. Here Is. 46.
with the Anthropomorphites they picture God the Father like an old man: from
the Pelagians they have borrowed free will: from the Manichees the prohibiting
of the eating of flesh. Many such heresies are without any wresting or forcing
fastened upon the Romish professors, D Sutcliffes challenge cap. 4. Tetrastyl.
2. pill. par. 3.
as a learned writer of our Church has already challenged, and charged them
with fifty heresies: and another has proved them guilty of forty more, and
so many as want of an hundred, shall be supplied shortly, and the number made
up, in the enlarging of the last recited work, as God shall give strength and
ability thereunto.

5 Neither is it true, Untruth. 17.
that diverse general Councels where the whole Christian world was assembled,
have anathematized and condemned the religion of Protestants: Protestants never
condemned in any true general Council.
for whereas in the margent he refers us to the Council. Constant. Council.
Florentin. in Union. Council. Trident. the first of these by our adversaries
confession was not a general Council: for whereas Sess. 4. of the Council of
Constance it was decreed, that the Pope ought to be subject unto the authority
of a general Council, Bellarmine tells us, Non erat tum generale Concilium,
etc. Lib. 2. de council. authoritat. ca. 19.
It was not then a general Council, when as the third part only of the Church
was present, only those prelates, which were under the obedience of Pope John:
if it were not general in the 4. session, neither was it in the 8. session,
wherein the opinions of Wickliffe and Hus were condemned.

As for the Florentine Council, neither was it by the same reason general:
for at the same time the general Council of Basil was celebrate, which
bears this style, sacrosancta generalis synodus Basiliensis in spiritu sancto
legitime congregata vniuersalem ecclesiam repraesentans: Florentine proved no
general Council.
the most holy general Synod of Basil lawfully assembled in the holy
spirit representing the universal Church. The 31. Sess. bears date ann.
1438. in which year began the Council of Ferraria, adiourned afterward to
Florence, as it appears in the proeme to the Council. And least it might be
thought, that the Synod Basiliens. was now determined, it is manifestly
apparent, Sess. 1. Basiliens.
that it both began before ann. 1431. and continued after, being not dissolved
before ann. 1442. which date the 45. sess. bears. But the Florentine Council
was ended ann. 1539. as it appears by the date of the letters of Union. How
then could the Florentine be General representing the whole Church, Florent.
sess. vltim.
whereas another general Synod at the same instant was congregate at Basil?
Neither yet was any thing concluded in the Synod of Florence against the
Protestants faith: The question there handled, and for the deciding whereof
both the Greek and Latin Church were assembled, was concerning the proceeding
of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. And whereas the Greeks were
requested by the Pope, that the Synod would discourse of the transmutation of
the bread, they refused, affirming they had no authority so to do, being
called together, Florentin. sess. 25. in fine.
pro illa tantum spiritus sancti processione, only for and about the
procession of the holie-ghost. As for the letters of Union, wherein other
articles are contained, they were not made by the consent of the whole Synod:
for as the story says, Multi prinsquam huiusmodi subscriptio fieret
discesserunt, Florent. synod. conclus.
Many were departed before any such subscription was made: neither did the
Greek Church observe this union afterward, though Pope Eugenius cunningly made
two of the Greek Bishops, Bessarion, Decret. Eugen. ex Platin. ant^ concilium.
and another, Cardinals of Rome, to keep the Greeks in obedience to the Roman
Church, but all would not serve.

Concerning the Tridentine Convocation, there subscribed only unto it of
Cardinals, Ex edition Petr. Crabb.
Archbishops, Bishops, not above 42. and the most of them were of Italy,
Sicily, Spain, though since an other tale is told us from Collen, that there
subscribed 25. Archbishops, Trident. synod. impress. Colon. pa. 416.
and 168. Bishops, but they are all summed in gross, their names are not
expressed. Is not this silly chapter or conuenticle of popish Bishops worthy
the name (think you) of a general Synod? Tridentine, a Chapter rather then a
Council.
with the which neither the Kings of England, and France, nor yet the Princes
of Germany, consented or communicated. Many provincial Synods have made as
great an appearance of Bishops, and some have exceeded. In the second Council
of Carthage there were present 214. Bishops. In the fifth Council of Carthage,
ann. 438. Bishops 73. Caranza.
In the Synod Epaunens. 70. In the fourth Toletane 70. Ex Petr. Crabb.
Bishops subscribed an. 681. why then should this late chapter of Trent presume
beyond these provincial Synodes, to be called General, or Universal,
consisting of so small a number of popish Bishops conspiring together, neither
in number, honesty, or learning to be compared unto the Bishops of diverse
provincial Synods, we therefore force not whatsoever this conuenticle has
decreed.

6 It is a notable untruth, Untruth. 18.
that in the popish Church there is not, neither ever was any disagreement or
contradiction in matters of believing, whereas the contrary is most manifest
and apparent, as these particulars do show.

The Council of Constance excommunicateth all those which communicate in both
kinds, sess. 13. The Council of Basile does grant to the Bohemians the use of
both kinds. Papists differ in matters of faith.


Both the said Councels decree, that a General Council is above the Pope:
Basiliens. sess. 33. Ibid.
and that it is veritas catholicae fidei a verity of the catholic faith so to
believe: and that pertinaciter repugnans est censendus haereticus, that he
which obstinately resists, is to be judged an heretic: and it is de
necessitate salutis credere etc. of the necessity of salvation to believe that
a general Council has supreme authority: and yet for all this the contrary
was decreed, Martin. 5. epist. 16. post council. Basilie^s.
that the Pope is above a General Council, Lateran. sub Leon. sess. 11.

The Franciscane Friars did teach, Fox pa. 800.
that the Virgin Mary was conceived without original sin: the Dominicanes
held the contrary.

The Rhemists hold, that none are absolutely elected without respect had to
their works, Annot. Hebr. 5. sect. 7. Bellarmine proves the contrary, Lib. 2.
de great. ca. 10.
that we are elected freely without any foresight of works.

Some of the popish writers extol free will, In 2. Sentent. did. 28. in 3.
did. 27.
giving unto the same a natural power of it self unto good, Scotus, Durandus,
Gabriel.

Some do affirm the contrary, as Capreolus, Marsilius. In 2. Sentent. did.
28. In 1. qu. 20. Lib. 1. de Sacram. ordin. ca. 4.


Some of them hold, that, Episcopalis ordinatio, the ordaining of Bishops is no
sacrament, Dominicus a Soto, Caietanus, Durandus: Bellarmine with the rest
affirm the contrary.

Lib. 1. de matrim. ca. 5.
Some that Matrimony is no sacrament of the new testament, as Durand,
Alphonsus, Petrus a Soto: Bellarmine with the rest hold the contrary.

Lib. 2. de sacram. ca. 20.
Concerning the indeleble character, which they say is imprinted in the soul by
the sacraments, Scotus says, it can not be proved by the scripture; Gabriel
doubts whether the Church have determined it: Bellarmine maintains the
contrary.

Some think that in the Eucharist the substance of Christ's body is present,
but without quantity, as Durand; Lib. 3. de sacram. Eucha. ca. 5.
others that it has quantity, but no distinction or order of parts; as Ockam:
Bellarmine says it has both.

Nicolaus 3. defined, that Christ had no property in any thing, Extrau. Ioann.
22. tit. 14. ca. 4.
Sext. decretal. lib. 5. tit. 12. c. 3. John. 22. decrees that opinion to be
heretical, that affirms Christ and his Apostles to have had nothing. And at
this present there is no small division and discord between the popish
seculars, and Iebusites, even in matters of judgment and doctrine, not only in
external points of difference.

1 The Priests deliver this position, that a Catholic may commit of frailty
any sin, that an infidel, heretic, or schismatike commits, Reply p. 50.
b. This Parsons denies, and proves the contrary, Manifest. p. 28.

2 Father Parsons holds, that if a man do deteine an other man's goods
wrongfullie, and be possessor malae fidei, he is absolutely bound by all
possible means to restore them to the true owner, Manifest. f. 45. a. The
Priests hold the contrary, that a man is not bound to restore, when it can not
be done without imminent danger, as to deliver a man his sword, wherewith he
purposes to kill an other. Reply f. 63. b. and they are in the right.

The Ignatian divines at Salamanca in Spain, resolved upon these conclusions
to be sound in popish divinity, that the Catholics in Ireland might with
great merit aid that Rebel Tyrone: that the Catholics sin mortallie, that
take part with the English: that they are by no construction Rebels, that fight
against the Queen: Reply f. 66. b. All which positions the secular Priests do
rightly conclude to be false and unchristian. Ibid.

4 Parsons affirms, that the consideration of Catholic religion is the
principal point in the succession to the Crown, Manifest. fol. 63. a. And he
seems to conclude, that succession by birth and blood is neither of the law
of God, or nature, Quodlib. p. 30. The Priests hold the contrary, that
Catholics are not bound to stand for a Catholic competitor, unless there
concur the right of succession, Reply f. 76. a.

5 The Priests affirm, We are most confident not only in the excellency of
our Priesthood, but also in the assurance, that we in the execution have a
sufficient direction of Gods spirit.

6 Parsons calls this high presumption of heretics, and denies both, that
by their character only Priests were made secure from erring, and so
consequently the sacrament of orders not to confer grace, which is a popish
ground; as also that they cannot have such assurance of Gods spirit: Manifest.
fol. 87. a. b.

7 Parsons says, that in Gods high providence we find the necessity and
ineuitabilitie of many accidents, Manifest. fol. 100.1. The Priests say, these
words taste unsavory, if not hereticallie, to put absolute necessity and
ineuitabilitie, in those actions, which are subject to man's will and reason.
Reply fol. 98. a.

8 Parsons says, that this position, that the life and estate of secular
Priests is more perfect then the state of religious men (which the Priests
maintain) is refuted and condemned, not only by Thomas Aquinas, Difference
between Popish Priests and Iudasites in points of doctrine.
but by S. Chrysostom and other writers of that time. Manifest. fol. 104. b.

9 The Priests call Parsons interpretation of that place of S. John, Try the
spirit, etc. false and heretical, thereby leading his Reader into a
presumptuous error of judging all both men and matters. Reply fol. 101. b.

10 The Priests hold, that the Pope as an Ecclesiastical Magistrate, has no
power to move war for religion against any temporal Prince, or for whatsoever
cause, or pretense, etc. and that they would oppose themselves against him, if
he should come in person in any such attempt, and that they will reveal,
whatsoever they shall know therein. Imp. consyd. p. 38. Parsons, full like
himself, calls these positions, pernicious, erroneous, heretical. Manifest.
f. 13. b.

11. The Priests doubt not to say, that the Pope was not endued with the
worthy gift of the holy Ghost, termed discretio spirituum, discerning of
spirits, and that he was deceived in setting up the Archpriest, Relat. p. 57.
Imp. consyd. p. 11. Parsons stiffly maintains the Pope not to have erred
herein. Manifest. 76. b. In diverse other points these two Popish sects do
differ, as may be gathered out of their late polemicall writings and
inuectiues set forth by one against the other.

And three hundred more of these contradictions and diversities of opinion in
matters of faith and doctrine, which have been and are in the Roman Church,
might be brought forth, but that it were needless (these few examples being
sufficient to convince the adversary of error) and superfluous: Tetrastyl.
pill. 4 part. 4.
this being elsewhere in another work performed, whither I pray the Reader to
have recourse.

Is not this then a shameless man, that has told us so many lies together,
and blusheth not to abuse such honorable persons, with his Frierly glosses? if
his neck were not (...), Isai* 48.
an iron sinew, and (...), his face brass, as the Prophet says: he would
never have faced out, such manifest untruths. But he may be very well compared
to raging and running brooks, which as Basile says: (...): as they run
carry every thing along, which they meet with: So does this bragger huddle
up together, whatsoever is in his way, be it true or false. And they think it
a good piece of service, if they may with straining and ouerreaching bolster
out a bad cause: much like to some, that Hierome speaks of, who thought they
might make bold with their disciples: Nos, qui necdum initiati sumus, audire
debere mendacium, ne parnuli and lactentes solidioris cibi edulio suffocemur:
Ad Pammach. and Ocean.
And that we, which are hardly yet entered must hear lies, least being yet but
little ones and sucklings, we might be choked with stronger meat. But though
their disciples are credulous, and will believe them upon their word, they have
small reason to think, that wise and grave persons will be so easily deceived.

The third Probation.
IN the third place the Epistler seems to reason thus: Apol. p. 15. lin. 20.
ad 28.
that if a man may doubt to give assent to any religion, where there is such
diversity: this being but a speculatiue consent of faith, only exacting an
agreement of the understanding: how much more doubt and difficulty will be
made, etc. for the obtaining of heaven, etc. His reason, if it be any, stands
thus: It is an hard matter among Protestants to make choice of the right faith,
Untruth. 19.
which consists only in the understanding:

Ergo, it is an harder matter among them to obtain heaven.



The Solution.
1. IT is no hard matter among Protestants to discern of the true religion,
seeing they make the Scriptures the rule of their faith: but among Papists it
is doubtful, seeing they refuse to be tried only by the Scriptures, (which
they blasphemously affirm not to contain all things necessary to salvation)
but they run unto uncertain and doubtful traditions: Bellarm. lib. 4. de
verb. c. 3.
and so as the Apostle says, they measure themselves by themselves: where then
the rule is crooked (such as are their humane traditions) how can that be
straight, which is measured by it? But we say with Augustine: Regula est illa,
Our rule is the will of God contained in the Scriptures: Enarrat. 2. in Psalm.
31.
stet regula and quod prauum est, corrgatur ad regulam: Let the rule stand (the
word of God) and let that which is amiss be corrected according to that rule.

2. Neither is there such diversity of opinion, Untruth. 20.
or multitude of divisions among Protestants, and thereupon such manifest and
apparent danger of a false election: as is showed before. And it is an absurd
and gross thing in a disputer, still to beg the thing in question. He may
take himself by the nose, and his fellow Friars, that make among them above an
hundred sects: one holds of Francis, another of Benedict, another of Austine,
another of Ignatius the founder of the Jesuits: like as among the Corinthians,
some held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas. So that that saying of
Hierome fitteth the Popish professors: Lib. 1. aduers. Pelagian.
Nunc quoque mysterium iniquitatis operatur, and garrit vnusquisque, quod
sentit: Now the mystery of iniquity works, and every man pratleth his own
fancy.

Faith is not an act only of the understanding. Iam. 2.
3. Neither is faith only an act of the understanding, and a speculatiue
consent: If your Popish faith be nothing else, the devil may well be one of
your Catholics; for he in his knowledge and understanding believes there is
a God, and consents that the Scriptures are true, and the history of Christ's
nativity, death and resurrection he knows and confesses. But the right
Christian faith, beside the illumination of the understanding, makes an
assured confidence of the heart, and setleth the conscience, and makes us at
peace with God: and by this faith, Romans 5.1.
every one that unfeignedly seeks God, believes that he will reward them: as
the Apostle says, He that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that
he will reward those that seek him. Heb. 11.6.
Here are two parts of faith expressed, a knowledge, that God is; and a belief
or assurance, that God will reward his seekers and followers.

4. The argument proposed concludes well against Papists, that he which is
doubtful of faith, is much more doubtful to obtain heaven: for a man may have
their speculatiue faith, and yet be no whit nearer to heaven, nor sure thereof.
True faith works assurance of salvation.
But the right faith, which Protestants profess, does put them even while they
live, in assurance, and in some sort in possession of the kingdom of heaven:
as our Savior says: He that believes in him, that sent me, has everlasting
life, John 5.24.
and shall not come into condemnation, but is escaped from death to life:
Wherefore it is an hard and difficult matter with Papists to obtain heaven, or
to be assured thereof, though they have the Popish faith. But with Protestants,
after they be endued with a lively justifying faith, there is no doubt or
difficulty in obtaining the reward: 1. Pet. 1.5.9.
for we are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation: and the end of
our faith is the salvation of our souls. He therefore that is in the way of
faith, is sure to come unto the end, which is salvation. I may therefore use
against this Romanist the words of Basile: (...).
You are guilty of that, which you accuse in another. It is an hard matter for
your followers to obtain or be sure of heaven: and therefore you judge so of
the Protestants. But as Augustine says: Quisquis adhuc malus non putet neminem
bonum esse: Let not him that is evil think no man good. Jn Psalm. 25.
Because Popish religion is desperate and comfortless, think not every
religion to be so.

The fourth Probation.
THe argument here urged, may be framed thus: He whom all or most deny to have
title or interest to a kingdom, will faintly take it in hand. Apol. p. 16. l.
9. Page 16. lin. 22.
The Protestants make the kingdom of God uncertain, improbable, impossible to
be obtained: and so deny men to have interest to it: Ergo, they are the cause
that few adventure, so certain and painful a work for so uncertain and
doubtful recompense. Lin. 26.


The Solution.
1. TO the proposition, this may be answered: that although in terrene
kingdoms, where a title is denied of all, there is small hope to obtain,
because to a temporal inheritance, admittance is by temporal means: and
entrance to kingdoms is made by the favor and assistance of united friends,
yet moved by the iustnes of the title, as the Wiseman says: In the multitude
of the people is the honor of the King, Prou. 14.28.
and for the want of people comes the destruction of a Prince: yet in the
obtaining of the kingdom of heaven the case is far diverse: for the children
of God have good title unto it, and great interest in it, and will earnestly
contend and strive for it, though all the world say nay: as Elias was not
dismayed in his course, though he thought himself to be left alone, and to be
forsaken of all men. 1. King. 19.10.


Untruth. 21.
2. It is an impudent slander, that the Protestants make the kingdom of God
uncertain, improbable, or impossible to be obtained: these are the proper
badges of the Popish Church. For how do not they make the kingdom of God
uncertain, when they teach, that the certitude of remission of sins is a
vain confidence, and void of all godliness: Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 9.
Rhemist. 1. Cor. 9. sect. 9.
and others call it, a faithless persuasion of salvation, for a man to be
assured by faith, that he shall be saved.

How is it not also improbable? seeing if any among the^ are likely to go to
heaven, their Popes, whom they call holy Fathers, Christ's Vicars, having S.
Peter's keys, to whom the spiritual treasure of the Church is committed, to
whom it belongs to canonize Saints, who are privileged not to err, they in
all reason and probability, should be most sure to go to heaven? Is it
probable, that they can open heaven to others, and command the Angels to
carry other men's souls to heaven, Clemens 6. in bulla.
that they can canonize others, and be excluded heaven themselves? And yet
they dare pronounce of some of their Popes, The Pope that helps others to
heaven, may go to hell himself. Quo^ lib. p. 57.
and those not the worst, that they are damned, as Bellarmine is reported to
have said to an English Doctor of Sixtus the last, that descendit ad infernum,
that he was gone to hell, as far as he could conceive or understand.

Yea by their doctrine the kingdom of heaven is impossible to be had: seeing
they do ascribe it to men's works and merits: for this I dare by warrant of
the Scriptures affirm, that he which makes account to purchase heaven by his
works, and not to obtain it by faith, is not like to come thither: For by the
works of the law no flesh shall be justified. Galat. 2.16.


This objection then might well have bin spared, which reboundeth back upon
their own face. Thus are they snared in their own words: and so it falls out
unto this brabler, as it is in Job: He that speaks many words, (...). Job. 11
2.
shall be answered again. If he be loath to have the nakedness of his mother
discovered, he should have followed Hieromes saying: Vis me tacere, ne accuses;
depone gladium, and ego scutum abijciam: Would you have us quiet, you should
not have accused us: if you had laid down your sword, I should not have needed
to take up a shield. Clitarchus could have told you: (...).
Utter not those things which you are loath to hear your self.

The fifth Probation.
THe Mahometanes were never more wicked then after the Persian schism and
division amongst them. Page 17.
Likewise the Jews were divided into many sects and religions at the coming
of Christ, Samaritanes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, etc. whereby that nation
etc. was drowned and overwhelmed in such monstrous and erroneous iniquities.

The conclusion must be: Ergo, Protestants being so divided, are most wicked,
etc. Slander 22.


The Solution.
FIrst, this argument is denied: for though among the Infidels and
misbeleeuers, such as the Turks are, and the Jews were at the coming of
Christ, where none hold the truth, but al are in error, divisions and sects
make them worse: yet is it not so among those, which profess the truth: 1.
For there the diversity of sects, and the springing and publishing of
heresies, does make the defense of the truth more glorious, and the defenders
thereof more faithful and constant: as the Apostle says: There must be
heresies even among you, that they which are approved among you, may be
known. 1 Cor. 11.19.
2. And yet in the mean time, the authors of schism, and hatchers of
heresies, are thereby given over to greater ungodliness: as the Apostle again
says: But the evil men and deceivers, shall wax worse and worse, 2. Tim.
3.13.
deceiving and being deceived.

3. For if the Church of God, were then at the worst, when heresies and
schisms are raised: then should the state of the Primitive Church be
condemned, when so many wicked doctrines of Ebionites, Basilidians,
Valentinians, Marcionites, Arrians, Sabellians with the rest were stirred up by
the devil.

4. The reason of this difference is evident: because that where the truth is
professed, the opposition of errors does give occasion, that the same be more
thoroughly sifted, as the wheat is by winnowing made more pure, and the light
shines brighter in darkness. But where there is no truth or sound knowledge at
all, The Church of God may profit by heresies, though others wax worse and
worse.
there divisions do but harden them the more in their error, like as chafe
being winnowed is scattered and dispersed: and as they which walk in darkness
without light, the further they go, the more they wander. This is the very
case of the unbelieving Turks, and of the misbeleeuing Jews, Pharisees,
Sadduces, Herodians, they were all out of the way. This point is well touched
by Augustine: Non ad diabolum pertinet, Homil. de pastoribus.
quis isto, vel illo modo erret, omnes errantes vult quibuslibet erroribus: It
is nothing to the devil, whether a man err this way, or that way, all that
be in error are his, what error soever they hold. No marvel then, if both
Jews and Gentiles by their divisions waxed worse and worse, because they still
were under the kingdom of Satan, howsoever divided.

Secondly, if this argument be admitted, it would conclude strongly against the
Papists, whose divisions are notoriously known both to have been, and at this
present to be such between the Secular Priests, and irregular Ignatians, both
at Rome, in France, and in England (which were happy, if it were rid of them
both) and so hotly pursued on both sides with all reproachful terms, of
knaves, heretics, diabolical Machiauels, devils incarnate, and such like, as
they are not able to show ever to have been among Protestants. And these
divisions not only to consist in verbal differences, In the solution of the
second probation.
or repugnance in external rites and liberties, but in material points of
doctrine, as has been before showed. Therefore among Papists, where neither
sect holds the truth, this argument may well hold by this their erroneous
dissentions and diversities, to convince them of monstrous and gross
iniquities.

Thirdly, against English Protestants (whom this Libeller chiefly impugneth)
this engine of his has no force: for (to Gods glory be it spoken) fewer
divisions have not been seen in the Church of England (excepting some few
novelties of certain new fangled teachers, who in time, I doubt not, but will
wax wiser) then at this present. And I trust our domestical heates shall every
day abate and slake, and our contentions at home decrease, that we may with
one joint force oppose our selves to the common adversary: like as Abraham
rescued Lot from the Gentiles, though some private iarres between their
families had broken out before. The Grecians are said, that when their enemies
approached, though they had been at civil discord before, would compound their
quarrels, to resist their foreign foes: And it is written of Themistocles and
Aristides, two famous Captains of the Athenians, that when they went on
embassage together, (...).
or to conduct an army, Inimicitiam in finibus patriae deposuerunt: They laid
down their enmity in the borders of their country. It should be a shame for
Christians not to be so wise for the defense of the common cause, as the
Heathen were: That saying of Augustine to Hierome is to be embraced: Fieri
potest, vt tibi videatur aliud, quam veritas habet, dum aliud a te non fiat,
quam charitas habet: You may so long think otherwise, then the verity, so that
you do nothing beside charity. If men will needs retain some private
opinions, yet let them refrain public dissensions. And here an end also of
this section.

THE FOVRTH SECTION: THAT THE Authors intent and scope is nothing less, then
to teach a most undoubted certainty and unity in Popish religion.
Page 18.19.
THis section has nothing worth the answering: neither contains any thing,
beside slanders, bragges, facings, and bold assertions.

Untruth 23.
1. He impudently says, and with a brazen face, that Protestants may be had in
just suspicion, Lin. 10
that many doubters or deniers (at least in affection) of all worship are
entered in among them. Whereas it is out of all doubt, that many such Atheists
are fostered, Sect. 2.3. proof
in Rome, Italy, Spain; where the name Christian is used as a word of
derision: as is rehearsed before.

Lin. 20.28.
2. He tells us, of an ample confutation, which he has written against all
Atheists and enemies to religion, which he calls a Resolution of Religion,
wherein he has resolved all doubts that may be imagined. This sure is a
work indeed, that can meet with men's thoughts and imaginations. This book
we would gladly see, which he so often makes mention of: some such thing I
have heard intended, but it should seem, the author, like to the Bear, has
not yet licked this deformed lump to perfection. If it were ripe, it would be
a good present for their mother of fornications and her children at Rome, to
persuade them from Atheism and Epicurisme. And yet considering this yonkers
spiritual father, graund provincial Friar Robert Parsons, has written of
this argument before in his Resolution, this punie father might have spared
this labor, and confessed modestly with Hierome: Supersedendum huic labori
sentio, Lib. 3. aduers. Pelagian.
ne mihi dicatur illud Horatij, In syluam ne ligna feras, etc. I think to give
over this labor, least that of Horace be said unto me; Carry not sticks into
the wood: video enim ^ clarissimo ingenio occupata esse meliora: For I see a
riper head has brought better stuff.

3. Where he says, that their religion, Untruth 24.
which he calls most holy and approved (most unholy and reproved rather)
is resolved to the most assured and infallible word and revelation of God. This
speech, it is hard to say, whether it has more subtlety or less honesty:
For if by the word and revelation of God he understand, not the word written
only, but their blind traditions, which they usually call, Verbum Dei non
scriptum, The word of God unwritten, he speaks craftily: Popish religion
relieth not upon the Scriptures.
for this their Anabaptistical revelation is not assured or infallible, but
most uncertain, and deceitful. If he mean hereby only the Scriptures of
God, it is an dishonest brag of him: for Popery differs as much from the
word written, as darkness from light: if it were not so, why do they not stand
to their tackle, and cleave only to the Scriptures? why do they make their
traditions unwritten of equal authority with the word written? what need had
they to deny the scriptures to contain all things necessary to salvation?
These gross positions of theirs do well declare, that they fear to be tried
by the Scriptures.

4. He says further, nothing is more holy, credible, Page 19. l. 12.
or worthy to be believed, then the doctrine he is to teach: Untruth 25.
and to follow S. Augustines phrase, that a man should sooner doubt, whether he
live. He may well follow Augustines phrase, his sense he follows not: for
Augustine in that place, (which he cites in the margin) speaks not of the
articles of Popish religion, which he neither knew, Lib. 7. confess. cap. 10.

Heretics many times resolute.


nor approves, but of the certainty, which we ought to have of the eternal
verity, that is, the Godhead, whereby we were made. And I nothing marvel to
see this fellow so confident in his Popish trash, seeing it has been the
property of the greatest Heretics to show themselves resolute. Eutyches said:
In hac fide genitus sum, vsque hodie vixi in ea, and opto mori: I was borne in
this faith, Council. Chalc. act. 3.
and hitherto lived in it, and desire to die. Dioscorus his companion said: Ego
cum patribus eijcior, ego defendo patrum dogmata: I am cast out with the
fathers, I defend the sentence of the fathers. Constantinus a Monothelite
heretic being asked of the Synod if he would continue in that error,
answered: Etiam domini, Constantinop. synod. 6. act. 6.
sic sentio, sic credo, non est possibile aliter: Yea my Lords, so I think, so
I believe, it is not possible otherwise.

THE FIFTH SECTION.
THis Ignatian professor takes upon him in this treatise to prove the
certainty, excellency and dignity of their Cacolike religion. But it fares
with him, (...).
as Plato says of lovers, that they are blind in that, which they love. As the
Crow thinks her own birds fairest, so he praises the deformities of his
profession: but as a blind man cannot judge of colors, so his blind affection
cannot discern of true religion. Let us see his reasons and persuasions,
whereby he does justify and magnify Popish superstition.

The first persuasion.
Page 20. lin. 4.
THe blasphemous impiety of Diagoras, Lucretius, Epicures, the infidelities of
Jews, Mahometanes, Brachmans and Pagans, Lin. 16.
are by that religion I will defend miraculously confuted and condemned, etc.

The Disswasion.
I Would that Popery were free from the imputation of these four sects, which
he says are by them impugned, of Atheists, Jews, Mahometanes, Pagans: for
then some hope might be conceived, that they would give place at the length to
the truth, if they were purged of these filthy dregs. But as that
profession now stands, I fear me it cannot be cleared from the imputation of
all these aforesaid impieties.

1. If Popery did not give way to Atheism, how comes it to pass, Untruth
26.
Diverse Popes Atheists.
that so many of your unholy fathers the Popes have been infected that way?
What was, I pray you, John 13. that playing at dice, Luitprand. lib. 6.
called to the devil for help, and who is reported to have drunk to the
devil: and Siluester the 2. that gave himself to the devil to be made Pope:
Ex Ioann. Stella. Benno.
and Gregory the 7. that cast the Sacrament into the fire: and Julius 2. that
threw S. Peter's keys, as they call them, into the river Tyber, and drew out
his sword, having more confidence in Paul's sword, Ex Balaeo de act. pontif. Romans
as he termed it, then in Peter's keys: Julius the 2. calling for his dish of
Porke, which he was forbidden by his Physicians, said, Give it me in despite of
God. Leo 10. said to Cardinal Bembus: Quantum nobis profuit fabula ista de
Christo. How gainefull to us has been this fable of Christ? Are these now your
holy fathers indeed, that were plain Atheists, and is this religion likely to
confute Atheism, which as a spider takes hold with her hands, and makes her
web, not in Kings but Popes palaces: Prou. 30.26.
yea builds her nest in Popes breast? And whence is it, I pray you, that you
and your fellow Iudasites, are by your pewfellowes the secular Priests so often
proclaimed Atheists, Machiauilists, devilish, if Popery, whereof you take
upon you to be sect-masters and ringleaders, were the overthrow of Atheism?

Secondly, for Iudaisme, Untruth 27.
how can the Roman religion clear it self: seeing they retain so many
Jewish rites and ceremonies: as the Priestlike garments, Altars, Incense,
Palm, Salt, Oil, Iubilee: and which is most notorious among the rest, they
every year, like unto the Jews, In Missal. Romans in fine.
consecrate a Paschall lamb.

3. And for Mahometanisme, it has great affinity with Papisme, in doctrine,
manners, miracles, pilgrimages, Untruth 28.
sects of Monks, in their Alchoran, and many rites and ceremonies, as is most
pithily and learnedly proved, D. Sutcliff. lib. 1. de Turcopapism. cap.
5.6.7.8.9. and deinceps.
by an excellent writer, and industrious professor of our Church, in a several
work of that argument, which the adversary shall never be able to answer: to
that treatise I refer the reader. How then is Popery a confounder of
Mahometanes, being rather a compounder with them, and cousin germane to many of
their erroneous and corrupt vsages.

4. Concerning Heathenish paganism, if Papists borrowed not much of their
stuff from thence, their religion would be left very beggarly and naked.

Plutar. quaest. Roman. qu. 86. Quaest. 99.
1. The old Romans married not in May: so the Church of Rome at certain seasons
inhibite marriage.

2. The Augur did not lose his Priesthood, while he lived, hence they have the
indeleble character of Priesthood.

Jbid. qu. 34
3. Of them also they learn to visit the sepulchers of the dead, and bring
their oblations thither.

Plut. quest. Graec. 16. de Jsid. and Osirid.
4. Nisus King of Megaris kept the relics of his wife Abrota: the relics of
Osiris were preserved in Egypt, and of Bacchus at Delphos. Hence is derived the
Popish reservation of relics.

Plutar. ibid. Popery borrows of Pagans.

Plut. Laec. apotheg. in Agasicle. Plut. de plac. philos. lib. 1. c. 7.


5. The Egyptians worshipped the image of Osiris: from this practice of the
Heathen, the Papists have received the adoration of images.

6. The Thasians took upon them to canonize Saints: so do the Papists.

7. Epicurus did ascribe an humane form to the Gods: so the Papists do
picture God the Father like an old man.

Aristid. Moles. lib. 1. Italic.
8. The Romans instituted an holy day in memory of their maids, which
delivered Rome from the Frenchmen: the Church of Rome has her festiuities of
Virgins.

Plut. lib. de virtutibus mulier.
9. Pythes for grief for his son, whom Xerxes commanded to be slain, made
himself a recluse and Anachorite, and so died: so has the Church of Rome
their Anchorites.

Plut. de Isid. and Osirid.
10. The Egyptian Priests did use to shave their hair: and so has the Church
of Rome their shauelings. Diverse hundred such Paganish rites, are to this day
practiced among the Romanists. One has of late written a treatise of this
argument, Thomas Moresinus de origin. papat.
wherein he shows the original of more then 400. points and tricks of
Popish religion, to have been taken from the Pagans: There the reader shall
find himself more fully satisfied in this matter. Untruth 29.
We see then how well Pagans are confuted by that religion, which this champion
takes upon him to defend.

It is not then the Roman superstition, which has confuted and condemned
Atheists, Jews, Mahometanes, Pagans: but the religion, which we defend, that
profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ, has exploded all these impieties, and
put them to silence, and has rooted out all other heresies beside. Who have
now impugned the heresies of the Tritheists, Anabaptists, Family of love, of
Seruetus, Valentinus Gentilis, with others, then Protestant writers: witness
the learned works of Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, Iunius with the
rest.

He has therefore here made a good argument for the Protestants, whose faith
is therefore worthy to be of all received, because thereby all heresy and
impiety is subdued: as Hierome says, Fides pura moram non patitur, vt
apparuerit scorpius illico conterendus: Ad Ioann. Hierosolym.
Pure faith seeks no delays, as soon as the scorpion appears, it nippeth
it on the head.

The second persuasion.
I Mean not the religion of Martin Luther, Page 21. l. 2, 3, 4 5, 6, etc.
so often recanted, altered, changed, etc. nor of licentious Calvin, and a few
artificers of Geneua, or of Knox that galley-slaue of Scotland, or of Edward
Seimer, or of King Edward a child of nine year old, etc.

The Disswasion.
HEre many shameless untruths are powered out together.

1. It is untrue, Untruth 30.
that Luther at any time recanted his judgment in religion, in departing from
the Church of Rome and forsaking her trumperie: you would threap kindness upon
Luther, as you have done of late in a lying pamphlet of reverend Beza that he
died one of your Catholics. If Luther altered in some private opinions,
Jesuit. Catechis. lib. 1. cap. 17. in fine.
it is nothing to us, who depend not upon Luther, Calvin, or any other for our
faith. And if he did so, it is no marvel, seeing it was hard for one man all
at once to find out the truth in every point: seeing the Apostle says to the
Philippians, If ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto
you. Philip. 3.15. Religion not perfited at once.
Faith is not perfected at once: and as in other things, the invention of a
thing and the perfection come not together, as the Greek Poet says: (...)
Xenophanes.
(...).
God at the first all things does not show,
But in process of time, they better do grow.
So is it in religion. But howsoever Luther might vary from himself, what is
that to us the Protestants of England, who are the greatest eye sore to these
bleare-eyed Popelings? It is well* you cannot vpbraide the Church of England
with any innovation of doctrine for these three score years well nie, since
the first thorough reformation of religion in blessed King Edwards reign.

Slander 31.
2. As for licentious Calvin, and galley-slaue Knox: the one is a malicious
slander, the other a scurrilous term. These men were both famous for their
learning, and reverenced of all that knew them for their godly life. I do not
a whit marvel that the memory of these men is odious to all Papists: for
Calvin has so decalued, made bare and bald their naked religion, and Knox has
given it such a knock and deadly blow in Scotland, that I trust in God it
shall never there rise up again.

3. That King Edward a child of nine year old, without any assent or assembly
of Parliament, Untruth 32.
or other (as Fox himself is witness) did reform religion, is a fiction of
your own. First, Master Fox witnesses no such thing: for although the King by
the advice of his Council appointed a general visitation over all the land
for the redressing of certain disorders, yet was not the Mass abolished, nor
religion wholly altered till the Parliament held, Fox page 1298. edit. 1583.
ann. 1. Edward. Nouemb. 4. Secondly, indeed true it is, that in Queen Mary's
time the Papists came before the law: Preachers were prohibited, Bishops
deprived, and diverse imprisoned: as Bishop Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper,
Rogers, Mass publicly solemnized. Thirdly, Fox p. 1492. col. 2.
you had forgotten, that the usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome, which
you make the chiefest ground of your Cacolike religion throughout your whole
dispute, was with common consent of Parliament, consisting of the three estates
of the land, the Lords spiritual and temporal, Ann. 1534. Fox p. 1056.
and Commons, abrogated by King Henry the eight of famous memory: so that no
new act was requisite in that behalf in the entering of King Edwards reign.
Fourthly, King Edwards godly youth no prejudice to reformation.
King Edward a King of nine years of age, by the advice of the Parliament
repealeth diverse Statutes, and among the rest one made against Lollards, ann.
1. Richard. 2. who was then but eleven years old: I pray you, what great ods
in their ages? Fox p. 1299. col. 1.
might not the one build up true religion at those years, when as the other
pulled it down? or will you take exception against Josias, because being yet
but a child, he began to seek the Lord, and to purge religion? 2. Chroni. c.
34. v. 2.
or is the authority and sovereignty of the Prince the less, because he is
young? or is the spirit of God tied to age, and limited to years? Does not the
Scripture say, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have ordained
strength? Psalm. 8.2.
And hereunto agrees that saying of Cypriane, Impletur apud nos spiritu sancto
puerorum innocens aetas etc. Lib. 3. epist. 14.
The innocent age of children with us is filled with the holy spirit. And so
was it in this princely child the Josias of this age, of whom we may say with
Ambrose, Non moueat aetas, imperatoris perfecta aetas est. Est enim perfecta
aetas, In obit. Theodos.
vbi perfecta virtus: Honorius iam pulsat adolescentiae fores, prouectior
aetate, qua^ Josias, We should not respect his years, the Emperors age is
perfect: age is perfect, where virtue is perfect: Honorius is now growing to be
a young man, elder then Josias.

4 Further it is a great untruth which follows, the will and testament of
King Henry being violated, Page 21. ^. 9.10.
and his Bishops and Clergy committed to prison, or deprived. Untruth. 33.


For neither does he show wherein the testament of the King was violated in the
entrance of King Edwards reign, and therefore may be justly suspected to be a
falsarie: neither does he cite any author for it, no such thing either by
Master Fox or Stowe (to whom in these matters he appealeth) being affirmed: so
that it seems his own fantastical brain has forged this fancy.

True it is indeed, that the Protestant Bishops were deprived, and excluded
both from the Parliament and their Bishoprics, Fox page 1410.
as Doctor Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor Harley Bishop of Hereford, with
others, in the entrance of Queen Maryes reign.

But untrue also it is that the Popish Bishops were deprived or committed to
prison during the time of the Parliament, Untruth. 34.
when the act passed for reformation of religion, which was in November ann.
1547. the Bishop of Winchester was not sent to the Tower til the morrow after
S. Peter's day the year following ann. 1548. nor deprived before ann. 1551.
Stow ann. 1.2. Edw. 6.
Fox p. 1339. col. 2.
And Bonner was not commanded to keep his house, till the 11. of August ann.
1549. in the third year of King Edwards reign. Fox 1304. col. 1, 2.
This shameless man we see dare adventure to utter any thing.

5 Of the like truth is that which follows, That the Protestants of this time
without any disputation or advice of any learned or Parliamentall Divine (all
such then being deprived) by the consent of unlearned noble men, Page 21. l.
13.14.
Knights of shires etc. enacted and decreed matters of religion.

For it is notoriously known, that during the Parliament, Untruth. 35.
ann. 1. Elizab. there was a conference and disputation held at Westminster,
between nine of the Popish Clergy, Bishops and Doctors, with as many of the
Protestant Doctors and Divines, whereof one was a Bishop, which disputation was
broken off by the frowardnes of the popish disputers, Fox page 2124. Stow ann.
1. Elizab.
that wilfully refused to obey the order appointed.

Untruth. 35.
Neither as yet, when matters of religion were treated of in Parliament, were
the popish Bishops deprived: for the Archbishop of York was then of the
Council, and the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln were not committed to the
Tower, but upon their disobedience and contempt of authority, Stow ann. 1.
Elizab.
in violating the prefixed order of the disputation.

And it is also evident, that the acts which passed ann. 1. Elizab. had the
consent of the three estates of the realm, as may appear by the style of
them, Ann. 1. Eliz. c. 3.
We your said most loving, faithful, and obedient subjects, representing the
three estates of your realm in England. And it is certain, that diverse
learned Divines were consulted with concerning the affairs of the Church, as
these reverend men, Scorie, Coxe, Whitehead, Grindall, Horn, Sands, Elmer,
Jewel, with others, the meanest of them far more learned, honest, godly,
then your Parliament divine Story, who uttered this phranticke speech in the
Parliament house, that while they labored about the sprigs, Fox p. 2125.
they should have stricken at the root, etc. with other mad words: but he
himself was happily not long after rooted out, and spued out from the earth
as an unclean thing: Untruth. 36.
wherefore there was more then the consent of the unlearned etc. to the things
then enacted. What a fardell now of lies has this glozing Friar bundled up, he
has vttred as many leasings, as scribled lines: he runs along, and makes
haste, as though the truth could not overtake him, as Cypriane says, ita
scelera festinant, Epist. 3. ad Cornelium.
quasi contra innocentiam festinatione praeualeant, impiety by haste thinks
to prevail against innocence. I may compare this fellows reports, as
Saleucus did the Locrensian laws to a spiders webs, (...).
a fly falling in was taken, but a waspe did escape: so his silly and
credulous disciples may be entangled with his talk, but the discreet reader
will deride his folly, and break his snares.

The third Persuasion.
I Defend that religion which all most learned and virtuous men of the whole
Christian world twenty times gathered together in general Councels, Page 22.
lin. 21. etc.
have ever concluded out of holy Scriptures, which many thousands of national
and provincial Synodes, etc. all Universities, Colleges, Schools, laws of
all Christian Princes, spiritual and temporal, have decreed, etc.

The Disswasion.
1 HE had said more truly, that the most unlearned and vicious men of the
world have approved their religion, not the most learned and virtuous, which is
an idle and fabulous speech. Untruth. 37.
Many of the Popes have been most unlearned: Alphonsus says, Constat plures
Papas adeo illiteratos fuisse, vt grammaticam penitus ignorarent, It is evident
that some of the Popes have been so unlearned, Contr. Haeres. lib. 1. c. 4.
Popes unlearned.
that they were ignorant of their Grammar. The like ignorance has reigned in
times past not only in the Popes, but in the whole court and city of Rome.
Arnulphus said openly in the Council of Rhemes, Arnulph. in council. Remens.
Cum hoc tempore Romae nullus sit, vt fama est, qui sacras literas didicerit
etc. Seeing there is none at this time in Rome, as the fame is, that has
studied the sacred scriptures, with what face dare any of them teach us that
thing which they never had learned. And such as was the city of Rome, the
whole papal Clergy and priesthood was not unlike: as what great learning
their Massepriests had, it may appear by that Canon where mention is made of a
Priest that baptized, Part. 3. did. 4. ca. 86.
In nomine patra, filia, and spirita sancta, such as was their latin, such was
their doctrine, both barbrous and false.

Untruth. 38.
2 Now what virtuous and holy men your Popes have bin, Platina.
who are the great patrones of the Roman religion, it may easily be seen:
whereas that Sea has afforded in great numbers, Benno. Sleidan. Theod. Ni^m.
Raphael Volaterran. Onuphri^s. Vergerius. Guicciardine. Sleidane. Agrippa. Ex
Balaeo.
1. Sorcerers, such were John 12. Benedict 8. Benedict 9. Gregory 6. Siluester
2. Gregory 7. Paulus 3. with others. 2. Murderers, as Clemens 5. Vrbane 6.
John 23. Sixtus 4. Alexander 6. Paulus 3. 3. Adulterers, as Innocentius 8.
Alexander 6. Leo 10. Julius 2. Julius 3. Some incestuous, John 23. accused in
the Council of Constance that he had known his brothers wife: Alexander 6.
with his own daughter Lucretia: Paulus 3. with his own sister committed
uncleanness. The virtuous life of Popes. Ex Balaeo. Dis^was. to perswas. 1.
Nay these unholy fathers have not bin free from the touch of the unnatural
sin of Sodomie, as Julius 2. Julius 3. Sixtus 4. Alexand. 6. Many of them
have been Atheists, as is declared before.

3 As true it is that all virtuous men have approved Popery. Of the like truth
is the next gloss, Untruth. 39.
that they have 20. general Councels of their side, Bellarm. lib. 1. de
council. c. 5.
whereas Bellarmine himself numbreth but 18. general, orthodoxall and allowed
Councels, and five of them Lateran. 1. Lateranens. 2. Lugdunens. 1. Lugdunens.
2. Viennens. are not extant: and how then can it be known what they decreed?

4 He tells us also of many thousands of national and provincial Synodes,
Untruth. 40.
Tom. 1.2.3. concilior.
whereas he is not able to produce one thousand, nor yet much above one hundred
of such Synodes (the general excepted.) And of all these Synodes general or
particular, Oecumenicall or provincial, where he can show one for popery, we
will bring forth three against it, and of all their Canons and Decrees we will
undertake to allege three to one, that shall testify with us against them.

5 He may be ashamed to say that all Universities have decreed with them,
Untruth. 41.
Fox p. 448. col. 1. Page 450. col. 2. Universities approving the Protestants
faith. Fox p. 1049. col. 2.
whereas both the University of Oxford gave public testimony of John
Wickliffe his sound doctrine and honest life: and publicly in the University
of Prage his positions were defended by John Husse. And King Henry had the
judgment of ten Universities, that his marriage with his brothers wife was
unlawful, which notwithstanding was dispensed with by Pope Iulie 2. and
ratified by Clement 7. And at this present (God be thanked) the Protestants
have as many Universities if not more on their side in Germany, Denmark,
Heluetia, the Low countries, England, Scotland, and other nations, then the
Romanists have for them.

6 The Imperial laws, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, holy and learned
Fathers, Historians, Synods, Untruth. 42.
Councels, Laws, Martyrs, Confessors, Page 22. lin. 15.16. etc.
all which this shameless popeling boasts of, are against them, as has been
sufficiently proved in more then 300. questions in controversy between the
Protestants and Papists. Synops. Papismi. Page 22. lin. 15.


7 Yea he blusheth not to say, that their religion is ratified by Sybils and
Rabbines before Christ, whereas in very deed they are both against them.
Untruth. 43. Lib. 8. ex version. Castalion.


First for Sybils Oracles, they do evidently describe the Pope of Rome, calling
him (...), one that should have a manifold, Sybilles oracles against the Pope.
that is, a triple crown, and his name should come near to Ponti, so is he
called Pontifex, that all the world should visit his foot: that he should
gather together huge heaps of gold and silver, be skillful in Magic art. And
afterward in the same book Sybill speaks of the utter ruin and desolation
of Rome.

Untruth. 44.
Concerning the Rabbines, neither do they witness for the Romans, Rabbines
against the Romanists. Numb. 24.24.
but did rather by the scriptures gather that they should be enemies to the
Church, for so they understand that prophecy of Balaam, that Cittim shall
afflict Heber, of the power of Italy and Rome: so Onkelos, Iarchi, Ezra,
Sadaiah, Isaac, Bochai, as they are cited by that learned man in his Concent,
whose name (as I have heard) this opponent bears, Concent of scripture ann.
^und. 2550.
but neither his wit nor learning. Is not this now a brave lad, that would make
us believe, that these speak for him, that are utterly against him? But
whereas he challenges beside, that Mahometanes, Jews, Paganes, Infidels,
Heretics, Schismatikes, Devils, damned souls, souls in Purgatory, do
witness with them: We willingly yield them all these; they are fit Jury men
to bring in such a verdite: only I take exception against two of this
empanelled enquest: the souls in Purgatory, which is no where, and therefore
it is a vain proof; and the damned souls, who if they might utter their
complaint from hell, Page 22. lin. 20. and dein^.
they would cry out against their popish instructors, which by their idolatry,
doctrine of freewill, merits, pilgrimages, invocation of Saints, blind
traditions, and by many other gross errors, and blind ignorance condemned them
to hell.

Page 22. lin. 3.
8 He says further: That the Queen by her new taken prerogative proceeds in
spiritual causes without Parliament. Here are two untruths couched together.

1 Her Majesty did while she lived exercise no authority in those causes
which the statutes of this realm have not yielded unto her: Untruth* 45.
and therefore without Parliament she proceeded not; that authority in
spiritual matters being restored to the Crown by act of Parliament.

2 False also it is, Untruth 46.
that this prerogative is new taken up: that the Prince should be the supreme
governor over all persons, and in all causes as well ecclesiastical as
temporal: See the admonition after the Queens injunctions, in what sense
supremacy is yielded to the Prince in her Dominions.
for her Majesty did not challenge any authority and power of ministry of
divine offices in the Church (as the Papists do falsely slander the state) but
only she was acknowledged during her princely life and reign to be supreme
governor of the Church in her realm, to prescribe laws for the same by the
word of God, and to see them executed, and no otherwise. This prerogative is
ancient, never denied to Christian Princes. David, Solomon, Iehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josias, reformed religion, deposed idolatrous priests, made
ecclesiastical orders and laws. Eleutherius calls King Lucius Gods vicar in
his kingdom, and says, Fox p. 107. col. 2.
it is his duty to call his people to the faith and law of Christ. Pope Leo
thus decreed, Res humanae, etc. Humane matters can not otherwise be safe, nisi
quae ad diuinam confessione^ pertinent, Cause* 23. q. 5. c. 21.
and regia and sacerdotalis defendat dignitas, unless those things which
belong to the divine profession, both the kingly and priestlie authority
defend. Inter leges Edward. 3. c. 1. Fox p. 166.
And among other offices of the Kings of England, this is one, Vt regat
ecclesiam, That he govern the Church. Yea the popish Clergy were the first
that recognized King Henry the 8. to be the supreme head of the Church of
England. Fox p. 1056.


9 Where he says, Page 22. lin. 9. Untruth. 47. Tertullian. cont. Praxeam.
Alphons. lib. 1. c. 4. Cusan. de concord. l. 1. c. 14. Laurent. Vall. de
donation. Constantin.
The definition of the Pope in such cases is impossible to be false, by all
moral judgment: You should have said moriall, or a fools judgment: for it
is notoriously known, that diverse Popes have been heretics: Marcellinus was
a Montanist: Liberius an Arrian: Honorius was condemned for an Heretic:
Anastasius and Celestinus were Nestorians. Yea it is also manifest, that the
Bishops of Rome have erred in their definitions and decrees. Nicolaus 1.
allows baptism made only in the name of Christ, Decret. 1. de baptis.
Platina says, Post Stephanum etc. After Stephen this custom was observed, In
Stephano.
Vt acta prioru^ pontificum sequentes aut infringerent, aut omnino tollerent,
That the Popes which succeeded did infringe the acts of their predecessors, or
clean take them away: The former then or the latter must needs err in their
decrees. Erasmus says, Ioannes 22. and Nicolaus totis decretis intra se
pugnant, idque in his, quae videntur ad fidei negotium pertinere, Annotation.
in 1. Cor. c. 7.
John 22. and Nicolas in all their decrees do fight one with another, and in
such things as belong unto faith. But if you weigh not the credit of this
testimony, The Pope may err. Aeneas Syluius de council. Bas. lib. 1.
hear one of your Popes confession, Quid si criminosus papa contraria fidei
praedicet, haereticisque dogmatib. imbuat subditos, What if a bad Pope do
preach contrary to the faith, and corrupt his subjects with heretical
opinions. It is possible then for a Pope not only to err himself, but to
preach, publish, and enjoin it to others.

What an heap of lies has this fabulous Friar told us, and all within the
compass of one page: I may say to him as Diogenes to Plato, who requesting of
him three roots out of his garden, (...).
sent him a bushel: even so (says he) when you are asked, you answer many
things. But this unskillful gardener, unasked, has cast us out of his garden,
stinking weeds by lumps, and served us with a bushel of lies. Cyprianes saying
may very well be applied to such ouer-reaching Romanists: Romani cum sua
mendaciorum merce nauigant, Lib. 1. epist. 2.
quasi veritas post eos nauigare non posset: The Romanists hoise up sail to
carry their merchandise of lies, as though the truth could not sail after
them, so this nimble Cursitor trips away with his false footing, as though no
man could trace his wide footsteps and overtake him.

The fourth Persuasion.
Untruth* 48.
1 I Defend a religion which has confuted all adversaries, Atheists, Page 22.
lin. 33.
Epicures, Jews, Paganes, Mahumetanes, Magicians, Philosophers:

2 Which has conquered above 400. sects of internal and domestical
heretics, subdued all nations. Ibid. l. 35.
Untruth. 49.


3 Not a religion builded upon vain conjecture etc. wherein so many heads, so
many religions, deniers of scriptures, Page 23. l. 4.7.
deceitful false translators, Untruth. 50.
corrupters and forgers of holy evidence, deuisers of doctrines for pleasure
sake, etc.

4 But a religion founded upon the most certain and infallible word of God,
etc. P. 23. l. 15.16.
Untruth. 51.


The Disswasion.
1 HOw well popish religion confuteth Atheists, Epicures, Jews, Pagans,
Mahometanes, 1. Disswas. to Perswas. 1.
I have showed before: that popery boroweth from all these, that diverse of
their Popes have been Atheists, Szeged. in specul.
Gregor. 7. Siluester. 2. Paulus. 3. Benedict. 9. Ioann. 13. Leo. 10.
Alexander. 6. with other: Jews and Turks are tolerated under the Popes nose,
only the Protestants are persecuted unto death. And for Magicians, Platina
shows, Platina.
that more then twenty of the Popes have been given to that devilish study.
How Papists are confuters of Philosophers, I leave it to their own report, of
one Maldonat an Ignatian sectarie, that in a great auditorie in one lecture
labored to prove by natural reasons that there is a God; in an other, that
there is none: Jesuit. catechis. lib. 2. c. 7.
and that the Jesuits do mainetaine at this day by the pen of Rene de la
Fon, that the Godhead must be proved by natural reason.

2 Untrue also it is that Popery has conquered so many heresies, retayning
still a great number of them, Sect. 3. solut. 2.
as is before sufficiently declared: neither have they cause to brag of their
universality, in subduing all nations: for popery was never so general, as
pagane Idolatry: neither had the Pope ever command of all nations, the Greek
Church having ever been divided from him: and I trust every day his
jurisdiction will be less, and his account of nations come short; as thanks be
to God, his nails are well pared, and his arms shortened in many famous cities
and kingdoms in Christendom.

3 Of the Papists it may be more truly said, that they have as many heads, so
many religions: of the diverse sects and schisms in popery, Sect. 3. solut. to
probation. 3.
and differences among their writers, which rise to the computation of many
hundreds, relation has been made before.

They are the deniers of scripture, not Protestants, that have not blushed to
say, Iuell. ex Felin. Panormitan. sum. Angel. defens. apolog. pa. 385.
Siluest. Prierias cont. Luther. Pigghius in loc. commun. de eccles. Cusan. ad
Bohem. epist. 2. Piggh. Hierar. lib. 1. c. 2. Papists deniers of scripture.
that the Pope may change the form of words in baptism: that the Pope may
dispense against the new testament: that the Pope may dispense against all the
precepts of the old and new testament: that the scripture takes authority
from the Church of Rome: that no man may lawfully believe any thing by the
authority of scripture against the determination of the Church. Another says,
the authority of the scriptures is founded in the allowance of the Church.
Another, Apostoli quaedam scripserunt, non vt praessent, etc. the Apostles writ
certain things, not that they should rule faith and religion, sed subessent,
but should be under. Let any man now judge if these men be not deniers of
scripture, which do derogate from the authority thereof, that take upon the^
to chop and change it, to annihilate the precepts thereof, and dispense against
it.

So they, not Protestants, are the false translators of scripture, who allow
the vulgar Latin only to be authentical, which in many hundred places
alters, and corrupts the Hebrew text: As Genes. 2.8. God planted a garden
from the beginning, Latin text corrupt.
for, toward the East. Genes. 15. she shall break thy head, for, he. Genesis
4.13. they read, my sin is greater, then I can deserve pardon, for, then I
can bear. Genesis 6.5. their cogitation intent to evil, for, only evil
continually. Genesis 12.15. and the princes told Pharao, for, the princes of
Pharao saw her. Genesis 26.9. why did thou lie, for, why said thou. v. 19.
they dug, in torrente, in the brook, for, in the vallie. Genesis 35.16. he
came in the spring time to the ground which brings to Ephratha, for, there
was a little space of ground to come to Ephrah. Genes. 36.24* found out hoate
waters in the wilderness, for, Mules. Genesis 40.13. shall remember thy service,
for, shall lift up thy head. Psalm. 68.4. exalt him that ascends, super
occasum, upon the west, or sunne-set, for, upon the heavens. v. 6. delivers
prisoners in strength, for, in fetters. v. 13. though ye sleep between the
lots, for, lien among the pots. v. 17. ten thousand, for, twenty thousand,
and a thousand such places might be alleged, wherein they have corrupted the
scriptures.

The Papists also are the men, that forge scripture and other evidences,
Papists forgers of evidences.
for they thrust upon the Church diverse Apocryphal books, of Tobie, Judith,
Macchabees, with the rest, which the ancient Church of the Jews, to whom all
the books of the old Testament, Romans 3.2.
and oracles of God were committed, never received, nor allowed: So have they
forged and devised diverse other writings, as the Decretall epistles of the
ancient Bishops of Rome, which were Martyrs, as of Zepherinus, Calixtus,
Pontianus, Vrbanus, Fabianus, with the rest, which are all counterfeit stuff:
as are also the leiturgie of S. James, the writings that pass under the name
of S. Martialis, Abdias, Hippolytus, Tetrastyl. 1. pill. part. 3.
Dionysius, and many such, as is elsewhere declared more at large.

4 Neither is it true that popish religion is founded upon the infallible word
of God contained in the scriptures, but most of it upon blind, fallible, and
uncertain traditions: Tetrastyl. pill. 2. par. 3.
and many opinions the Church of Rome holds directly opposite and contrary
to scripture, as elsewhere has been showed.

Thus this (frivolous adversary) passes on along, heaping up sclaunders and
untruths, not remembering what the wise man says, Prou. 12.22.
Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly, are his
delight. But we need not marvel at it; for this is familiar with the^, with
great boldness to face out their own forgeries: and they may well say in
Hieromes phrase, domi nobis ista nascuntur, Hieron. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
we have plenty of such stuff at home. But as the Lacedemonian magistrates
said to Cephisophon the Orator, when they expelled him, that it was a good
Orators part, (...).
to make his speech answereable to his matter: so should this sophister have
done, and not to profess truth in his speech, where none is in his matter.

The fifth Persuasion.
Untruth. 52.
1 I Defend a religion, P. 23. li. 21.
where so much virtue is practiced, such obedience, chastity, poverty, etc.

Untruth. 53.
2 Which brought the professors thereof to heaven, as religious Heremites, P.
24. l. 16.
Monks, Friars, Priests, Bishops, Popes, etc.

3 Not that religion, which made those which before were good, Untruth. 54.
P. 24. l. 19.20. etc.
chaste, obedient and contemners of the world, to be wicked and given to
impiety.

The Disswasion.
Disloyalty of diverse Papists to their prince.
1 WHat obedience popery teaches to their princes, the late practices both in
England and France do proclayme to all the world: as the treacherous
conspiracy of Parry, incited by Cardinal Coomes letters: of Somerfield and
Arden solicited by Hall a popish priest: of Babington with other stirred up by
Ballard: Lopez by Parsons: Savage and York by Gifford: Squire by Walpoole a
Iebusite. Jesuits Catechism, lib. 3. c. 6.8.
In France James Clement a Iacobine murdered Henry the third. Barriere and
Chastell attempted the like against the now King of France, at the instigation
of the Jesuits. The Prince of Orange was by the like treachery murdered: and
the death of the Chancellor of Scotland intended. Ibid. c. 22.
This may suffice to show their obedience.

For their chastity, I appeal to the stories written of their unholy fathers
the Popes. What place in the Christian world can afford more filthy spectacles
of adulterers, incestuous persons, Sodomites, then that Sea and city of Rome,
I appeal to the inquisition made in King Henry the eights reign, at the
suppression of the Abbeys, Praefat. Balaei de act. Roman. pontific.
when in some places the Priests and Monks were descried to have kept some two,
some three, some six, some more, one among the rest twenty concubines: such
also is their chastity.

Much agreeable also is their poverty: for Abbeys and Monasteries grew to be
so poor, that they had gathered a third part of the land and more into their
hands; in so much that the Kings of this land were forced to make provision by
statutes of Mortmaine, Ann. 7. and 34. Edward. 1. ann. 18. Edw. 3. an. 15.
Ricard. 2. c. 5.
that no more lands should be given to religious houses without the Kings
license.

The annuitie which the five orders of Friars gathered, amounted to an hundred
thousand pounds yearly: for they had five pence a quarter of every house,
Supplicat. of beggars, Fox p. 1015.
twenty pence by the year, which will arise (counting but ten households in
every parish, and parishes ten thousand) to little less sum then is named.

The new vpstart Ignatian fathers have also entered the vow of poverty with the
rest: Of the Iebusites vow of poverty.
And what poor souls they are, contemning all worldly riches and pleasures,
their own fellows the secular priests can very well certify us. They tell us
that Friar Hawood did ride up and down in his Coach, and that his pomp and
train was such, that where he came, it seemed to be a little Court by his
presence. Reply fol. 14.
Friar Garnets pomp and expenses could not be gessed at less then five hundred
by the year, his apparel very costly, with his two geldings of thirty pound
a piece. Reply fol. 15.
Friar Oldcorne was able to keep at once eight good geldings, his apparel
worth thirty or forty pound. Friar Gerard got by one two hundred pound, by
another seven hundred pound, of another 160. pound, of another 500. pound,
beside the disposition of 100. pound by the year. Another Jesuit is reported
to have worn a girdle, Fol. 24. p. 2.
hangers and rapier worth ten pounds, Dialog. p. 90.
and a ierken that cost no less: his apparel with his horse and furniture was
valued at one hundred pound. He was thought to dispend four hundred by the
year, and yet had no patrimony. And such is their vow of poverty and
contempt of the world, which this punie Ignatian on his fellows behalf and
his own boasts of.

2 As I deny not but that diverse ancient Monks, Heremites, Bishops, and some
Popes of Rome might be and are saved: yet that by the popish faith, as it is
now professed, they were saved, Diverse may be saved in the popish Church, but
not by the popish faith.
I much doubt; nay I assuredly believe they were not it will be an hard matter
for him to prove, that all these, of whom there is hope that they are in
heaven, were idolaters, worshippers of images, artolaters, adorers of bread,
inuocaters and worshippers of angels, freewill men, reposing themselves upon
their merits, maintayners of traditions against the scriptures, followers of
Jewish rites and ceremonies, such as the modern Papists are. Nay we are sure
they were none such: for the ancient Bishops of Rome, the Monks and Heremites
of former time, were of a diverse faith and judgment in religion, then now the
Popery and Monkerie of the Romish Church is: for otherwise the Apostle tells
us directly, 1. Cor. 6.9.
that no idolaters shall inherit the kingdom of God. And if it be so likely a
matter that your Popes are saved, why did one of your great Rabbines so
peremptorily give his sentence of Sixtus 5. none of your worst Popes,
Bellarmine quodlibet p. 57.
that he was gone to hell. I make no question but welnie an hundred Popes might
be named in all probability more like then he to go to that Limbus, whereof
some were necromancers, some murderers, some atheists, some adulterers, some
thieves and robbers, some blasphemers, all which sins by the Apostles
sentence, exclude from the kingdom of heaven. Galath. 5.20.21.


3 It is a sclaunder, that the Gospel has made those which were before,
chaste, obedient, etc. licentious, wicked: the contrary is manifest, that they
which were in popery irreligious, lewd, profane, being converted to the
Gospel, became virtuous, holy devout persons, witness George Tankerfield,
Master Green, Julius Palmer, Fox Monum. Page 1690. P. 1851.1934. P. 2012.2039.
Mistress Jews, Roger Holland, who of blind and licentious Papists were
wrought by the Gospel to be godly Christians, zealous Protestants, and
constant Martyrs: the contrary has appeared in Protestants reuolting from the
Gospel to popery, Reuolters from the Gospel to popery wax worse then
before.
who after their apostasy waxed worse and worse. This is exemplified in
Gardener, Bonner, Harding, with others: the first two of half Protestants,
having taken the oath in King Henry's reign against the Pope, afterward did
violate their oath, and a good conscience; and beside their licentious life,
fell to be deadly enemies to the truth: The other of an earnest and modest
Protestant, was turned to be an intemperate and railing Papist, as his hasty
writings do declare.

We see then, what little conscience this man has thus to charge the glorious
profession of the Gospel: he shall not be able to show one example of any,
that being truly converted to Protestancie from Popery, thereby was made
worse: for the contrary experiment many instances may be exemplified, and that
common by word does show as much, An Englishman Italianate, is a devil
incarnate: which phrase is not only used of Protestants, but it is current
among the Romanists: as the secular priests do give out of one, Epist. relat.
page 10.
that was a favorite to the Ignatian friars, that he was an Italianated
companion, and a devil incarnate.

Now then against this accuser of the brethren, that saying of the Prophet may
be well applied, he has conceived mischief, and brings forth a lie, Psalm.
7.14. We see the fruits of his long travail, such as the conception is, such
is the birth, mischief in his heart, and a lie in his lips. Cypriane tells
us, from whence this comes, Scias hoc opus esse diaboli, vt seruos dei
mendacio laceret, Lib. 4. epist. 2.
vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumorib. sordidentur, this
is the devils work, to belie the servants of God, that they which in their
conscience are unspotted, by others reports should be taynted. Democritus said
well, (...).
that envy was as the truths ulcer; so the envy of our adversaries would make
the truth vlcerous by their malicious reports. But our true defense shall be as
a salve to this sore, and where they would fester with biting corrasies, we
doubt not to cure with wholesome cordials, and against their vain sclaunders
to use the defensatiue of true dealing, that all this roauing shooters darts
shall be, I trust, but as bulrushes, and his endeavor as of one that works
against the stream, who while he labors to disgrace the Gospel, shall
gain shame to himself: to whom that saying of Hierome may be returned,
Praefat. in Esram.
Frustra niti, neque aliud fatigando, nisi odium quaerere, extremae dementiae
est, to strive in vain, and to purchase hatred with wearines is extreme
madness.

The sixth Persuasion.
P. 23. l. 24.
I Defend a religion approved by infallible signs, by thousands of
supernatural wonders, which by no means could be counterfeit, or falsely
reported, so many naturally blind, restored to sight, P. 24. l. 4.
deaf to hearing, dead to life, etc. which no natural cause or art of devils
themselves could bring to pass.

Untruth. 55.
I defend that religion, which made them so holy, that it reclaymed, Eusebius.
Fox. Bed. Gregor. Ruffin. Sozomen. etc.
that all creatures have done homage to them, the sea and waters against nature
supported them, the ravening fowls nourished them etc. the devils themselves
with trembling obeyed them.

The Disswasion.
1 THese stories being admitted, which are reported by the forenamed authors of
the miracles wrought by the Apostles, holy Martyrs, and Confessors of the
Primitive Church (though we have great cause to suspect, that some of these
stories have been corrupted by their evil handling, thorough whose fingers
since they have passed, and that in many things the authors themselves might be
too credulous) yet what does this advantage the adversaries cause? The miracles
of Martyrs and Saints not done in the popish church.
Let him first prove that the Apostles, and the holy Martyrs and Confessors
were Papists, before he seek to win grace by their miracles. He might as
well have mustred on his side all the signs and miracles wrought by Christ and
his Apostles, as these which were done by holy men continuing in the
Apostolic faith and doctrine.

2 But they can tell us of miracles (to take away this first answer) which
were effected by such men as were known to be great patrones of diverse popish
superstitions, such were Odo, Dunstane, Editha, Bernake, Bartlemew a Monk of
Durrham, Augustine the Monk, Brendane, with such others: And that every one
may judge of the truth herein, I will produce the miracles ascribed to these
Pope-saints, and martial them in their order.

Of Odo it is reported, that he caused a sword to come flying into King
Ethelstanes sheath, when he had lost his own, as he should fight with
Analanus: that he kept the Church of Canterbury, that no rain dropped upon it,
Ex Malmesb.
while the roof was in making: that when he brake the host over the chalice,
being at Mass, it dropped blood.

Such like stuff is fathered upon Dunstane: Fabulous miracles of Dunstane.
how being tempted with the cogitation of women, he caught the devil with a
pair of tongs by the nose, and held him fast: how a Lute hanging upon the wall
did sing and play alone, without any touch of finger: how by making the sign
of the cross, he set a great beam of an house, being displaced, into his
right room again: How the Virgin Mary with her fellows appeared visiblie to
him singing: and the Angels often talked familiarlie with him.

Of Editha this tale goes, Editha her fained miracles.
that her body being taken up by Dunstane, all was found corrupted, but only
her thombe, wherewith she used to cross, and her belly for her chastity, as
she her self is said to have expounded the mystery, appearing to Dunstane: Ex
Chronic. Saxonic. Osber. in vit. Dunstan.
yet this chaste Nun is detected in the truer histories to have been King Edgars
concubine, by whom she had a base son: whosoever worshipped the Tomb of this
Editha, if they were blind, deaf, halt, mad, were healed, Malmesbur.
says the Legend writer.

Bernacus went over the sea upon a broad stone, Capgraue.
turned Oak leaves into loaves, stones into fishes, water into wine, his Cow
being cut in pieces he restored to life. The same author says, that Christ
appeared to Austine, and talked familiarly with him: that Bartilmew saluted a
wooden Crucifixe, Capgraue.
and it bowed down and resaluted him again: that Brendan caused a fountain
to rise out of a dry ground, and was carried into Paradise. A thousand such
tales, their Breuiaries, Itineraries, Legends contain.

3. And that we think it not strange, that Popery so abounds with
miracles, the Pagan Idolaters shall vie with them at this stake, and the best
cards take all.

Miracles coined among the Heathen. Origin. lib. 2. cont. Celsum.
For raising of the dead, they will tell us, that Zamolxis in Scythia,
Pythagoras in Italy, Ramsimitus in Egypt, Protesilaus in Thessalia, Hercules
in Tenarus: all went down to hell, that is, were dead and raised up again.
But Celsus that Heathen scoffer does deride these fables.

Trisymach. lib. 3. de vrbib. condit. Theodor. in transformat.
For strange transmutations, and metamorphoses: there shall we find, that
Amphiaraus spear, was changed into a Laurel tree, being pricked down in the
ground: of Smyrna changed into Myrrha (by changing certes of the letters, and
not otherwise:) of Diomedes companions turned into birds, Ulysses fellows into
beasts: of the Arcadians into wolves, Augustine. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 18. c.
16.17.
Lucianus and Apuleius into Asses.

For miraculous passage upon the seas: they will report unto us, how Arion the
Musician, and Enalus with the Virgin, Plutarch. in conuiuio.
which he loved, leaping into the sea, were borne up by the Delphines, and
carried safe to land.

What can now the Roman Iconolaters say more for themselves in this kind, then
the Pagan Idolaters? If Religion should be tried by miracles, the one as well
as the other, can tell us tales enough, if we will believe them. But what is
to be thought of these lying and fained miracles, Augustine will tell us:
Remoueantur ista vel mendacia fallacium hominum, vel portenta mendacium
spirituum: Remove out of the way these lies of deceitful men, De vnitat.
ecclesiae. cap. 26.
or strange deceits of lying spirits.

4. I will further show the vanity of the forged and devised miracles by these
reasons following.

First, it is evident by the testimony of the ancient Fathers, that miracles
were not usual in their time. Ambrose says: In 1. Cor. c. 12.
Quare nunc non ita fit, vt habeant homines gratiam Dei, qua operentur
miracula? Why have not men now adays grace given them to work miracles?
Augustine says: Modo iam caeci non aperit oculos miraculo Domini, The power of
miracles not usual in the Church now.
etc. Now the blind receives not his bodily sight by the miracle of our Lord,
but the blind heart receives sight by the oracle, or word of the Lord: now the
dead body rises not, but the soul rises, that was dead in the living body:
now the deaf ears are not opened, etc. Bernard says: Licet nostra non
habeamus miracula, etc. Sermon. de Benedict.
Although we have no miracles of our own, yet the miracles of our patron are
a consolation to us. Seeing then these Fathers thought that they had no power
to work miracles, what impudency is it against their own judgment to
ascribe miracles unto them? As an Epistle goes under Augustines name, wherein
he is fained to report, that as he was about to write a letter to Hierome, his
soul being lately departed, appeared unto him, and talked with him. Epist.
205. Miracles falsely fathered upon the Fathers. Epist. 106.
Likewise how Hierome after his death, caused the souls of diverse to return
to their bodies, and so they revived again: how he delivered one condemned to
hell: and how sixteen blind persons were restored to sight, in the translation
of his body.

Of Bernard it is avouched, that after his death he healed eleven blind, ten
maimed, Lib. 4. de notis eccles. c. 14.
and eighteen lame persons: and all these miracles Bellarmine justifies to
have been so truly done. How are they not ashamed to father such fables upon
the Fathers, contrary to their own judgment.

Secondly, this may be an evident argument, that these Legends smell, because
they make miracles so common, Multitude of miracles in the Popish Church makes
them suspected. Vit. Hilarion.
to flow from them in heaps: as that Hierome healed sixteen blind at once:
Bernard in one day of all infirmities 39. persons: Hilarion is affirmed to have
cured 200. possessed with devils at Cyprus, beside a great many of other
diseases. Christ and his Apostles were but bunglers in working miracles to
these, if they may have their saying. Origin to Celsus, who counted it as a
fable that Christ raised some from the dead, makes this answer: Si fabulosa
haec essent, multos resurrexisse finxisset: Lib. 2. cont. Cells.
If these things were fabulous, they would have fained more to have risen,
whereas now three only are said to have been raised. We may therefore worthily
doubt of these strange reports of miracles, wherein they have no measure,
bringing forth such a beadrole of them.

Thirdly, we have the adversaries own confession, who themselves suspect the
credit of these tales: therefore Alexander the 3. forbids a certain Popish
saint to be worshipped, Decr. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 45. c. 1.
although miracles were done by him, without the authority of the Church of
Rome. Innocentius 3. also decrees, Ibid. 2.
that Prelates should not suffer those, which come to their Churches, to be
deceived, varijs figmentis, aut falsis documentis, with diverse figments and
cousening tricks. The Abbot of Clumack testifies, that he noted four and
twenty lies in the song of Benedict, Lib. 5. epist. 29.
as he sung it in the Church. In 2. Timoth. page 138. a.
Espencaeus a learned Papist holds that to be but a fable, reported by
Christianus Massaeus, lib. 8. Chronic. of Trophimus, that having buried his
wife in a rock dying in travel, A notorious fable.
with the child sucking at her breasts, two year after sailing that way,
found her alive and the child sucking. Many fables are current among the
Ignatian Fathers, The fabulous visions of Jgnatius founder of the Jesuits.
Mass. lib. 1. c. 8.
of the strange visions, which their founder Ignatius Layola had: As how he
was rapt into heaven, where he saw the Trinity in three persons and one
essence: how the tools and pattern were showed unto him, whereby God made the
world: how at the elevation of the host, he saw Jesus Christ in it in body
and flesh, just as he was upon the earth, etc.

The legend of Xauiers wonders an Ignatian impostor.
The like stuff they have vented of Xauiere one of the Ignatian sect, who
wrought great wonders among the Indians: how he raised six dead men to life:
how sending a little child with a cross to one possessed with devils, they
went out; fretting at this most of all, quod per pueru^ pellebantur, because
they were cast out by a child, as says the fabulous author: How a devil being
cast forth, scratched him by the back and belly, Tursellin. lib. 1. cap. 7.
as he prayed to the Virgin Mary, that he was constrained to keep his bed,
till the skin was healed: Lib. 2. cap. 7.
How when he was dead, a blind man by rubbing his hand upon his eyes received
his sight: how with his whip, wherewith he used to beat himself, Lib. 5. cap.
4.
and a piece of his girdle, an infinite number of diseases were cured. All
these tales, Lib. 4. d^ not. eccles. c. 14.
though magnified by Bellarmine, who is ready to take any occasion, to grace
his own order; yet by other Papists not so light of credit, are rejected, as
mere fables and old wives tales, Jesuit. catechis. lib. 1. cap. 7.
as they well deserve.

Fourthly, many of these Monkish miracles and Frierlie fables are ridiculous,
and not beseeming the gravity of right holy men: Popish miracles ridiculous.
such is that of Dunstanes holding the devil by the nose with a pair of
tongs: and of the devil scratching Xauiere by the back: Are not these very
worthy matters (think you) to be registered? Such tools Hierome calls,
Prandiorum, coenarumque fabulas, table talk, and mimum Philistionis, vel
Marilli stropham; he compares them to Philistions jests (who made verses to
move laughter, Apolog. 2* aduers. Ruffin.
and died of laughing) or Marillus toys.

Fifthly, The end of popish miracles rendeth to superstition.
the end of these Popish miracles is to be considered, which is not to persuade
faith in Jesus Christ, or to stir up to godliness of life, which was intended
by our Savior Christ and his Apostles in their miracles: But this was the
drift of them, to confirm their own superstitious devises, in the adoration
of Images, invocation of Saints, visiting the tombs of the dead, worshipping
their relics, and such like. This difference Origin well observed between
the miracles of the Christians and the Pagans: Magorum nemo, per ea quae facit,
Lib. 2. cont. Celsum.
sicut Jesus ex rebus quas factitarit, mirandis, ad moru^ imitationem inuitat:
None of the Magicians by their miraculous works (as Christ did by his) do
move men to amendment of their manners.

May we not now justly wonder, that any are so simple to give credit to such
gross fables: but that it is a just judgment of God upon those, that will not
receive the truth, to believe lies. These false teachers, as Ambrose says, Per
ea quae placida sunt, suadent foeda: 2. Thessal. 2. In 2. Tim. c. 2.
By pleasing tales persuade beastly stuff: And their blind scholars, as
Hierome says, sub martyris nomine bibunt de aureo calice Babylonis, under the
color of martyrs (and of their miracles) do drink of the whore of Babylons
golden cup: but like as Satyrus the Sauian his friends are said to have stopped
his ear with wax, that he should not hear the railing speech of his
adversaries; so men had more need to stop their ears against these flattering
and pleasing tales, as against the Syrene songs. But I have stayed too long in
raking in this channel, and stirring in this dunghill of popish legends.

The seventh Persuasion.
Page 25. li. 1.2.
1 I Defend not a religion tossed and tennised up and down with so many bounds
and rebounds, Untruth. 56. lin. 4.5.
both in head and members, containing so many falsities by their own
proceedings.

Untruth. 57.
2 So many contradictions in essential things, as there be essential
questions.

Lin. 8.
3 Neither do what it could, having the temporal sword, has hitherto
condemned us. Untruth. 58.


Lin. 11.12.
4 But a religion, which in the space almost of 1600. years never changed one
point of doctrine, Untruths many, see the answer.
never admitted error in faith, or the least contradiction therein, either in
decree of Pope, or confirmed Council.

The Disswasion.
1 ANd I defend that religion, which has not been tossed up and down,
chopped, or changed in head or members, as this alogisticall discourser
sclandereth the Gospel, but has continued one and the same for these 60.
years, since the first abolishing of the Mass in England, all which time the
profession of the Protestants in England in the substantial points of faith,
has not altered hitherto, neither I trust, shall hereafter.

The Communion book has been but once altered among us all this while,
whereas the form of the Mass in the Roman profession has been often
chopped and changed, patched and pieced, by adding to it, and taking from it,
which was for the space of 700. years, in fining, and refining, Polidor.
Virgil. lib. 5. Platin. in Sixto 1. Polidor Virgil. lib. 5. de in ve^torib.
rer. c. 10.
before it came to that deformed perfection which now it has. Read Platina
and Polidore Virgil, there shall you find, how and by whom, and in what
process of time every part of the Mass was devised.

2 Which conteyneth neither falsities, nor contradictions in any essential
points, as popery does: neither shall this trifler be able to show any such
falsitie, or co^trarietie, who herein, and every where almost, would have us
take his own word, as though he were the Pope himself: for proof he brings
none. We know what the Law says, Solam testationem prolatam etc. nec causam
probatam, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20. l. 3. Carinus.
nulliu^ esse momenti, That a witness produced, and no cause or matter proved,
is of no force.

3 A religion, that has publicly by the word of God, and godly laws with
full consent of Parliament abrogated and condemned all gross papisticall
errors, as of justification by works, art. 11. of works of supererogation,
Book of Articles agreed upon in the Convocation, ann. 1562. confirmed by act
of Parliament. Ann. Eliz. 13. c. 12.
art. 14. of freewill, art. 10. of purgatory, art. 22. of speaking in the
congregation in an unknown tongue, art. 24. of the five popish sacraments, art.
25. of the bodily presence of Christ in the sacrament, art. 28. of receiving
in one kind, art. 30. of the blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass, art. 31. of
the unlawfulness of Priests marriage, art. 32. of worshipping of images,
invocation of Saints, art. 22. that the Pope has no jurisdiction in England,
art. 37. What will not this impudent man now dare to say, who boldly affirms,
that Popery is not by public authority condemned in England. Now then
because their Law says, Qui crimen, quod obiecit non probauerit similem
poenam sustineat, Sixtus 3. can. 4.
He that proves not the crime objected, shall endure the like punishment; so
this thing objected, redoundeth upon his own head: For true it is that the
faith of Protestants is not condemned by the ancient Canons and Decrees of the
Roman Church, Synops. Papism.
but receives plentiful witness from thence, as is already showed in diverse
hundred questions.

4 A religion, which has continued these 1600. years in the true Church of
Christ, Untruth. 59.
not as Popery* which for most of their opinions must come short of this
computation by 800. years: which is full of errors, and contradictions, in the
Decrees of Popes and Councels.

For errors, the Council of Neocesarea ca. 7. decrees, that the Priest should
neither give consent to second marriage, Apparent errors admitted and allowed in
the papal Church.
nor be present at the marriage feast, but rather enjoin penance for it, and so
in effect condemns second marriage.

Toletan. 1. ca. 17. He that in steed of a wife has a concubine, Untruth. 60.
is not to be repelled from the Communion. This Council is approved by Leo 4.
as it may appear, Can. 21. and the other also, Distinc. 20. ca. 1.

In the sixth general Synod Can. 2. the Council under Cypriane that approved
the rebaptizing of such as were baptized by heretics, is confirmed: c. 72.
Marriages between Catholics and heretics irritas existimari, are judged to be
void, contrary to S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7.13. Yet this sixth Synod cum omnib.
canonib. with all the canons is received and approved by Adriane, Distinc. 16.
c. 5.

Nicen. 2. act. 5. it was concluded, that Angels have bodies of their own, and
are circumscriptible, and multoties in corpore suo visi, and have been often
seen in their own bodies: which is a manifest error: for Angels of themselves
are invisible spirits.

Nicolaus 1. de baptis. decret. 1. allows baptism only made in the name of
Christ, without express mention of the Trinity, contrary to the scriptures,
Math. 28.19.

Nicolaus 2. in a Council at Rome, where Berengarius recanted, resolved upon
this conclusion, Christi corpus sensualiter manib. sacerdotis tractari, frangi
and fidelium dentib. atteri, That the true body of Christ was handled
sensibly by the Priests hands, broken and chawed by the teeth of the
faithful, de consecr. did. 2. c. 42. which gross opinion, the modern
Papists are ashamed of. Contradictions of idolatry in Popery.


For contradictions, Council. Carthag. 3. c. 47. the Apocryphal books of Tobie,
Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Macchabees, with the rest, are made Canonical:
Contradictio^ of doctrine in the popery.
Laodicen. can. vltim. these books are rejected out of the Canon; and yet both
these Synodes are confirmed by Leo 4. Distinct. 20. c. 1. Untruth. 61.


In a Council at Rome under Stephen. 7. all the acts and decrees of Pope
Formosus are repealed: Sigebert in ann. 903. Platina.
in a Council of Rauenna under John. 9. they were again revived.

Gregor. 3. epist. ad Bonifac. determines virum vxore infirmitate correpta,
etc. that the husband, the wife being weak, and not able to do her duty, may
marry an other.

Nicholas 1. decrees the contrary, Nichol. 1. de matrim c. 6.
that the marriage of such ought not to be dissolved.

Alexander. 3. forbids marriage to be made with the sister of her that was
betrothed, and is deceased. Later. conc. par. 6. c. 8. Par. 6. c. 27.
Benedict does determine the contrary.

Pope Alexander judges matrimony contracted with per verba de praesenti, by
words of the present tence, and consummate with another, to be void. Lateran.
par. 6. c. 8.
Benedict determines the contrary, that the marriage consummate, though a
contract made before in that form with an other, Ibid. c. 28.
is not to be violated.

Nicolaus. 3. Abdicationem proprietatis rerum etc. Sext. decret. lib. 5. t. 12.
c. 3.
That Christ did by his example abandon the very property of things.

Ioannes 22. defines the contrary, Extrau. Ioann. tit. 14. c. 4.
that the opinion of them that say Christ and his Apostles had nothing, is
erronea and haeretica, is erroneous and heretical.

The Council of Constance, sess. 13. does excommunicate all those that receive
the Communion under both kinds. The Council of Basile grants to the
Bohemians the use of both kinds.

The Councels of Constance and Basile determined that a general Council has
authority above the Pope. The contrary was concluded, Lateranens. sub Leon.
10. c. 11.

Many such contradictions in matters of faith and doctrine may be found in the
Roman corporation, See before sect. 3. Untruth. 18. Crastouius in bell.
Iesuitic.
which otherwhere are set down more at large to the number of 250. and in
another work 300. more of their differences and repugnances are expressed.
(...). pillar. 4.
Therefore this (petifogger for popery) is detected of great untruth, that no
error or contradiction was ever admitted in their religion: Wherefore he being
thus notoriously convinced of a false testimony, is worthy to pass under
the censure of the Epaunens. Synod, Epaunens. synod. c. 3.
reus capitalis criminis censeatur, etc. to be held guilty of a capital
crime. And concerning this spirit of contradiction among the Romanists, we may
say with Ambrose, Diuersa and distantia prompserunt, non locorum separati,
Epist. 64.
sed mendaciorum diuortio, They have uttered diverse and contrary things, not
separated in place, but differing in lying. (...).
And as Melanthius said, that the City of Athens was saved by the disagreement
of the Orators; so I doubt not but that this division among them shall tend to
the further establishing of the truth. For as Plutarke says of the
contradictions of Poets, that they will not suffer them to have any great
strength to do hurt: (...).
so the manifold divisions in Popery, shall have no force to seduce such as
are wise.

The eight Persuasion.
Page 25.
1 I Defend not a religion etc. which separateth man from his God and creator
by so many sins and iniquities, and yet has no grace, Untruth. 62.
no sacrament for men of reason and actual offenses, Untruth. 63.
no means or preservative to prevent them etc. for that instrument of
justifying faith, which be no benefit unto them, Untruth. 64.
which by their own grounds have no faith at all.

2 But a religion, that has in every state a remedy for those that have
offended, for the state of all, till they come to such discretion and
judgment, as may be cause of sin, the sacrament of baptism, both taking
original offense away, and arming the soul against new and actual infections.

Page 26.
3 To confirm the former grace etc. the sacrament of confirmation.

4 To feed and foster all estates, the sacrament of the most holy body and
blood of Christ.

5 The sacrament of penance for the cure and comfort of all offenders.

6 The sacrament of extreme unction to avoid the relikes of sin, and give
strength in that extremity.

7 For particular helps and assistance to particular states, particular
sacraments: the sacrament of Orders and of Matrimony, etc.

The disswasion.
1. ANd we defend a religion, which does not separate man from God (as this
Libeller belieth it) but teaches faith in Christ whereby we are reconciled
unto God, and are at peace with him, Romans 5.1. Not that religion, which
separateth from God in destroying faith, Popish religion separateth from God,
the Gospel joins and reconcileth to God.
which joins us to God, in teaching justification by works, whereby faith is
euacuated: as the Apostle says, Ye are euacuated from Christ, whosoever are
justified by the law, Galath. 5.4. But that religion, which preaches faith in
Jesus Christ, which is both a remedy for sins past in the remission of them:
We are sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 6.11.
And a preservative also from further offending: for the grace of God teaches
us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. Which faith for the
remission of sins is sealed and confirmed in the most holy Communion;
Tridentin. sess. 13. c. 5.
which the Popish sort denies properly to be ordained for remission of sins:
contrary to the words of our Savior, who in the institution of this
Sacrament, says directly: this is the blood of the new Testament, that is shed
for many for remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. This faith is both preached and
practiced in this religion: which they undoubtedly have attained unto, which
have believed, and are careful to show good works, Titus 3.8. But this
justifying faith by the grounds of Popish religion cannot be had, seeing they
teach, that for a man to be sure of his salvation by faith, is a faithless
persuasion, and the faith of devils: and yet such was S. Paul's faith, Rhemist.
1. Cor. 9. sect. 9. Romans 8.38.39.
whereby he was persuaded, that nothing could separate him from the love of God
in Christ.

2. I maintain a religion, which leaves not infants dying before baptism,
The Sacrament of Baptism corrupted in Popery.
without remedy, and condemns them to hell for the want thereof without
their fault, as the Church of Rome does: but even comprehends such infants,
being the seed of the faithful, under the covenant of Gods grace, who has
promised; I will be thy God, Genes. 17.7.
and the God of thy seed: which makes not Baptism imperfect, only to serve
for sins going before Baptism; Rhemist. Heb. 10. sect. 4.
but extends the efficacy thereof, as well to sins following after, as past
before. For as Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans
4.11. so likewise is Baptism, by which through faith in the blood of Christ,
both our sins before and after Baptism are forgiven.

Bellar. lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 7.
Which does not allow women* lay men, Turks, Jews and Infidels to baptize, as
the Romanists do: whereas Christ gave this power only to Ministers and
teachers, Go teach all nations, Matthew. 28.20.
etc. baptizing them etc.

Which does not profane this Sacrament in baptizing of Bells, Fox page 865.
col. 1. edit. 4.
as they do: neither does contaminate it with the humane additions of spittle,
salt, oil: Can any man forbid water (says S. Peter) that these should not be
baptized? Act. 10.47.
then they only used water.

3. Which does not bring in new Sacraments, not instituted by Christ and his
Apostles, as are those of Confirmation, Penance, extreme Unction, Orders,
Matrimony; but only contenteth it self with two Sacraments of Christ's
ordaining, Baptism and the Lords Supper, because we find no more of Christ's
institution: which does not add more strength against the devil, to their
devised sacrament of Confirmation, Bellar. lib. 2. de confir. c. 11.
then to Baptism a Sacrament of Christ's institution: neither gives virtue to
Chrisme, How a Christian is truly confirmed against tentation.
tempered of oil and balm, with the sign of the cross, which are but
terrene and external things, against spiritual tentations, as they do: for
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2. Corinthians. 10.4. but exhorts
Christians to put on the whole armor of God, the shield of faith, the sword of
the spirit, the word of God with the rest, Ephesians. 6.13.
whereby they may be able to resist in the evil day: By this means is a
faithful man armed and confirmed against spiritual tentations.

4. That religion which mangleth not the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, Rhem. Ioh. 6. sect. 11. Rhemist. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 16. Rhem. Matthew. 26.
sect. 4. Trid. sess. 13. c. 5. Trid. sess. 22. c. 3.
robbing the faithful communicants of the cup, the one part thereof: nor yet
teaches that wicked men do eat the body of Christ: neither forces the
glorious body of Christ from heaven into the form of a piece of bread:
neither says, that this sacrament was not ordained properly for remission of
sins: neither that it is available without the faith of the receiver, by the
action and work it self done: all which positions the profession of the
Roman sect maintains: But which according to Christ's institution exhibiteth
the holy Sacrament in both kinds of bread and wine, according to the first
institution, Matthew. 26.28. and teaches only the faithful to be partakers by
faith of Christ's body and blood: as our Savior says: The right use of the
Lords Supper.
He that eats me, shall live by me, Ioh. 6.57. which affirms that Christ's
body is not in earth, but in heaven, Act. 3.21. And that the special use of
this Sacrament is to confirm our faith in Christ for the remission of sins,
Matthew. 26.28. and that (least men should be secure) it profits no man,
unless he examine himself, whether he be in the faith, 1. Cor. 11.28.

5. That religion, which does not enjoin men of necessity to make confession
of all their secret sins into the ears of the Priest, with an opinion to
merit by it: Bellarm. lib. 2. de poenit. c. 12.
nor yet imposes upon them penal works, Rhem. Mat. 11^ sect. 21.
thereby to satisfy the justice of God for the punishment due unto their
sin: But which teaches men to confess unto God: I acknowledge my sin unto
thee, No true repentance in the Papal schism.
etc. and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin, Psalm. 32.5. to challenge
Gods mercy, not our merits: According to the multitude of thy mercies put away
mine offenses, Psalm. 51.1. and to hope for satisfaction to Godward only in the
death of Christ: He was wounded for our transgression, etc. with his stripes
are we healed, Isay. 53.5.

6. Which does not imitate without ground the Apostles annoynting of the sick
with oil, which was a sign for that time of the miraculous gift of healing:
for whom they anointed, they healed, Mark. 6.13. Neither thinks to cure
spiritual maladies, with bodily bathings, as though the suppling of the body,
The true comforts of the sick.
were a supply to the soul: neither does it leave the sick remediless or
comfortless, but prescribes prayers to be used by the Elders and Ministers to
be sent: for the prayer of faith shall save the sick, Iam. 5.15. and
spiritual instruction and consolation to be ministered, if there be a messenger
with him to declare unto man his righteousness, Job. 34.23.

7. Which does not appoint orders, to consecrate men to a blasphemous service
to make the body of Christ, and to install them Priests of the order of
Melchisedech (as that corporation does) of which order of Priesthood is none
but Christ, Trident. sess. 23 c. 1.

Abuse of orders in popery.


Psalm. 110.4. Nor which makes it no essential part of their ministry to be
able to teach and instruct the people: Jbid.
but especially requires, that Ministers should be apt to teach, 1. Timot.
3.2. that they should be pastors and teachers, etc. for the edification of the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11.12. Neither does it teach, that the grace of the
spirit is actually conferred by orders: but that men set apart to this calling,
Jbid. c. 4.
not relying upon their ordination, should take heed to themselves and unto
learning, thereby both to save themselves and their hearers. Which does not
deny the remedy of marriage to any condition of men, 1. Timot. 14.16 Abuse of
matrimony.
as the Roman seignorie does to their Clergy, seeing the Apostle says,
Marriage is honorable among all men, Heb. 13.4. Neither does it tie the grace
of marriage, to the matrimonial solemnity (as this contradictor says it
gives grace against the cares and difficulties of that condition, page 27.7.)
but teaches that the married parties not relying upon the ceremony or
solemnity, should give themselves to fasting and prayer, 1. Cor. 7.5. no
doubt, to obtain among other, matrimonial graces.

Thus it is evident, that not the Protestants faith, but the Papists belief,
leaves many without help and remedy: As infants dying without baptism, are
in their judgment damned: Priests not having the gift of continency, are
denied marriage: Sick men have no true comfort, but a little greazing of the
eyes and ears: Sinful men are by their popish penance made hypocrites: their
ordered Clerks are deprived of the principal part, which is the preaching of
the word.

Thus this cauiller for his false accusation, shall have Damasus fee,
Calumniator si in accusatione defecerit, 1. Decret. Damas.
talionem accipiat, A false accuser, if he fail in his accusation, shall
receive the law Talionis, himself to incur the same: for it is in deed the
popish irreligion, that affoordeth no true comfort, stay or remedy to their
miserable disciples; that a man may say to them, Job. 13.4.
as Job to his deceitful friends, ye are physicians of no value. And whereas
they think to cure spiritual maladies with corporal medecines, as with oil,
chrisme, salt, holy water, crossing, to be defended against temptation, it is,
as Ambrose says, Lib. 3. de virginib.
vt qui latere laterem lauat, as if a man should cleanse clay with clay, magis
se oblinebat luto, such an one should defile himself more. And as Diogenes
said, (...).
that Patacion the thief was no better then Epaminondas, because he was
professed, or entered into religion: no more is an evil man made better by such
popish ceremonies.

The ninth Persuasion.
1 I Defend not a religion, where God is made author of all sins, and thereby
worthy no religion. Untruth. 65.
P. 27. l. 14.


2 Where the decision of spiritual doubts appertain to temporal and
unlearned princes, men, women, children. Untruth. 66.


3 Where such sentences, though never so much disagreeing, Sclaunder 67.
and apparantlie false must be obeyed for the infallible word of God.

4 Where man has no liberty or freedom of will, Sclaunder 68.
where our good works are necessitate.

5 Where the predestination of God takes away all election and indifferency
etc. Sclaunder 69.


6 But that religion, Untruth. 70.
that so accords the eternal prescience and predestination of God, P. 28. l.
4.5.6. etc.
with the temporal cooperation of man, that it both leaves the first
infallible, and yet proves the temporal action, appetite, etc. to be
voluntary, free, in the power of man to be effected.

The Disswasion.
HEre is nothing else, but an heap and pack of sclanderous untruths, which by
one common answer of denial might be easily removed: but somewhat more shall
be said.

1 The Protestants make not God author, either of all, or any sin; Rhemist.
annot. in James 1. v. 13.
but the Papists rather, that thus write: They mean not, that God is any way
the author, causer, or mouer of any to sin, but only by permission etc. Ergo
they grant that by permitting and suffering God is the author and causer of
sin: How evil actions are disposed of God.
And true it is, that he which permits evil to be done and hinders it not,
is consenting to it, and a doer of it, because accessorie to it. But we say,
that God is not so much as a permitter or sufferer of sin, as it is evil:
and yet, as he is a disposer of evil actions to good, and an imposer of
punishment, is not only a permitter and beholder, but an agent and doer even in
evil actions: so that although sin do no way stand with the will of God in
approving or consenting to it; yet it stands with his providence, in
ordering, disposing, and judging of it: 2. Sam. 16. v. 10.
As God is said to have bid Shemei curse David, because he both disposed it to
David's good for his further trial and probation, and judged Shemei by it to
his greater confusion. Thus Origene well distinguishes between Gods will and
providence, Multa sine dei voluntate geruntur, nihil sine prouidentia, etc.
Many things are done without Gods will, nothing without his providence: his
providence is that, whereby he dispenses and provides; his will, whereby he
wills any thing or nilleth.

Admonition after the Queens Injunctions.
2 The Prince challenges not the decision of spiritual doubts, but only to
have the rule over all manner persons within his realms either Ecclesiastical
or Temporal; so as no other foreign power shall or ought to have any
superiority over them. What authority the Prince has in Ecclesiastical
matters. Article. 37.
And again in the book of Articles it is thus contained, We give not to our
Princes the ministering either of Gods word or sacraments, but only that
prerogative which we see to have been given always to all good Princes etc. in
holy scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all estates
and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical
or Temporal. And beside, Preface to the Communion book.
the deciding of doubts is referred to the Ordinaries directly, and not to the
Civil Magistrate.

3 A most wicked sclaunder it is, that we are bound to take such sentences for
the infallible word of God. The contrary is evident in the Articles of
religion set forth by authority of Parliament, wherein the Church of England
thus professes, It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods word written. Again, Artic. 20.
things ordained by them (that is, general Councels) as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, Artic. 21.
unless it may be declared that they be taken out of holy scripture. If
Protestants attribute no greater authority to the whole Church, Papists
receive the decrees of the Church as the word of God.

Ioannes Maria.


much less to Princes and Magistrates that are but members; though principal
ones of the universal Church. Indeed it is the doctrine of Papists that the
decrees of their Church must be taken and obeyed, as the infallible word of
God. One says, Determinatio ecclesiae appellatur Euangelium, The determination
of the Church is called the Gospel. Another says, Quicunque non innititur
doctrinae Romanae ecclesiae, Siluester Prierias cont. Luther.
ac Romani pontificis tanquam regulae dei infallibili, a qua sacra scriptura
robur trahit and authoritatem, haereticus est, Whosoever does not lean unto
the doctrine of the Roman Church, and of the Roman Bishop, as the infallible
rule of God, from the which the sacred scripture does draw the strength and
authority, is an heretic. The Rhemists say, We must believe the Church, nay
believe in the Church, Annotat. in 1. Tim. c. 3. sect. 9.
and trust it in all things.

4 It is also untrue, that we take away freewill. We affirm, that man's will is
free unto evil without coaction, What freewill man has.
and free unto good by divine operation: as the scripture says* If the son
make you free, then are you free in deed, John. 8.36. Lib. de corrept. and
great. c. 13.
So there is a free will, and a will freed, as Augustine well distinguishes,
Peccant per liberum arbitrium, non liberatum, they sin by free will, not will
freed: Will is always free to sin, but unto good it is freed by grace.

Good works also we hold to be necessary in respect of Gods prescience: De
praedestinat. lib. 1.15.
for that thing must needs be, which God foreseeth shall be: Qui si hoc
praescierat, quod non est, praescientia iam non est, How good works are
necessary.
as Augustine says, who if he foresee that which is not, it is now no
prescience. But in respect of the will of man, good works are not necessary,
or compulsorie, but voluntary, and so both virtuous actions, and commendable:
therefore that is an impertinent speech of the libeller, Page 27. lin. 30.
who can either praise, or discommend that which is done, whether the doer will
or no? For good works are done by the faithful willingly, though wrought by
grace: for as Augustine says, Deus ex nolentib. volentes facit, God of
nilling, makes us willing. But you might with greater reason have apposed your
graund Master senior Robert Parsons with this question of necessity, who
puts an absolute necessity and ineuitabilitie in those actions which are
subject to man's will, Manifestat. f. 100. Reply f. 98. a.

Predestination takes not away man's freewill. Act. 2.23.
5 Neither does the doctrine of predestination and election among Protestants
take away the liberty or freedom of the will: for though Christ by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God were delivered, yet Judas was not
thereunto forced. Augustine says well, Dei praescientiam non cogere hominem vt
talis sit qualem praesciuit Deus, sed praescire talem futurum, qualis futurus
erat, quamuis sic non eum fecerit Deus, That Gods prescience does not force a
man to be such, De praedest. lib. 1. c. 15.
as God foresaw him, but foreknew him to be such, as he should be, though God
made him not to be such: Like as in a Ship under sail, though it be carried
one certain way to the haven, yet the Mariner may walk in the Ship which way
he will; yet so, that at length he must be brought to the haven where the Ship
arriueth: so all the actions of man, though they be done freely, not
forciblie; yet they must fall out according to Gods foreknowledge, and be
ouerruled to the end appointed by Gods providence.

6 But it is an hard matter for the popish religion to accord the eternal
predestination of God, with the temporal cooperation of man's will: for some of
them hold, that a man may fall from his election and predestination, Ye can
not be saved (say the Rhemists) though ye be predestinate, except ye keep Gods
commandments: Annot. in act. 27. sect. 3.
As though it were possible for them which are predestinate, Popish doctrine
can not accord Gods predestination and man's freewill. Romans 8. v. 29.30.
either not to walk in obedience of Gods commandments, or in the end not to
be saved. How then is Gods eternal predestination maintained, where the same
by man's free will may be reuersed? Again, if whom God predestinateth he
calls, and justifies, and makes conformable to the image of his son, then
it is not in man's power or freewill to be called and justified (as they say men
believe not, Rhemist. Math. 20. s. 1.
but of their own free will) but their vocation and justification depends
upon their election: so that it is not of him that wills or runs, but of
God, that shows mercy. Romans 9.16.
Wherefore the certainty of Gods election can not stand with the natural
liberty of man's will and actions: for if it be in man's power to believe, or
not to believe, then is it not in the mercy of him that calls and electeth,
but in the will of him that receives and accepts. Wherefore according to the
sentence of the law, Particeps criminis, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20. leg. 9. Gratian.
in authenti^.
non est testis idoneus, That he which is partner in the crime, is no fit
witness: So this opponent being guilty of that which he obiecteth, may be
worthily excepted against, as an insufficient witness. It is strange to see how
his tongue and pen run along without all honesty or modesty to coin and
devise fables, not against one or two, but the whole company of all that
profess the Gospel, as Bernard says, Cantic. sermon. 24.
Vides quam ingentem multitudinem velociter currens sermo tabe maliciae
inficere posset, See what a great multitude his swift running speech with the
plague of malice might infect. But the best is, his words are but wind, he has
so often fabled unto us, that we may well think he keeps the same tract
still. And as Aristo said, of a bathing or speaking, (...).
that purges not, there is small need: so is this Friars prattle that proves
not, like to a bath that purges not; it might well have been spared.

The tenth persuasion.
Untruth. 71.
1. I Defend not that religion, that divides the militant and triumphant
Church, Page 28. lin. 16.
depriving Angels and glorified souls of that honor and dignity which God
required, men in earth, and the militant Church of that help it needs.

Untruth. 72.
2. Which spoyleth the patient Church of the faithful departed of the relief,
Lin. 22.
which ever they received of those alive.

3. Where no memory is left of the passion of Christ, except in most
sacrilegious and blasphemous swearing, Untruth. 73.
Page 29. lin. 8.
etc. no sign, image or representation, no commemoratiue sacrifice, etc.

Lin. 16.
4. Where no order, etc. no consecration or distinction of callings, Untruth 74.
except the Letters Patents of a temporal Prince can give that to others,
which is not in the giver, etc.

Untruth 75.
5. But that religion, which consists of a most perfect hierarchicall
regiment, of Pope, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, etc.

6. The meanest of these by calling and consecration of greater honor, Lin. 28.
then any ministerial preferment among Protestants, Untruth 76.
being no real thing, but an ens rationis, an Idol of the mind, as the making
of Purseuants, Apparitors, etc.

Untruth 77.
7. Our Pope is so ample in jurisdiction, that no temporal Prince Christian,
Page 29. lin. 2.
or Infidel, no professor of regiment in ecclesiastical causes, etc. was by
many degrees possessed of so large a regiment.

8. Our private Priests the most reverend and learned fathers of the society
of Jesus, Page 29. lin. 4.
are honored of the greatest Princes in the world, Untruth 78.
etc.

The disswasion.
1. NEither do I defend that religion, that divides the militant and
triumphant Church, in robbing God of his honor, in giving it to Angels and
Saints against their wills, who refused to be worshipped here in earth, as the
Angel of John, and Peter of Cornelius. Revel. 22.9. Act. 10.26.
And therefore God requires no such honor to be given unto them: so that, as
our Savior says of Moses: There is one which accuses you, even Moses, in
whom ye trust: Joh. 5.45.
even so the Angels and Saints shall be witnesses and accusers of popish
superstitious worshippers, who honor the creature in steed of the Creator.

But the religion, which Protestants profess, The intercourse between the
Church triumphant and militant. Revel. 5.10. Revel. 6.10.
and I defend, does make but one family in heaven and in earth, Ephesians. 3.15.
joining them together in an holy society and communion: we in earth giving
thanks for them, whom God has delivered from these terrene miseries: and they
longing to see us also with the whole Church to be made partakers of their joy.
As Cyprian says: Magnus illic charorum numerus nos expectat, parentum,
fratrum, filiorum de salute sua securi, de nostra solliciti: Ex Augustine. de
praedestinat. ad Prosperum. lib. 1. cap. 14.
A great number of our friends does there look for us, of our parents,
brethren, sons, secure of their salvation, and sollicitous for ours.

Other intercourse between the Church militant and triumphant there is none,
neither of our prayers to them, that were superstitious: for the Lord says,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.15. nor
of their help and assistance to us, that were superfluous: God is able alone
and sufficient to defend his Church: as the Angel says, None holds with me
in these things (in the defense of the Church) but Michael your prince, which
is Christ. Dan. 10.21.

2. Which does not that wrong to the faithful departed, Papists do wrong to
the dead.
to thrust them down into the extreme pains of purgatory (which they say
exceed all the pains of this life) when as the Scripture says, that they
which dye in the Lord, do from thencefoorth rest from their labors: Revel.
14.13. Revel. 7.17.
and all tears are wiped from their eyes. They need not therefore any relief
from the living, being in joy and happiness.

3. Which does not make any representation of Christ, by Images: for we are
commanded, not to corrupt our selves in making any graven image, or
representation of any figure, Christ but once offered in sacrifice.
Deuter. 4.16. Neither does it presume to offer up Christ in sacrifice, as the
Papal priesthood does, because the Scripture says, that Christ does not offer
himself often: but he appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself: Heb. 9. v. 25.26
Heb. 10.14.
And with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
But our religion prescribes the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ to be used according to his institution, in his remembrance: as our
Savior himself says, Do this in remembrance of me. Whereupon it was thus
concluded and resolved in a general Council: Luke 22.19.
Ecce viuificantis illius corporis imaginem totam, Constantinop. synod. 7.
gener. Ex Nicen. 2. action. 6.
panis scilicet substantiam, quam mandauit apponi: Behold the whole or all the
image of that quickening body, the substance of bread, which he commanded to
be used. We have then no other commemoration, or representative image of
Christ, but only the Sacrament celebrated according to his own institution.
As for blasphemous swearing by instruments of our redemption, Swearing usual
among Papists.
though too many among Protestants are addicted to that evil custom, yet he
might have bin ashamed to object it to us, knowing how common a thing it is
among Papists to swear: as it appears by their own Synod, which thus
complains: Quo color nunc consuetudo passim iurantium in omni negotio
excusari possit, Coloniens. part. 13. cap. 13.
non videmus: With what color the custom of such, which swear upon every
occasion can be excused, we see not. Those sacrilegious oaths, to swear by
the Mass, by the cross, nails, body, blood of Christ, his wounds, by S.
Peter, S. Anne, S. Mary and the rest, where else had they their beginning but in
Popery? Yea it seems that swearing by such is not only usual among them,
but commendable also: for one Sanpaulinus for reproving one of swearing, was
suspected to be a Lutherane, Fox. page 904.
and thereupon further examined, sifted, condemned and burned at Paris ann.
1551.

4. It is also untrue, that there is no consecration or distinction of callings
among us: for both Bishops have their consecration from the Metropolitan with
his Suffraganes, Consecration of the Clergy in England.
and Ministers their ordination from their Ordinaries (by imposition of hands)
which ought to be and is assisted with other Presbyters. The Prince does not
challenge any power or authority of the Ministry of any divine offices in the
Church, or to confer orders, or consecration, but only by the Letters
Patents conferreth the temporalties of Bishoprics; the Metropolitan with his
assistance consecrateth, as other Patrones present to benefices, and the
Ordinary instituteth. And this has been the ancient use and custom of
England and prerogative of the Crown, Edward. 1. anno 25. Edward. 3. anno 25.
statut. de prouisorib. Richard. 2. anno 13. stat. 2. c. 2. Henr. 4. ann. 2.
cap. 3.

Popish hierarchy against the Canons.


that license should be demanded of the King to choose, and his royal consent
to be had after election made, as it is evident in diverse ancient statutes.

5. As for the Papal Hierarchy it is altogether imperfect and out of order:
1. The office of the Pope is injurious and Antichristian, taking upon him to
have jurisdiction, and prerogative over all other Bishops: contrary both to
the Scriptures, which gave unto all the Apostles the same authority, and to
them all the keys were equally committed, and power to bind and loose, Mat.
18.18. And to the Canons: for Nicen. 1. can. 6. parilis mos, the like custom
and jurisdiction is decreed to the Patriarch of Alexandria, as to the Bishop of
Rome. Chalcidonens. action. 16. equal privileges are yielded to
Constantinople, which is called new Rome, as to old Rome. Synops. p. 149.
The like may be showed out of the eight first general Councels.

The offices of Archbishops and Bishops, as we condemn not absolutely, when
they are used not as titles of ambition, but as wholesome means to preserve
unity, as they should be exercised among Protestants: so in the Papal policy
we mislike them, being but the Popes creatures, and fit props to uphold his
Antichristian and usurped power.

But concerning your seven orders of Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolythists,
Readers, Exorcists, Doorekeepers, we hold them as superfluous and unnecessary
services. The Apostle shows that Christ has given some to be Apostles,
Ephesians. 4.11.12.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors, some teachers: for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edification of the body of Christ, etc. If these be sufficient to edify the
Church, Popish orders of the Clergy superfluous.
and to labor in the Ministry, then are these Popish degrees unnecessary,
and not given of Christ, neither belonging to the ministry of the Gospel.
And if they will needs bring in Doorekeepers to be an order of the Clergy,
why not Sextins also, Belringers, graue-makers, Church-sweepers,
Waxe-chandlers, water-bearers, whip-dogs, and what you will? for all these
there is use of in the Church, and so for seven orders, we shall have twice so
many. This is the goodly Hierarchy, which this Ignatian Nouice boasts of.

6. I doubt not but the meanest office of the Gospel is more honorable before
God, then the greatest Antichristian dignity, which are plants not of the Lords
planting, and therefore shall be rooted out. Matthew. 15.13.


No indeleble character in Orders.
The indeleble character, which they say is by their Popish orders imprinted in
the soul of the receiver, whereby they are made partakers of Christ's priestly
power, and really distinguished from others; is indeed nothing but an Idol of
the mind, and an imaginary fantasy: for spiritually in the soul and before
God, there is no difference between the Priest and the people. Christ has
made us Kings and Priests unto God his father: Reuelat. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.
and all Christians are a chosen generation, a royal Pristhood.

And as for your ens rationis, it is the very opinion of some Papists, that the
character of Priesthood, is no real quality of the mind, In 4. distinct. 4.
quaest. 1. Distinct. 6. q. 9.
but only rationalis respectus, a relation or rational respect: Durand.
Scotus holds, that it cannot be proved by any manifest testimony of
Scripture. Gab. ibid. q. 2.
Gabriel doubts whether the Church have defined it.

They are your own Church-seruitors, Sextins, Doorekeepers, Church-sweepers,
that are made no otherwise, then Purseuants, Apparitors, etc. The Ministers of
the Gospel, though they are not really distinguished from the people, by any
inherent quality of greater holiness, Ministers how they differ from the people.
and more merit; yet are diverse in the ecclesiastical Oeconomie and
dispensation of the Church, in their different functions and offices, whereunto
they are set apart: first, by the probation and examination of their gifts.
Secondly, by the imposition of hands with prayer of the Elders and pastors.
Thirdly, by their endowment and ability of gifts for the execution of their
Ministry: all which the Popish priesthood wants.

7 A manifest untruth it is, that the Pope has had more ample jurisdiction,
then any Prince Christian or Infidel: for the half of those countries never
submitted themselves to the Popes devotion, Emperor more ample in jurisdiction
then the Pope
which were under the Emperors obedience. Constantine the great had command
over all Europe, Africa, all Asia minor, Arabia, Armenia, Phrygia; as it may
appear by the assembly of Bishops called by the Emperors authority out of
all these countries, to the general Nicen Council.

And at this time both the great Turk in Europe and Asia, and Prester John in
Africa, have larger dominions, and greater authority, then ever the Roman
Bishops have had. That jurisdiction which now the Pope has, is (thanks to
God) brought into a narrower compass, though it be too much; and I trust
shall every day be more confined: And whatsoever power he has, or ever had
over other Churches, is but usurped: for Peter, from whom he claims, Galath.
2.
was but the Apostle of the Circumcision; S. Paul's lot was over the
uncircumcision.

8. This last article contains nothing but untruth. For neither have these
Ignatian fathers (which call themselves proudly, of the society of Jesus)
converted by their preachings many kingdoms to the regiment of Christ, but
rather subverted and As Valens the Emperor sent Arrian Priests to infect the
Goths at their first conversion, Lanquet anno Christ. 380.
corrupted them in faith. The Spaniards tyranny has subdued the poor
Indians, not the Iebusites hypocrisy, though they tell us of many fabulous and
lying miracles wrought by Xauiere, and other of that order in those coasts; as
has been showed before.

Indeed it is well known, how they have attempted to reduce diverse kingdoms
to the temporal government of the Pope-catholike King of Spain, Jesuits have
perverted rather then converted countries.

Jesuit. Catechis. fol. 152. b.


by their treacherous conspiracies, and wicked devices to take away the lives
of Princes: Such were the accursed attempts of Commolet, a seditious Iebusite
in France, and Varade another false brother of that order, co^federate with
Barriere, to take away the life of the now King of France: and of Guignard and
Guerret, Jesuit. Catechis. fol. 187.188.
Iebusite Priests convicted of treason: and John Chastel brought up in that
society, who was worthily executed for attempting the Kings death. In England
such have been the practices of Saunders, Allen, Campion, Parsons, Walpoole,
with diverse other of that rank: who by their traitorous plots have practiced
against the life of our late Sovereign, to bring this famous Country into
slavish servitude to Spain, which I assuredly trust, shall never be. And these
are the fruits of the preaching and pains of this irreuerent order.

Untrue also it is, that they are honored of the greatest and richest princes
in the world: for the renowned King of France, who in riches, puissance and
greatness, is not inferior to any Christian Prince, neither honors or
favors them: but the whole order, for working against the peace of that
state, was by decree of the Parliament of Paris, anno 1594. exiled and expelled
that nation. Let it also be noted by the way, that this Ignatian and Iebusited
brother, Jesuit. Catechis. lib. 3. cap. 18. The Jesuits slender account of her
Majesty.
much like the rest of his order, counted the Queen of England his then
Sovereign, none of the great, puissant, rich, or Catholic Princes: for I
think he is not so blinded to imagine, that either her Highness then, or his
Majesty now and the state favors them, or has any cause so to do.

That Jesuits are so familiar with some Princes that have given their power to
the beast, I do not marvel, seeing this has been prophesied of before: for
they are the frogs that come out of the Dragons mouth, that go unto the kings
of the earth, Revel. 16.13.14. But if such Princes were not blinded, or had but
like experience of their cloaked holiness, and mystical impiety, Ignatian
Friars no fit Courtiers.
as their neighbor Princes have, they would soon find the^ to be unfit
Courtiers, but more unwholesome Counselors. And (me thinks) these Polypragmon
friars, ietting in Princes Courts, and intermedling in State-affaires, are
much-what like to limping Vulcane in Homere, (...).
that taking upon him to be a skinker to the Gods, a great laughter suddenly
was taken up among them. But it were happy that such Princes would take
counsel of themselves, and not endure to be carried away with these seditious
frierlie humors: Ad Theophii. aduers. Ioann. Hierosolym.
Hieromes counsel were good to such, Verba ei de alieno stomacho non fluant,
faciat, quod vult, non quod velle compellitur, Let not their words and sentence
depend of another will, but let them do as their own mind moves them, not as
an others humor forces them. As for the noble kingdoms of England, Scotland,
France, they have sufficient experience of this kind of vermin, no more to be
bitten by them: (...).
But as Pythagoras gave this precept to his scholars not to taste of such
things as had black tails, that is, not to converse with men of black and
evil conditions: So I trust we are sufficiently taught to beware of these
crouching friars lewd and ungodly practices.

The 11. Persuasion.
I Defend a religion etc. where there is no festiuitie, no office or part of
divine service etc. but represents unto us one benefit or other, no
ceremony is used in the holy sacrifice of the Mass, no action of the Priest,
Page 46. lin. 18.19.20. etc.
no ornament or attire he wears, no benediction he gives, no sign of the
cross he makes, but has his religious signification and preaches unto us:
his introite to the Altar, his actions there, his return from thence, the
very vestments wherewith he is adorned, Untruth. 78.
his putting of them on, his putting them off, his Amice, Albe, They speak
nothing less then Christ crucified.
Girdle, Maniple, Stole, Vestment, speak nothing but Christ crucified, etc.

The Disswasion.
1 Indeed, such Church such preaching: this superstitious insinuation by
crossings, Popish preaching by ceremonies.
turnings, coming, going, putting off, putting on, copes, vestments, is fit
instruction for such blind worshippers. But Christ is otherwise preached in his
true Church, then by dumb ceremonies. Moses was read and preached in the
synagogues, Act. 15.21. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. not by showing,
shadowing, or signifying. What hypocrites are these to thrust out of the Church
the plain reading of scripture to the peoples understanding, and to supply it
with mute and maimed shows and ceremonies, in which respect the Prophets words
may be used against them, who required these things at your hands? Isay 1.12.

2 But that it may better appear, what a goodly kind of preaching this is by
signs and circumstances, I will briefly bring in view some of their
pope-edifying significations, which by great oversight, the Friar, belike
ashamed thereof, has omitted: and to begin with his own trumperie.

Bellar. lib. 2. de monach. c. 40.
First, the shauing of Monks and Friars is very rich in sense and signification.
1. It betokens the revelation of the mysteries of our redemption by Christ.
2. It expresses the similitude of Christ's crown of thorns. What Monks and
Friars shauing signifies.
3. It insinuates the amputation and cutting away of carnal desires. 4. The
circle of hair which is left, represents the fashion of a crown, because to
be devoted to Gods service, is to reign. 5. The baring and making naked of the
head, implies an apert and naked life, and an open and free heart for
celestial meditations.

Likewise they use diverse Magical enchantments in the dedication of Churches.
Popish ceremonies in dedicating of Churches.
1. They make 12. crosses upon the walls, and set twelve burning lamps over
against them; signifying thereby, that the 12. Apostles by their preaching
brought light to the world. Bellarm. lib. 3. de sanct. c. 5.
2. They burn incense, set up taper-light, annoint the altar and vessels with
oil, to show, that the place is consecrate to holy uses. 3. They sprinkle
ashes over all the Church, therein writing the Greek and Latin Alphabet,
thereby setting forth the preaching of the faith, which was first taught in
those toongs. 4. They beat upon the Church door with an hammer, to drive
Satan from thence.

In Baptism they use many interpretatiue toys, 1. They touch the ears and
nostrels with spittle, that the ears may be ready to hear, and the nostrels
to discern between the smell of good and evil. Bellar. lib. 1. de baptis. c.
25.26.27.
2. All the senses are signed with the cross thereby to be defended. 3. Salt
is put into their mouth, that they may be kept from putrefying in sin. 4.
They are anointed with oil in the breast, to be safe from suggestions. Popish
toys used in baptism.
5. They are anointed with chrisme in the top of the head, and thereby become
Christians. 6. A white garment is put upon them that are baptized, to betoken
their regeneration. 7. A veil is put upon their head, in sign, that they are
now crowned with a royal diadem. 8. A burning taper is put into their hand to
fulfill that saying in the Gospel, Let your light so shine before men, etc.
Math. 5.

In Matrimony the like toys are observed: as to cover the parties with a
veil: to join them together with a partie-coloured scarf of white and
purple: to mutter certain words over the ring to hallow it.

Thus have they pestered the Church with a multitude of idle, unprofitable, and
vnedifying ceremonies, which the Apostle calls a yoke of bondage, Galath.
5.1. And as Augustine says, Ipsam religionem quam Deus paucissimis sacramentis
liberam esse voluit, onerib. premunt, Epist. 119. c. 19. cited distinc. 12. c.
12.
vt tolerabilior sit conditio Iudaeorum, etc. They cumber or oppress religion
with burdenous ceremonies, which God would have free with few sacraments.
Pharisaicall religion.
And these frivolous observations and superstitious types, do tend to
instruction, and bring religious lessons (as this expounder of riddles tells
us) like as the Pharisees phylacteries and fringes of their garments tended to
keeping of the law. Untruth 79.
They writ the law in parchments and scroules, Math. 23.5.
and tied them to their frontlets, and bound them upon their arms, whereas
they should have kept them in their hearts. Thus the Papists keep the memory
of Christ's death in crosses, vestures, pictures, and such like, which should be
revived by the preaching of the word, whereby Christ is described in our sight,
and among us crucified (as S. Paul to the Galathians) and graft in men's hearts
by a lively faith. Galath. 3.1.


3 Now further as these papal Romans do boast of their preaching and
significant rites and ceremonies; so the Pagane Romans can pretend the like
for their religion, Paganes significant ceremonies.
whose hieroglyphicall toys are very consonant and suitable to these new
histrionicall tricks of Christened Romanists. 1. They sacrificed to Saturn
bareheaded, because all things are naked and open to God: Plutarch. quaest.
Roman. Qu. 11. Qu. 26.
for the which cause also popish Priests were shaven, to betoken their open and
free hearts, etc. 2. Their women in mourning used white garments, to betoken
innocence and simplicity: so does the white garment used in popish baptizing,
Qu. 61.
as we have seen before. 3. It was a great offense to utter the name of their
Deus tutelaris, their God of defense: so the Mass Priest mumbleth his
mystical enchaunting words in secret. 4. When they took up the table, Qu. 64.
they always left somewhat remaining, because no holy thing (such as they
counted the table) should be left empty: so the Mass Priests do reserve some
part of the sacrament upon the altar, and hang it up in the pixe.

4 They did burn lamps in their temples, and at the graves of the dead, Qu.
75.79. Polidor. Lib. 6. d^ inuentorib. Qu. 86.
and consecrate wax candles to their Gods to signify the everlasting light: so
do the Papists.

5 The ancient Romans married not in May, because it was an holy time used
for solemn expiations: so the Church of Rome inhibiteth marriage at certain
seasons for the holiness of the time.

6 They used not to marry their Cosins, that by marriage they might increase
kindred. Qu. 108.
In the Papal seignorie for the same cause marriage is forbidden between
Godfathers and Godmothers and their Godchildren, as they are called, because
they are already of a spiritual kindred.

7 The Paganes used a kind of shauing, which betokened a crown, and thereof
was called (...): Euripid. in supplicib.
such is the shauing of Monks, and for the like signification of a crown, as
has been showed before.

8 The Priest of the Sun among the Phenicians did wear a vestment of purple
wrought with gold, Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 2. c. 8.
to show the dignity and excellency of that priesthood: for the same cause
have Mass Priests their rich and costly copes of diverse colors.

9 In Boeotia they used to cover the Bride with a veil, Plutarch. coniugial.
praecept.
and crown her with flowers: which use is yet retained in Popery.

10 The heathen used to cleanse themselves with sprinkling of water, thinking
thereby to be purified. Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 4. c. 17.
Thus in Popery they think to purify their houses and the people, with
casting of holie-water upon them.

Is not this now a goodly religion, that retains still the idolatrous and
superstitious vsages of the heathen? that instructs the people by signs and
figures, even as the Paganes preached to theirs? May we not justly return upon
them the rebuke of the Apostle to the Galathians, Seeing you know God, how
turn ye again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments, Galath. 4*9.
whereunto as from the beginning you will be in bondage again? Hierome says,
Ego libera voce reclamante mundo pronuntio, ceremonias Iudaeorum perniciosas
esse and mortiferas Christianis, Hieron. Augustine. tom. 3. oper. Hieron.
and quicunque eas obseruauerit, in barathrum diaboli deuolutum: I do freely
pronounce (though the world say nay) that the ceremonies of the Jews are
pernicious and deadly to Christians, and whosoever observes them to be
thrown down to hell: much more are they in danger which observe Pagane
ceremonies and inventions. Therefore we take no great care to answer them for
this matter, resting upon the words of our Savior, Let them alone, they are
blind leaders of the blind: Math. 15.14.
Their own blindness and grossenes in their superstitious corruptions, does
sufficiently bewray the badnes of their cause, Plutar. de superstition. (...).
and madness of their religion, to whom that saying of Plutarch may fitly be
applied: You need not draw a superstitious man out of the temple, for there is
his punishment and torment: So that, which this (figurecaster) has taken for
an argument of their profession, is found to be but a torment to their
conscience, and a punishment of their superstition.

The twelfth Persuasion.
1 I Defend not that religion, which denies all things etc. as their opinions
all negative do witness. P. 47. li. 13.14.
Untruth 80.


2 That has taken away and converted from spiritual religious uses, Untruth.
81.
to private and temporal pleasures and preferments, all monuments and
foundations of devotion etc.

Untruth. 82.
3 Using nothing necessary to salvation.

Untruth. 83.
4 But that religion, whose opinions are all affirmative.

Untruth. 84.
5 That has founded Churches, Schools, Colleges, Monasteries.

6 That observes all things, that wants, or omitteth nothing belonging,
Untruth. 85.
or that can be required to true religion.

The Disswasion.
1 NEither does that religion, which I defend, deny any thing, much less all
things (as it is falselie sclaundered) that are found to be agreeable to the
scriptures; neither does it consist of all negatiues: affirming the scriptures
to be sufficient, and to conteyne all things necessary to salvation: that the
Church and general Councels may err, Protestants affirmative doctrine.
that the Pope is Antichrist, that the scriptures ought to be read in the
vulgar tongue, that Magistrates have authority in spiritual causes, that all
sins in their own nature are mortal, that faith only justifies, that
Christ only is our alone sufficient mediator, that there are only two
sacraments of the new testament: an hundred more opinions it holds
affirmatively, and the negatiues to these doctrines it refuses. And if our
religion should be condemned, because it holds some negatiues, exception
likewise might be taken against the Decalogue, wherein of ten, two
commandments only are affirmative, the fourth in the first table; and the
first in the second; all the rest are negatiuely propounded.

2 An impudent sclaunder it is, Foundations for learning and religion standing
among Protestants.
that the religion of Protestants has taken away all foundations of devotion.
1. Seeing that Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, all Colleges in the
Universities, Hospitals, parish Churches, erected for maintenance of learning,
relief of the poor, for the edifying of the people, are yet standing and
flourishing among us. 2. Only those unclean Cells of Monks, the seminaries both
of spiritual and corporal fornication, are removed (though I deny not, but
they might better have been disposed of, as was intended) by example and
warrant of virtuous Princes: As Josias overthrew the foundation of the
Chemarims, an idolatrous order of Priests erected by his superstitious
predecessors: 2. King. 23.5.
Iehu destroyed the house of Baal, 2. King. 10.27.
and made a draught-house of it. And things abused to idolatry, are justly
confiscate to the Prince, as Ambrose defends the taking away of the lands,
Ambros. contr. Symmach.
which were given to the maintenance of Pagane idolatry: Sublata sunt praedia,
quia non religiose vtebantur ijs, quae religionis iure defenderent: Their lands
and manors were taken away, because they did not religiously use them, which
they defended under color of religion. 3. Neither were all Abbey-lands
converted to temporal pleasures and preferments (though we grant too many
were) but diverse were given to Hospitals and Colleges, and to other good uses.
What is to be thought of the dissolution of Abbeyes.
And this is warranted by the imperial laws, that things abused by false
worshippers, should be given to the use of the Orthodoxall Church, as may
appear by that law of the Emperors, Valentinian and Martian: Cod. lib. 1.
tit. 8. leg. 8.
Domum vel possessionem, etc. That house or possession which belongs to
heretics, Orthodoxae ecclesiae addici iubemus, We will to be annexed to the
orthodoxall Church. 4. These lands and possessions were surrendered into the
Kings hands by the voluntary act of the owners thereof thereto not forced or
constrained, Statut. Hen. 8. ann. 31. c. 13.
as is extant in the public acts of Parliament, and at such a time, wherein
the popish religion was not altered, saving in the Popes supremacy, and
therefore this is a false imputation to the Gospel. And yet, as is before
showed, possessions abused by men of false religion, by the Imperial laws,
are confiscate to the Prince: as it was decreed by Anastasius, Praedia and
possessiones, quae in haereticas personas quocunque modo collata vel translata
fuerunt fisci nostri iurib. decernimus vendicari, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 8. leg. 9.
Lands and manors howsoever conferred or translated upon heretical parsons, we
decree to be forfeited to us.

All things necessary to salvation in the Gospel.
3 A foul slander is uttered of our Religion in the next place: for nothing
necessary to salvation is wanting in the profession of the Gospel: There is
Baptism Hebr. 6.2.
for infants: catechizing Ephesians. 6.4.
for children: preaching to beget Romans 10.17.
faith: the law to persuade Romans 7.7.
repentance: the Gospel for Romans 5.1.
comfort: the reading of scripture John 5.39.
to increase knowledge: the Sacraments Romans 4.11.
to confirm it: prayer prescribed if any Iam. 5.13.
be afflicted: singing of Psalms for those that are Iam. 5.13.
merry in the Lord: godly visitation for Job. 33.23.
the sick, with assurance of remission of sins upon their repentance:
comfort over the dead in the Revel. 14.13.
hope of the present rest of their souls with God, and 1. Thessal. 4.13.18.
the resurrection of their bodies to come.

4 It is Popery rather, that consists of negatiues, as it is evident by
their manifold oppositions to the doctrines before rehearsed: as that the
scriptures conteyne not all things necessary to salvation: that the Church can
not err: Popish negative doctrine.
that the scriptures are not fit to be read in the vulgar tongue: that the Pope
is not Antichrist: that faith only justifies not: that there be not two only
sacraments: that Christ only as one mediator is not to be inuocated: These
negatiues with a number more, the Roman separation maintayneth. And where they
affirm and set down any thing positiuely, they affirm their own fantasies
(the doctrine of the Trinity only and some few other points excepted) and
oppose themselves therein to the scriptures.

5 First, Plutark. quaest. Romans

Temples many built among Paganes.

Plutarch quest. Graec.


what if many Churches have been erected in popery? Were not many Temples also
built in the time of Paganism, as at Rome to Diana, to Honor. q. 13. to
Matuta. q. 16. to Bona. q. 20. to Saturn. q. 42. to Horta. q. 46. to Vulcane
without the city, q. 47. to Carmenta. q. 56. to Hercules. q. 59. to Fortuna
Parua. q. 74. to Aesculapius without the city. q. 94. to Apollo at Delphos. q.
12. to Ocridion at Rhodes. q. 27. to Tenes at Tenedos. q. 29. to Ulysses at
Lacedaemon. q. 48. with many other: Not the building therefore of Churches,
Temples, and other Monuments, but the end whereto they were first founded
makes them commendable.

Secondly, let it be considered to what intent these Monuments were erected in
the popish time, and so many Monasteries builded; not, for the most part, of
any true devotion, or to the honor of God, but pro remedio animae, pro
remissione peccatorum, in honorem gloriosae virginis, for the remedy of their
soul, Monasteries founded for murders.
for the remission and expiation of their sins, to the honor of the glorious
Virgin. As King Ethelstane after the death of his brother, which he had
procured, builded in satisfaction two Monasteries of Midleton, and Michelenes:
Fox page 149. col. 1. Page 155. col. 2. Page 159. col. 1.
Elfrida for the death of Ethelwold her husband builded a Monastery of Nuns
in remission of sins. Queen Alfrith in repentance of her fact for causing
her son King Edward to be murdered, founded two Nunries, one at Amesburie by
Salisburie, the other at Werewell: let any man now judge what good beginning
those Monastical foundations had.

Thirdly, it will be an hard matter for them to prove, that all the founders of
Churches, Colleges, and other Monuments, were of the Roman opinion (...)
^eligion, as now it is professed.

For Charles surnamed the Great, Founders of Monasteries not of the new Romans
faith.

Houeden continuation Bedae ann. 792.


who is said to have builded so many Monasteries, as be letters in the A, B, C,
held a Council at Frankeford, where was condemned the 2. Nicene Council with
Irene the Empress, that approved the adoration of Images, which is now
maintained by the papal corporation.

Ann. 927.
In King Ethelstanes time, the Prince was acknowledged to have the chief stroke
in all causes, whether spiritual or temporal, as it may appear by diverse
constitutions by him made for the direction of the Clergy. In this Kings
reign diverse Monasteries were builded, as the Abbey of Midleton, Fox. p. 149.
and Michelenes.

Ann. 940.
In King Edmunds time, the opinion of transubstantiation was not generally
received, but then newly hatched by certain miraculous fictions imputed to
Odo. Fox. p. 151. col. 1. Guliel. lib. 3. de gestis pontif. Ann. 975. Histor.
Iornalens.
Under this King the order of the Monks of Bennets order increased: and the
Abbey of S. Edmundsburie with great revenues endowed.

In King Edward the Martyrs reign, Priests were suffered to have their wives,
and were restored to their Colleges, and Monks thrust out by Alpherus Duke of
Mercia. In this Kings time were founded the Nunries at Amesburie and Werewell.
I trust then, that in these times, when neither images were adored, nor the
Princes authority in ecclesiastical causes abridged, nor transubstantiation
believed, nor the marriage of Ministers inhibited, all went not current for
Popery, as it is now received.

Fourthly, this age of Protestancie for this 40. year in England, under the
happy regiment of our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, has been more
fruitful of pious works, in building of Hospitals, Almes-houses, free
Schools, Colleges in the Universities, specially in Cambridge, founding of
fellowships and schollarships, erecting of Libraries, specially the
University Library at Oxford, by the liberal charge and christian care The
charge of this work is thought to amount to 4000. pounds, which sum was
before mistaken by wrong information, Synops. p. 960.961.
of Master Bodlie a religious and well disposed Gentleman, then any like space
of time which can be named under the regiment of the papal Hierarchy. See
more of this elsewhere.

And concerning the godly care of the foresaid virtuous and liberal
Gentleman, he deserves to be compared either to Pamphilus which erected, or
Acacius and Euzonius, which enlarged and amended the famous Library of
Caesarea, in whom that sentence of Hierome uttered of Pamphilus is now
verified, Beatus Pamphilus cum Demetrium Phalereum and Pisistratum, in sacrae
bibliothecae studio voluit ^quare, imagines ingeniorum, Tom. 4. Marcell.
quae vera sunt and aeterna monumenta toto orb perquireret, Blessed Pamphilus
equalizing Demetrius Phalereus and Pisistratus, in taking care for Libraries,
he sought for the images of men's wits, the only true and eternal monuments
through the whole world.

6 I suppose rather, that all things requisite to true religion are wanting in
Popery, where the people are nusled up in ignorance, no edifying in their
Churches, All things to true religion requisite are wanting in popery.
where all the service is muttered in an unknown tongue: no reading of
scripture, which should make them wise to salvation: no comfort in prayer to
salvation, which they understand not: seldom receiving of the sacrament, and
that but in one kind, and so it is maimed and defective in the sacramental
effects: where then there is no knowledge in themselves, no edifying toward
others, no true prayer to God: no comfort in meditation of scripture, no
strength in the celebration of the sacraments: where men are taught not to
rely only by faith upon Christ, but to trust in their merits, not to rest in
Christ's mediation, but to seek for the intercession of Angels and Saints: not
to be content with a spiritual worship of God, but to prostitute themselves to
dumb Idols: not to cleave only to the scriptures in matters of faith, but to
run unto traditions: How then does this religion observe all things; nay
rather how are not all things there wanting that are requisite to true
religion? And as the living have small comfort; so as little hope is there of
the dead, whose souls after they have passed the troubles of this life, they
send to Purgatory flames, there to suffer more then ever they endured before:
like as a Ship, having escaped the dangerous surges of the Sea, should suffer
wrack, and be lost in the haven. Of such comfortless doctrine, that saying of
Plutarke is verified, Death to all men is the end of life, but to superstition
it is not so, Libr. (...).
for it extends fear beyond a man's life: then hell gates are set open,
fiery streams, and infernal rivers are let go, and horrible darkness with
fearful sights, and terrible scritches etc. A right description of popish
Purgatory, The comfortless resolution of Popery.
grounded upon a faithless superstitious fear. And such is popish doctrine,
neither affoording comfort to the living, nor joy to the dead: that a man can
not say of them, as a certain Thessalian being asked who are at most ease,
(...).
answered, they which have made an end of warfare. But these which dye in
popery, after they have made an end of the warfare of this life, by their
doctrine enter into their greatest labors and pains.

Thus have we heard with how many cunning sleights this glozing Friar has
endeavored to persuade unto his profession: he has wrapped up together in this
one section no less then half an hundred untruths: and as he began, Untruth.
86.
so he ends with a lie, that they were all vnius labij, of one language,
before the Gospel was revived: for it is certain that the Greeks always
used the Greek tongue; the Sclauonians, the Sclauonian; the Aethiopians, the
Ethiopian language. And how untrue this is, their own canons shall testify:
for Innocentius decreed, that in great Cities where people resort of diverse
languages, that the Bishops should provide fit men, qui secundum diuersitates
rituum and linguarum diuina illis officia celebrent, Gregor. decr. lib. 1. tit.
31. c. 14.
which according to the diversity of their rites and languages should
celebrate divine service. Lastly he tells us, that he will prove by above an
hundred arguments, that their religion is only true and lawful, etc. in a
certain book which he calls a Resolution, page 47. li. 32. which pamphlet,
when he has hatched it to his perfection, and sent it out of the owlelight
into the sunshine, which as yet, so far as I can learn, is not come from
under the brooders wings, it may be, either I or some of my brethren will
pluck a feather with it. And thus is this Section ended, and with such
success, as all liars and sclaunderers must look for. And though this false
accuser might be thrust under the old canon, which decrees, Vt qui primum
obiectum non probarunt, Carthaginens. Council. 7. ca. 3.
ad caetera non admittantur, That they which prove not the first thing
objected, should not be admitted to the rest: yet I will examine whatsoever he
can say, and cast his light stuff into the balance, and lay his counterfeit
coin to the touch, that the vanity of the one and deceit of the other may
appear.

THE SIXTH SECTION, WHAT MOVED the Author to dedicate his work to the Counsel.
The Answer.
THis Section coming out of the same forge, bewrays the same author, it is
so patched together with untruths and falsehoods, like the former. He abuses
those honorable persons, and deceives himself to think to win grace with
wise men by telling of fables. Simonides being asked why of all other he
deceived not the Thessalians, answered, (...).
because they were more simple and unlearned, then could be deceived by me,
says he: But their honors are too wise and prudent, then to be deluded with
such a fablers fictions. His several motives confusedly shuffled together, I
will bring into some order if I can.

1. Motive. Page 49. li. 5.6.
As this cause which I handle is most honorable of all, so I am bold to offer
the defense thereof to your honors, the most honorable and noble consistory of
our nation, etc. Page 48. lin. 10.11.12. etc.
Yet he limiteth this honorable authority before, saying, that the ends and
offices of a religious and spiritual commonwealth, Untruth. 86.
The end is the same, though the offices diverse.
are diverse from those of a temporal and civil government: and in that
respect, matters handled in the one do not so properly appertain to the
redress and judgment of those which rule in the other; Untruth. 87.
but are to be decided and reformed by the governors of that profession, See
the answer.
to which they are belonging, etc.

The remove. 1. I had thought that the general end both of the civil and
ecclesiastical body had been one and the same, though the offices and
functions be diverse, namely, The general end of the spiritual and temporal
body all one. 1. Timot. 2.1.2.
preservation not only of peace, but the maintenance of true religion to bring
the people unto God: I am sure S. Paul so teaches, that prayer be made for
Kings, and all that are in authority, not only, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, but in all godliness and honesty. It belongs then not only
to the civil state to provide for peace, that the people may live quietly,
but for true religion, that they may live also godly and honestly. In these
two points Eleutherius sometime Bishop of Rome shows the office of a King to
consist, Ann. 169. Fox. p. 107.
thus writing to Lucius King of Britain, The people and folk of the Realm of
Britain be yours; whom, if they be divided, you ought to gather together in
concord and peace, to call them to the faith and law of Christ, and to the
holy Church, etc.

The Princes power to reform religious disorders.
2. It is an absurd speech, that reformation of religion belongs not properly
to the judgment and redress of the Prince and her noble Counselors. Thus
these pragmaticall Friars would both pull out their right eye of judgment,
that they should not be able to discern, and cut off their right hand of
power, that they should not reform what is amiss in religion: for if the most
sovereign care of piety and religion do properly belong to the Prince; then
the Counselors of state, the most honorable Ministers under the Prince can not
be excluded. And therefore the Apostle in the place recited, makes not mention
only of Kings, but also of all that are in authority under them. This also
has been the ancient practice of this land: Eleutherius advises King Lucius
with the Council of his realm out of the scriptures to take a law to rule
his people by. Eleutherius epistle to King Lucius.


The Statute of Praemunire made against provisions and presentiments of
Bishoprics and other benefices from the Pope, Ann. 25. Edward 3. stat. de
prouisorib.
was enacted by King Edward the third, by the assent only of the great men of
his Council and Nobility, and of the comminaltie, without the Spiritual
Lords.

The like Act was made under Richard. 2. that all they which procured such
presentations from Rome, or any excommunications from thence in those causes
should be banished: Ann. 13. Rich. 2. s^. 2. c. 2.

The authority of noble men redress of spiritual disorders.

Fox. p. 1424.


to the which act the great men only of the temporaltie, without the Clergy,
gave their assent: Yea of late in Queen Mary's reign, the greatest friend to
the Pope that ever he had in England, the Prince (advised most like by her
Counsel) did of her own authority send certain articles, concerning
religious matters, as reteining of ceremonies, using of processions, manner of
baptizing, admitting to orders, and such like, to the Bishop of London
presently to be put in execution. Yea this discourser, soon forgetting what he
had said, confesses, whose chief care, speaking of the honorable Counsel,
must be in taking order for such causes, meaning of religion, p. 49. l. 14.
then as they may receive direction from the spiritual state (which we deny
not) so the correction and administration belongs unto them. Thus as a man
running in a maze, and not knowing where he is, he speaks contraries,
affirming unawares, what he before untruly denied, that the Magistrates chief
care and solicitude must be in taking order for such causes, he means of
religion, page 49. lin. 13. And thus as Augustine faith, Impij in circuitu
ambulant, qui in gyrum it, nunqua^ finit, etc. In Psalm. 139.
The ungodly walk in a maze, as he that goes in a compass, never is at an
end. And thus this obliuious discourser, runs himself out of breath, saying
and unsaying: for if the Magistrates chief care must be in taking order for
causes of religion, how do they not properly belong to the judgment and
redress of those which rule in the commonwealth? Much like he is to the
roape-maker in Purgatory, (...).
who as fast as he twisteth the roape, an ass behind deuoureth it: So his
wrested speeches, (...).
as the ouer-runnings of his mouth, are licked up by a contrary breath.

Now (right honorable) this Popes-creature at the first discovers himself,
he is his grand-masters factor, to engrosse all ecclesiastical causes to his
vnholines, and would cut your honors short both of judgment and power in
matters of religion: And thus full well like a wise Orator, he does wisely at
the first exasperate them, to whom he would insinuate himself. But go on (my
Lords) in your honorable course, to whom I do not only wish all excellent
knowledge and judgment in religion, as S. Paul said unto King Agrippa, Act.
26.29.
I would to God that not only thou, but all that hear me to day were both
almost, and altogether such as I am, etc. but prosperous success also in the
defense thereof: And I say with Hierome to every one of your honors, Ad Julian.
Cur qui in seculo primus es, non in Christi familia primus sis? Why should ye
not, that are chief in the world, be chief also in Christ's family?

Page 49. lin. 18.19. etc.
2. Motive. Because you are sworn Councellers to assist our Princess, whose
chief style and title is granted to her father King Henry the 8. by Pope Leo
the 10. (defender of the faith) for defending the Catholic Roman religion
against Luther, Untruth. 89.
etc.

The remove. 1. This title to be defender of the Church or faith, was due unto
the Prince, and given to the Kings of England long before King Henry, in Edward
the Confessors time, Illos decet vocare reges, qui vigilanter defendunt, Inter
leges Edward. Fox. p. 166.
and regunt ecclesiam Dei, It is meet to call them Kings that vigilantly
defend and govern the Church of God.

2 Her Majesty according to her princely style, has showed her self in deed
while she lived, a most constant Defender of the faith, and to none of her
predecessors was this style more truly given: for it is not contained in her
Majesty's style, to be defender of the Roman or Papal, but simply of the
faith.

3 What if it were bestowed upon King Henry for writing against Luther, Title,
to be defenders of the faith, how annexed to the Crown, and in what sense.
etc. that famous King did not receive it in that sense, or at the least
retained it not: neither is it now annexed to the imperial Crown in that
regard for writing etc. which concerned the King only then being, not his
succession, nor yet as a gift from the Pope, but as a right due to all
Christian Princes to defend the faith. What the occasion first was of this
title it skilleth not, neither by whom, nor for what it was taken up, so long
as it is not a vain title, but the Princes proceedings are answereable to the
style.

4 The heathen Emperors of Rome first used in their style to be called
Pontifices maximi, High Priests, as it may appear by the Epistle of Antoninus
Pius to the people of Asia: Eusebius. lib. 4.
yet the Christian Emperors continuing that style, to be named Pontifices
maximi, Edict. imper. Et council. Chalced. action. 3.
as Flauianus Valentinianus, pontifex Inclytus; Flauius Marcianus, pontifex
Inclytus, etc. yet were not bound by their style to maintain the idolatrous
religion of the Pagane Emperors, from whom it was descended: but they in
another sense did call themselves high priests, as having the chiefest care of
the Christian faith as the other had before of idolatry: So the Queens
highness then, and the Kings Majesty is now called a Defender of the right
Christian faith, howsoever their predecessors might be defenders of another
religion. And as Pilate did write Christ King of the Jews ignorantly,
confessing the truth; so did the Pope name the King of England Defender of the
faith, prophesying as Caiphas against himself, and foretelling unawares, that
the Princes of this land should become true defenders of the faith indeed.

5 This title of Defender of the faith is more truly annexed to the Crown of
England, then the style of Holiness to the Popes chair, and of Catholic to the
King of Spain, who, I could wish indeed, were that which they are called. But
I fear me, these titles do agree unto them, even as the titles of benefactors,
and of Saviors were usurped of Antiochus, and the Ptolomies, (...).
which were cruel tyrants: And as Dionysius the younger called his daughters by
the names of virtue, chastity, justice, being an enemy to them all. Who
herein are like unto those, qui titulos potentiorum praedijs suis affigunt,
who, the better to hold their lands, do entitle great men with them* against
which fraud Arcadius made a law: Cod. lib. 2. tit. 15. leg. 1. Augustine. in
Psalm. 21.
And as Augustine says, Haeretici ad defensionem possessionis suae Christi
titulos ponunt, sicut nonnulli faciunt in domo sua etc. Heretics to defend
their possession pretend the title of Christ, as many use to do in their
houses, entitling some great men with them to keep them from wrong: Ipse vult
possessor domus, and frontem domus suae de titulo alieno vult muniri: He will
be the owner of the house himself, yet will have another bear the name: So
the Pope will be the master of faith himself, yet pretends the name of
Christ, of holiness, of Catholic religion. So are not our late Queen and now
sovereign Lord defenders of the faith, but their Christian proceedings
(thanks be given unto God) are answerable to their honorable titles.

The third motive: Our unjust persecution under your predecessors requires
amends, Page 50. lin. 8. Slander 90.
and I hope at the least shall receive a toleration.

The Remove: 1. The punishment, which has been inflicted upon treacherous
Iudasites, is no more persecution, then for felons and murderers to be executed
at Tiburne: they suffer worthily for their traitorous conspiracies and
practices: shameless men they are, that complain of persecution, Traitorous
positions of Jesuits.
when as they hold most traitorous positions against the Prince and state: as
whereas the secular Mass Priests profess (if it be in truth) that if the
Pope should attempt by force of arms to invade the land, they would resist him
in person: and that if they knew of any designements by the Pope to enter by
force, etc. to reform religion, they would reveal it to the State. Disloyal
Persons in the name of that whole disordred crew, Manifest. f. 13. p. 2.
calls those assertions, heretical, and traitorous: yea, those wicked Popish
Iudas^^ed Divines at Salamanca in Spain resolved upon these devilish
conclusions: That they sinned mortally, which aided the English in Ireland;
that it was a meritorious act, Reply to the Manifestat. fol. 66. b.
to assist Tyrone; that the Catholics in Ireland, which did fight against the
Queen, were by no construction Rebels.

Beside these villainous positions, which no estate in the world could endure,
In the book of important considerations.

Decreed at Paris in Parliament anno 1594.


the Iebusites and Mass Priests practices have been most odious against the
life of our Sovereign: the treasons are confessed by the secular Priests
themselves. Therefore if the state of France upon one attempt of John Chastel
against the King of France, suborned by the Jesuits, expelled the whole order:
greater cause has the state of England, having experience of many wicked plots
devised and practiced both by the secular and irregular Mass Priests, to exile
the whole society of both, and to make their return into the land of treason.
Have not these miscreants now great cause to complain of persecution, and to
glory of such filthy martyrdom? I say unto them with Augustine against the
Donatists: Recte haec a vobis dicerentur quaerentibus martyrum gloriam, Cont.
Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 13.
si haberetis martyrum causam: These things were well alleged of you that
seek the glory of Martyrs, if you had the cause of Martyrs.

2. Nay rather these ungodly and seditious practisers, Popish professors
persecute rather then are persecuted De vnitat. eccles. c. 17.
by their impiety, obstinacy, idolatry, do persecute the state, then are
persecuted of the state: as Augustine says, Grauius Saram ancilla per
superbiam persecuta est, quam eam Sara per debitam disciplinam: The bondmaid
did more persecute Sara by her obstinacy, then Sara did her by due discipline
and severity.

3. Yea these froward persons, that have been so often by proclamation
forewarned to be packing (whereas the law is a sufficient monition it self)
and diverse of them, whereas they had deserved death by the law, were but exiled
and banished, as 21. at one time, and 31. at another: aduenturing
notwithstanding to enter the land, Stow anno Elizab. 27. 1585. Ann. 28. 1586
whether more of a superstitious mind to pervert souls, or of an ambitious
desire to gain a kingdom to the Popes seignorie, it is hard to say, or which
is more like, of a treacherous resolution to destroy both, and so rushing upon
the pikes, are accessory to their own death, Popish professors accessarie to
their own death.
and cause of their trouble themselves. Protestants in the late days of
persecution could not obtain that favor to be banished, neither were they
suffered to depart, but Ports and Havens were laid to keep them in. But this
Seminary brood may be gone, if they will, the passages are open for them, and
yet they will remain among us to their own peril. Wherefore we may here say
again unto them, as Augustine to the Donatists: Patent ^ortae, and exire non
vultis; quam persecutionem pa^^^ini, nisi a vobis? diligit vos persecutor
vester, Cont. Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 13.
and persequitur vos furor vester, ille vt fugiatis petit, iste vt pereatis
impellit: The gates are wide open, and ye will not go out; what persecution
suffer you, but from your selves? your persecutor loves you, your own fury
persecuteth you; Seminary Priests and Jesuits may be packing.
he desires you would be packing, this forces you to your own perishing.
Wherefore it is evident that these clamorous mates suffer no persecution, but
punishment for their evil demerits, and they suffer most justly, that no
amends is requisite in this case, unless it be by the like. But if they would
be exempted from the danger of the Princes laws, let them follow the Apostles
counsel: Will thou be without fear of the Prince? do well, Romans 13.3. And
let them do as Ambrose says to the Emperor: Ego in consistoria nisi pro te
stare non didici, Epist. 32. ad Valentin.
and extra palatium certare non possum, qui palatij secreta, nec quaero, nec
noui: I have learned not to stand in the imperial consistory, but for thee;
neither can I strive in the Princes palace, which neither know the secrets
thereof, nor desire. So let them neither strive against the authority of
Princes, nor press to know, and knowing to bewray their secrets. We desire not
their company, neither have need of their physic. And as Pausanias answered
a Physician, that said all was well with him: Because (says he) I use not you
for my Physician: So I make no doubt but all would be well with us, (...).
if such Italianated Physicians would be packing.

The fourth motive: 1. You vowed it in Baptism, your promise to God, Page 50.
lin. 16. Untruth 91.
to his Church, to your country, is to be performed.

Untruth 92.
2. Many, or most of you being of age and discretion in the time of Queen Mary,
have practiced and professed it.

Untruth 93.
3. So many of your noble company, as are admitted to the honorable order of
the Garter have sworn it.

Untruth 94.
4. You are all sworn Counselors to our Queen, which by title of inheritance,
and at her coronation by the oath and fidelity of a Christian Prince has
obliged her self to maintain it, etc.

The Remove: 1. They which were baptized under the Popish religion, were
baptized in ye name of the Trinity, not into the name of the Pope: they were
entered into the profession of the Christian faith, not of the Popish religion*
for then by this reason he that is baptized by an heretic, were bound to
maintain his heresy, if baptism in Popery were a bond to profess that
superstitious fantasy. We deny not, but that true Baptism in substance is
given in the Roman synagogue, but that neither proves it to be the true
Church, nor those baptized among them to be obliged to their religion: For
though we confess with the Apostle, that there is one Lord, Eccles. 24.5.
Baptism in Popery proves it not to be a true Church.
one faith, one Baptism, yet are not these only professed and had in the
Church, but only fruitfully and truly professed in the Church. In the which
alone, as ( Augustine says) God is not worshipped, but in the which alone God
is truly worshipped: in the which alone faith is not kept, but in the which
alone faith with charity is kept: Nec in qua sola vnus baptismus habetur,
Cont. Crescon. lib. 2. c. 29.
sed in qua sola vnus baptismus salubriter habetur: Neither in the which alone
is this one baptism had, but in which alone baptism is holesomely had. And
this is the cause why we iterate not Baptism given in Popery, because it was
ministered in the name of Christ, and so binds to the true Christian
profession, not to the Roman separation. And therefore we say not, to use
Augustines words, Vt cum ad nos veneritis alterum accipiatis, August. ibid.
sed vt eum, qui apud vos iam erat, vtiliter accipiatis: That when ye come to
us, you should receive another baptism, but that which they had with you, they
should hold it with profit. He seems then erroniously to think, that*
Baptism and the Church cannot be separated, that because we renounce not
Baptism ministered in the Popish Church, we are bound together with their
baptism to acknowledge their Church and faith. But this is a manifest error:
for as Augustine truly says: Lib. 5. de Baptism. c. 16.
Non omnes qui tenent baptismum, tenent ecclesiam, sicut non omnes, qui tenent
ecclesiam, tenent vitam aeternam: All which hold baptism, do not hold the
Church, as all that hold the Church, do not hold eternal life. We confess
then that the Church of Rome, Lib. 5. de Baptism. c. 7.
has legitimum baptismum, lawful and true baptism in substance, sed non
legitime, but not rightfully, or lawfully, as Augustine distinguishes: And,
Aliud est habere, Lib. 4. de Baptism. c. 17.
aliud vtiliter habere: It is one thing to have it, another to have it
profitablie: Baptism may without the Church be had, but not profitablie or
fruitfully had. Wheresoever baptism is had, it is the baptism of Christ, not
of men; of the author, not of the Minister: and therefore it binds to the
faith of the first institutor, not to the doctrine of the corrupt imitator.
Neither yet do the Papists baptize those again, which were initiated by that
Sacrament, among Protestants, and afterward became Apostataes; neither do they
think them to be tied by that baptism to the Protestants faith, as this
Apologist confesses he was borne in the Queens reign of parents conformable
to the time, page 52. and so baptized under the Gospel, yet has played fast
and loose with us, notwithstanding that bond.

2. Untrue it is, which in the next place is boldly affirmed: for diverse of
their Honors, were borne since the reign of King Henry the 8. and so not of
years then to discern. Some of them were in that time of the faith, which The
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury brought up under Master Bradford holy Martyr.
Philip 3.5. Galath. 2*3.
they now profess. The rest may say with S. Paul every one for himself: What
they were in time past it makes no matter to me, Galath. 2.6. By this rule,
neither Saint Paul that had been a circumcised Pharisie, should have been
become a preaching Apostle, nor yet Titus an uncircumcised Grecian a baptized
and believing Christian, if a profession first received might not upon better
judgment be rejected, or an opinion once entertained, might not with more
mature advice be reuersed: As though a plant disliking the ground might not be
removed, or the air for a man's health, that is sickly, changed* Augustine to
this purpose says well, that was challenged of the Donatists, Lib. 3. cont.
Petilian. c. 10.
because he had been a Manichee: quantum ille accusat vitium meum, tantum laudo
medicum meum: The more he blames my disease, I commend my Physician. The
obiecting of former error, does tend to the praise of the reformer.

3. The honorable Knights of the Garter never took any such oath to bind
themselves to the obedience of the Papal faith, but rather the contrary: as
may appear by the oath prescribed by statute to be ministered unto all her
Majesty's officers and ministers, whereby they acknowledge the Queens highness
to be supreme governor in this Realm, etc. in all spiritual or
ecclesiastical causes, Ann 1. Elizab. c. 1.
as temporal; and that no foreign Prince, Prelate or person, has or ought to
have any jurisdiction, power, The Council sworn against the Popes
jurisdiction.
etc. within this Realm. Thus this (sly merchant) would entangle their
Honors with repugnant oaths: as though they should swear one thing, when
they are enstalled into the honorable order of the Garter, and the quite
contrary, when they are sworn of the Council.

4. And as true it is, that our late Queens Majesty did oblige her self by
oath to maintain the Popish religion: which is a most notorious slander of
her Highness: there being no such thing contained in that princely oath, In the
7. section.
as shall afterward be showed, and her Majesty having given her royal consent
to the book of Articles of religion, confirmed by act of Parliament, and to
diverse statutes made for the abrogation of the Papal jurisdiction. Thus we
see, Imputation of perjury in effect to her Majesty by the Jesuit. Eccle.
10.20.
how disloyallie (this Popes creature) behaueth himself to his Prince, being
not far from the imputation of perjury, as though her Majesty should have
promised one thing upon her oath, and performed the contrary. The Preacher
advises, not to curse the King in thy thought: But these malepart popelings
dare adventure, not only to think, but to speak and practice evil against
their Prince. An evil requital for her princely clemency toward them: of
whom we may say, as Ambrose of Theodosius: Quasi parens expostulare malebat, De
obit. Theodos.
quam vt iudex punire, etc. vincere volebat non plectere: Who had rather as a
parent expostulate with them, then as a Judge punish them; win them rather
with favor, then winnow them with rigor: if her Highness had not been
otherwise by their unnatural proceedings provoked. And as Cleomenes said to
the Argiues that vpbraided him in like manner with perjury: It is in your
power to speak evil of me, (...).
but in mine to do evil to you: So these men do not consider, that for their
lewd leasings her Highness might have justly recompensed them with sharp
proceedings.

Page 51. lin. 13.14. etc.
The fifth Motive: Never any Catholic subject of England hitherto, has abused
so much your Honors, dishonored the cause of religion, for which we daily
undertake so many troubles, etc. to make so bold a challenge, except he were
able to perform it, Untruth 95. None of them have made good their challenge,
nor ever shall.
and my confident assurance is, I shall not be the first unhappy and unadvised
man to do it.

The Remove: What your success has been in your challenges, and how well ye
have performed the defense of the Popish cause, is well known to the world:
which of your writers has not been answered to the full? or who is there of
you, that has not been overtaken in that he has undertaken? Your great
patrones, Harding, Saunders, Bristow, Martin, Campion, Stapleton with the rest
have had their hands full. Protestant writers not answered.
But which of you has reioyned upon B. Iuel, D. Fulkes, D. Whitakers, D.
Sutcliffes replies? Your offers are brags, rather then bickerings, false
charges, rather then true chalenges. There is (says the Wiseman) that makes
himself rich and has nothing, Prou. 13.7. And such are those braggers, that
think no men's writings comparable to theirs, and scornefullie rather contemn,
then soundly confute any thing brought against them. You could do little, if
you might not brag; but your vain confidence will soon fail you, and your
swelling words will soon abate, and your vain crakes will crack upon your
own heads: Ad Pammach.
as Hierome says, Cito turgens spuma dilabitur; and quamuis grandis tumor,
contrarius est sanitati: The rising ^ome is soon dispersed, and great
swellings show no soundnes. Cicero well said: Oratores imperitos ad
vociferationem vt claudos ad equum confugere: That unskillful Orators use
outcries, as lame men horses: the one cannot go unless he be carried, the
other can say nothing unless he cry out. And set the loud outcries, vain
bragges, and bold facings of our adversaries aside, what are they, and what is
their cause? It is not so among disputers, as they say it is with Bee-masters:
(...).
That is judged to be the best hiue, which makes the greatest noise. The
greatest crakers are not the best fighters, nor the lowdest noise shows not
the best cause. And as they have sped hitherto, the like success let them
look for hereafter.

The sixth Motive: I will prove the religion, Page 50. lin. 1, 2
I defend to be conformable to the present forcible laws of England
established by our Queen Elizabeth, etc. P. 51. l. 18.19. Great untruth.
I undertake to prove directly by the Parliament laws, and proceedings of
Queen Elizabeth, that their religion is false, that we defend, true, etc.

The Remove: If this man were not past all shame, he would never have been so
audacious as to have uttered this untruth: for it is a fiction without all
color, he might as well have told us of the man in the Moon, and the
Sunneshine at midnight, and as soon might he have proved it, as that, which
here he says. He goes on and tells us he will prove by the proceedings of
Queen Elizabeth, that Christ is reallie present in the Sacrament of the altar:
As though the Church of England and all Protestants do not hold Christ's body
to be reallie, that is, Popish religion has no affinity with the Queens
proceedings. Untruth 96.
verily and truly present to the faith of the worthy receiver: but if by
reallie, he understand carnally present, it is directly contrary to the 28.
article of religion: which in direct words says* that transubstantiation is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture: and further adds, that the body
of Christ, is only eaten after a spiritual and heavenly manner, and the mean
whereby it is eaten is faith.

He will prove that Saints and Angels are to be reverenced and prayed unto. A
reverence, who denies? Untruth 97.
but to pray unto them is contrary to the 22. article, Invocation of Saints is
a fond thing.

That there is a Purgatory: Untruth 98.
which is contrary to the 22. article, the Romish doctrine concerning
purgatory is vainly invented. That prayer, alms, Untruth 99.
and other good deeds are available for the faithful souls departed:
contrary to article 31. that the sacrifices of Masses, etc. for the quick and
dead, are blasphemous fables: that only faith justifies not: Untruth 100.
contrary to article 11. that we are justified by faith only, is a most
wholesome doctrine.

Untruth 101.
He will prove that good works are meritorious before God: contrary to
article 12. good works cannot put away sins, and endure the severity of
Gods judgment.

Untruth 102.
That there is an external Priesthood and sacrifice in the Church of Christ:
contrary to article 31. the sacrifices of the Mass, wherein it was commonly
said, that the Priests did offer Christ etc. were blasphemous fables and
dangerous deceits: that we are not justified by an imputative justice, but
grace and justice are inherent and internal things: Untruth 103.
contrary to article 11. we are accounted righteous before God only for the
merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own
works, or deseruings.

That there be seven Sacraments in number: Baptism, Confirmation, Untruth 104.
Eucharist, Penance, extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony: contrary to
article 25. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the
Gospel, that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord: those five
commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders,
Matrimony and extreme Unction, are not to be accounted for Sacraments of the
Gospel.

These articles were first agreed upon by the whole Convocation of the Clergy
of this land, and put forth by the Queens authority anno 1562. and again
approved and allowed by the assent and consent of her Majesty, and subscribed
unto by the whole Clergy assembled in the Convocation anno 1571. and
established by act of Parliament anno 13. Elizab. c. 12. as may appear by
diverse branches of that act, whereby they are punishable which refuse to give
assent to the said articles, or do teach any thing repugnant, or contrary
unto them.

Notwithstanding all this, this shameless man blusheth not to tell us, that
these his erroneous opinions directly contrary to the very express words of
the said articles are conformable to the present forceable laws, and the
proceedings of Queen Elizabeth. Thus these fellows would make us believe that
the black crow is white, and that the Moon is made of green cheese, as the
saying is: or they might as well tell us with Democritus, that the Moon has
hills and dales; with Metrodorus, that the Sun is made of stone; with
Philolaus* of glass; with Epicurus, of the earth; with Heraclides, that the
earth moves round as the wheel upon the axletree; with Philolaus, that it is
whirled about as the Sun and Moon: or what else he may tell us, that is most
fabulous and incredible, as well as this, that the Romish religion is agreeable
to the laws in force in the Church of England. As he is found tripping here,
so I trust his credit shall be in the rest: Ambrose says, Nerui sunt, Epist.
44.
and quidam artus sapientiae non temere credere, It is as the sinews and
joints of wisdom, not rashly to give credit: (...).
And as Demosthenes was wont to say, that the best preservative against
Tyrants, was not to trust them: so is it against liers, not to believe them.

The 7. Motive. What reason should move me, then very young in years borne of
parents conformable to the time, Page 52. lin. 16.17. etc.
in and under the Protestant Regiment of Queen Elizabeth, brought up in that
University and other places, which were always least favoring of that
belief etc. to be of a different and contrary opinion, when if I would have
been of the same profession, I might have been regarded as others of my
condition.

The remove. The reason here used, may be thus framed: That is likely to be
the right faith, which a man, leaving all possibility of preferment, cleaves
unto.

But so has this man done, in embracing the popish profession: Ergo, etc.

First, if the proposition were true, this argument might be retorted upon
them: for in the late days of persecution in England, many zealous Protestants
did not only forsake all expectation of worldly preferment, but did willingly
forgo their life for the truth sake, and endured more for their conscience
only, then ever did any Papist: therefore if he have reasoned well for Popery,
he has reasoned better for Protestancie, that it is in the right belief.

2 Other reasons may be alleged, why many depart from the truth, Causes and
motives of and to heresy.
even where they may live with good conditions, beside a conscience of
religion: As an ambitious desire of preferme^t caused some to start aside, as
is evident in the examples of Nicepho. lib. 1. ca. 7.
Theobutes, Ambr. li. 1. de poenit. ca. 15.
Valentinus, Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. ca. 6.
Nouatus, Ex Augustine. de haeresib.
Marcion, Niceph. lib 4. ca. 22. Ex council. Antiochen. Epist. 6. ad Cornel.
Math. 23.14. Socrat. 7.27.
Montanus, who for the thirsty desire to be made Bishops, which they could not
obtain, fell into heresy. Some of a covetous greedy mind have become
singular, thinking thereby to grow rich. Such an one was Paulus Samosatenus, Ex
sacrilegijs ad summas diuitias peruenit, By sacrilege he came to great riches.
So Cypriane testifies of Nouatus, Spoliati ab eo pupilli, fraudatae viduae,
etc. He robbed orphans, and defrauded widows, as the Gospel witnesses of
the Pharisees, that they devoured widows houses, under color of long prayer.
Some are possessed with a spirit of phrenzie, and deluded of Satan: as the
Jews persuaded by one Moses, did cast themselves headlong into the Sea. The
Donatists did throw themselves headlong into the fire and water, and from the
tops of hills. Lib. 2. contr. Gaudent.
Augustine says of them, Diabolus vobis istum furorem inspirat, Who else but
the Devil does inspire this furious mind into you? And hence it comes that
many are bewitched of Satan, and justly given over of God to be deceived by
him to believe lies, because they received not the love of the truth. 2.
Thessal. 2.10.


Secondly, for the assumption. 1. seeing this Ignatian brother confesses he
was very young, when first he forsook the faith of the Gospel: he had greater
cause to suspect the rashness of his shalow youth in receiving, then commend his
stedfastnes in retayning his first error: He should rather say with S. Paul,
1. Cor. 13.12.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
a child. Otherwise his stiffnes in continuing, as he was, may be rather imputed
to an obstinate resolution, then to a tender persuasion of his conscience.
Youth is soon infected, and tender years easily tainted. It seems to be
true in him, which Hierome says, Difficulter eraditur, Hieron. ad Lae^am.
quod rudes animi perbiberunt, It is hardly recovered, which simple minds have
once received. And seeing he tells us he was borne of Protestant parents, I
would not have him more wilful then the heretic Eutyches, who said, Stiffnes
of heretics.
Sicut accepi a progenitorib. ita credidi; in hac fide genitus sum, etc. in hac
opto mori, As I have received of my progenitors, Council. Ephesm. 2. insert.
council. Chalcedonens. action. 1.
so have I believed; in this faith I was borne, in this faith I desire to die:
for seeing he was borne of right believing parents, and in the faith of the
Gospel, he can not pretend like cause of his persisting, as obstinate Eutyches
did. I know not who his parents were, but by his confession they were better
resolved in religion then their son: let him take heed then, least Eudoxius
speech inuerted be verified upon him, pater (...), filius (...): a godly
father, Socrates lib. 2. ca. 32.
a godless son.

2 But if it might be lawful for me a little to sound this young fathers mind,
I could guess at an other cause of his revolt, then his pretended conscience:
for it is well known, that the Ignatian fatherhood (whose cognizance as I am
informed, this sect-maister bears) is an order peramount in the Romish
corporation, and a passing gainful trade. These new vpstart friars are notable
catchpoles, and cosening (by their own Mass Priests report) cunni-catchers,
and such as angle with long rods, Ignatian fetches to get riches.
and fish for their own advantage.

They can tell us of Friar Gerards golden web, who could weaue, Quodlib. p. 90.
or rather wave to himself from diverse persons above six thousand pound: of
Friar Hawoods pomp in riding in a coach, and of his lordlike train: Reply to
the Manifestat. f. 14. a. Ib. f. 15. a. Quodlib. p. 91. Repl. f. 24. a. Repl.
f. 14. b.
of Friar Garnets expenses after five hundred pounds by the year: of Friar
Oldcornes stable of eight geldings, all at one time: of Friar Holts large offer
of pensions: of Friar Walpoles crowns: of Friar Gerards Church-stuffe, valued
at two hundred marks: of a vestment given him of needleworke esteemed at an
hundred marks. May we not now say unto them as Apollonius of Priscilla and
Maximilla, Dic mihi prophetae vestib. and gemmis ornantur, propheta tabula
ludit and tesseris, Hieron. catalog. scriptor.
Do prophets glitter in rich vestures and precious stones? Do prophets play at
tables and dice? But such are these iollie fellows, ietting up and down in
silks and veluets, with jewels, rings, and chains of gold: and it is very like
they do sport themselves also, both above and under boo^d at their pleasure.

And as they are nimble fingred gentlemen to tell money, so they have a
special faculty in bestowing of Legacies. Friar Gerard being put in trust for
the disposing of 3000. pound and more, Repl. f. 24. a.
could very handsomely co^uey it into his own purse. An other lay brother of
that order got from a rich man lying sick at Valledolid in Spain a great
sum of gold, which he had purposed to have given to the poor Englishmen,
Ibid. fol. 26. a.
which lived there. And herein they do well revive the memory of the heretic
Dioscorus, of whom Ischyrion complained, that whereas the Emperor had decreed
to send corn for the relief of the parts of Lybia, he would not suffer it to
be transported, Libell. Monach. Constantinop. 5. action. 1.
but sold it in time of dearth at great prices, and how Peristeriae testamentum
violauit, he violated the testament of Peristeria, and the legacies given to
the Monasteries he bestowed upon bawdes and harlots.

This great wealth, pomp, and credit of the Ignatians considered, who are
regarded (as we were told before) of the most rich and puissant princes of the
world, Page 46.
might it not be a great allurement to this (aspiring springall) to associate
himself unto that company, and to thrust his sickle into their harvest? for
if they that gleane after them, which are but their factors and dispensators
can fill their hands, that they stick not to hazard twenty nobles at once at
play, Reply to the Manifestat. fol. 24. b. (...).
the reapers that go before them must needs make a better match? they come to
the golden harvest, as Stratocles and Democlidas profanely called the judgment
seat. And thus much also of this Section.

THE SEVENTH SECTION: OF THE Authors particular defense to her Majesty.
I Do not purpose to examine all the Libellers idle speeches, vain
repetitions, and unsavory words: if I should make answer to every thing, and
spend time to note every foolish pranke he plays, I should (as the wise man
says) be like him: Proverb. 26.4.
I will therefore make choice of his principal stuff and leave the rest: Not,
as Hierome says, Quia difficile sit eum vincere, Aduers. Heluid.
sed ne respondendo, dignus fieret, qui vinceretur, as though it were an hard
matter for him every where to be vanquished, but least he should be thought
worthy to be answered.

The first Apology or defense.
1 BEginning with my Catholic, Christened, anointed, and crowned Queen
Elizabeth, Page 54. lin. 1.2. unto 105. these are but glozing speeches. Page 54.
to whom I wish as much spiritual benediction, and terrene honor, as any
subject may to his temporal Sovereign etc.

2 Whereof she has vowed defense, by the vow of a Christian in baptism etc.
by the oath and fidelity of a Christian Catholic anointed at her coronation
etc. for defense whereof the glory of the style of her title was first
granted etc. Untruth 106.


3 Whereof she reteyneth in princely person some reverent notes, as the using
of the sign of the cross upon sudden and strange accidents, Untruth 107.
etc. not preuaricating in the maine point of the real presence etc.

4 I will teach nothing contrary to her princely dignity, and prerogatives,
Untruth 108.
nothing repugnant to her own truly interpreted proceedings.

The Antilogie.
1 HE that should read Cardinal Wolseys style thus writing, Ego and Rex meus,
I and my King, would think that this vain craker trod in his steps, saying
here and in other places, My Catholic Queen etc. And whether for this or
other of their proud tricks, the secular Mass Priests have well matched them
together, these are their words, Manifest. f. 19. b.
Never shall the Catholic Church or commonwealth of England find so wicked a
member, as a Wolsey, a Parsons, a Creswell, a Garnet, a Blackwell.

But if this suger-toonged fellow would have had her Highness then and his
Majesty now think, that he wishes so well unto them, The Apologist detected
not to wish well to his Majesty.
let him tell us, whether he were not brought up in the Ignatian school of
treachery, and if he be not of Parsons mind, that it is treason if the Pope
should invade England, to bear arms against him, or agrees he not with the
Ignatian brood of Salamanca, that resolved it was no rebellion for the Queens
subjects to fight against her in Ireland: or what thinks he of Parsons,
Walpooles, Giffords, Allens attempts against their country, and their
suborning and exciting of traiterous Parry, Lopez, Squire, Savage, York, with
the rest of those detected parricides: for all these wicked conspiracies were
forged in the Ignatian ignited and fiery shops: These were the actors, but
they the inuentors: as it was said of Laelius, that he was the deviser, and
Scipio the performer of diverse actions. (...).
And yet for all this, we must believe this (dissembling Friar, that is by all
likelihood consorted and confederate with the rest of that crew) that he
wishes her Highness then, and his Majesty now, as well as if they were of his
religion.

2 Concerning the vow made in baptism, I have answered before, Remove to 4.
motive artic. 1.
that the vow is made to Christ, not to the Pope; and therefore baptism
received in popery, does not bind the party baptized to maintain and receive
popery. It was the heresy of Petilian the Donatist, whom Augustine confuteth,
Lib. 3. contr. Petilian. ca. 19.
that Conscientia dantis attenditur, quae abluat accipientis* That the
conscience of him that gives baptism, does cleanse him that receives it:
Against whom Augustine shows, that it is the baptism of Christ, if it be
given in his name, whosoever is the minister thereof: Baptismum Christi nemo
Apostolorum ita ministrauit, vt auderet dicere suum, Ibid. ca. 56.
The baptism of Christ none of the Apostles so ministered, that he durst call
it his: much less may the Pope or popish Priest challenge the baptism which
he gives in the name of the Trinity to be his. It was Cyprians error confuted
by Augustine, Baptism and the Church may be separated.
that Baptism and the Church could not be separated. Si baptisma (says he) in
baptizato inseparabiliter manet, Lib. 5. de baptis. ca. 16.
quomodo baptizatus separari ab ecclesia potest, and baptisma non potest? If
baptism remain inseparable in the baptized, how can he that is baptized be
separated from the Church, and not baptism with him?

Concerning the Princes style to be called Defender of the faith, I have
likewise said enough before. Remove to motive 4. artic. 4.


Now because he does so often inculcate the Princes oath, that all men may see
his false dealing, I will set down the same before omitted, as it is in Magna
charta expressed: This oath then is prescribed to be taken by the Prince at the
Coronation, and to be ministered by the Metropolitan or other Bishop. Seruabis
ecclesiae dei, Clero and populo pacem ex integro and concordiam in deo etc. The
oath of the Prince at the Coronation.
You shall keep peace and concord in God to the Church of God, the Clergy and
people according to your power, he shall answer, I will. You shall cause to be
done in all your judgments right and equal justice, and discretion in mercy
and truth according to your strength: he shall answer, I will. You shall
grant just laws and customs to be held, and promise them to be protected by
you, and confirmed to the honor of God, which the people shall choose,
according to your strength: he shall answer, I do grant and promise: All
these things pronounced, let him confirm, that he will keep them all,
Sacramento super altar protinus praestito, etc. By an oath presently taken
upon the altar, etc.

What is there now in this oath, that binds the Prince to the defense of the
Popish religion? there is not so much as one word tending to any such thing
contained in the oath it self: only mention is made of the altar, which was
so called in time past, though it were made of wood, because it represented the
true altar which was Christ's body: Lib. 6 c. 21. in Leuitic.
for so Hesychius interprets the Altar. And Augustine speaking of the violent
outrages of the Donatists, says, Effractis altaris lignis, Having broken the
boords of the Altar. Epist. 50. ad Bonifac.

The Communion Table called an Altar.

Jn epist. praefac. liturg. Chrysostom.


Their Altars which were no other but Communion Tables, were then of wood: the
making them of stone is but a late device, as Beatus Rhenanus testifies:
Araerum superaddititia structura nouitatem prae se fert: This building of
Altars added to the rest, does show novelty. And it is most evident, that when
the name of altar was first used, as in Augustines time, there was no opinion
in the Church of the carnal presence, or of the sacrificing of Christ's body,
but only spiritually: as it is evident by these sayings of Augustine.
Octogint. trium quaest. q. 61.
Christ is our priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, which
offered himself a sacrifice for our sins, and has commended the similitude
of that sacrifice to be celebrated in remembrance of his passion, that the same
thing, which Melchisedech offered to God, now we see to be offered in the
Church of Christ through the whole world: But Melchisedech offered not Christ's
flesh, but only bread and wine. Again he says, The flesh and blood of this
sacrifice before the coming of Christ, Cont. Faustum Manich. lib. 20. c. 21.
How Christ is sacrificed now. August. cum citation.

Gratian. page 3. distinct. 2. c. 48.


was promised by sacrifices of similitudes in the passion of Christ; it was
given by the truth it self, after the ascension of Christ; it is celebrated by
the sacrament of remembrance: therefore now Christ's body is not sacrificed
verily and truly, but only sacramentally, non rei veritate, sed significante
mysterio, not in verity, but in mystery.

And I pray you, what kind of argument is this, the Prince at the Coronation,
taking his oath, lays his hand upon the Altar: Ergo, she swears to
maintain the Popish sacrifice of the Altar: as though he that prays or
takes his oath in the Churches, which have been consecrate to idolatry,
thereby gives consent to maintain idolatry? 2. King. 5.18.
Naaman though he kneeled with his master the King leaning upon his hand in
the house of Rimmon, yet gave not consent to that idolatrous worship: yet this
example is very unlike and not to be imitated, only I allege it to show the
weakness of this argument.

3. As for the sign of the cross, wherewith, you say, her Majesty used to
sign her self, or women with child* etc. as you speak here but upon
hearesay: so if it should be true, as you say, you have not gained much by it.
For neither our Prince then, nor Church did ascribe any virtue to the sign it
self, or adore and worship it, as Papists do: The sign of the Cross ciuilly
used.
The sign of the cross may be used in banners and streamers, and set into the
Diadem of Princes, as a civil sign of honor: as Ambrose, if that oration be
his, Oration. de obit. Theodos.
writes of Helena; Sapienter Helena egit, quae crucem in capite regum leuauit:
Helena did wisely, in rearing up the cross in the head of Kings. And though
this sign is not any ways to be adored, Not to be contemned.
neither yet do we think it ought to be contemned: As that law of Honorius
was commendable, wherein the Jews are prohibited, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 12. l. 1.
speciem crucis incendere, to burn the fashion of the cross: And that of
Theodosius, which decrees a great punishment to him, qui in solo vel scilice
crucem depinxerit, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 11. l. 1.
which painteth the cross in the ground or pauement to trample and tread upon
it: Or if any should use the sign of the cross (which notwithstanding we
allow not) as in Basils time, not with a superstitious opinion of it, or
confidence in it, but as an outward testimony of their inward faith: as Basile
says, (...): Lib. de spirit. sanct. c. 27.
That they which trusted in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, were marked with
the sign of the cross: Whosoever shall use the sign of the cross in any of
these manners, is yet far off from Popish superstition.

And I am verily persuaded, that if his Majesty, or the Church of England did
think, that the civil, reverent, significant using of the cross, without a
superstitious opinion of it, were in deed, or could justly be taken, as a
badge or cognizance of Popery, as it has bin an offense to many good
Christians, it should be more sparingly used, and may in time, if it seem so
good to his Majesty without prejudice of the truth or religion, be wholly
removed, that there might not be the least exception taken against our Church.
But this (quarrel picker) according to the saying, will play at small game
before he will sit out, and so does he here by fastening his hold of so small an
occasion. Her Highness then, and his Majesty now, and the Church of England
holds a real and true presence of Christ's body to the faith of the worthy
receiver in the Sacrament: but her Highness was not persuaded of any gross
carnal presence, as is evident by her royal assent to the articles of
religion, therefore herein her Majesty was much abused and slaundered.

4. Lastly, whereas the Roman profession is altogether repugnant to Princes*
prerogatives: as in that it allows the Pope to excommunicate Princes, to
depose them, to transfer their Crowns, appeals to be made to the Pope from
the Prince, that the Pope may absolve subjects from their oath of fealty; that
the Pope, not the Prince in his own kingdom, is supreme in all
Ecclesiastical causes: that the Pope inuading a kingdom by force, under
pretense to reform religion, is to be assisted against the Prince: all which
positions the Jesuits the Popes parasites do hold, Popish religion repugnant
to the prerogative of the Crown.
as it may appear in their seditious books and answers to the Secular
Mass Priests. And these all being directly repugnant to the prerogative royal
of the Crown: as it has been adjudged by by public acts of Parliament, not
of late only, since the reviving of the Gospel, Anno 1. Eliza. c. 1. Anno
Richar. 2.16. c. 5.
but even while Popery reigned, and that by the express consent of the Popish
Clergy: How is not this man to be thought to be past all shame, that
persuading to Popery, says he will teach nothing contrary to the Princely
dignity? etc. We may say truly to him, which Petilian the Donatist untruly
objected to Augustine, that he had, ingenium Carneadis Academici, Carneades the
Academikes wit, August. lib. 3. cont. Petilian. c. 16.
who disputed, Nigras niues esse cum albae sint, nigrum argentum, etc. That
snow was black, and silver black, whereas they are both white: so he goes
about to persuade things that are quite contrary. We need not here follow the
counsel of Seneca: Quaedam falsa very speciem ferunt, dandum semper est
tempus, veritatem dies aperit: Some false things make a show of true, we must
give some space, for time tries the truth. But the falsenes of these
improbable speeches appears at the first, we need no time to descrie them.

The second Apology.
FRom page 55. to page 66. the Apologist runs as it were in a maze, now in,
and now out, as though he had lost himself in a wood: I will do my best to
trace him, and find him out: I shall not need to follow him in all his
wanderings and turnings, nor to answer all his tautologies and vain
repetitions, but I will gainecope him, and cross him the next way, and reduce
his idle and superfluous speeches into some order and form. All these leaves
contain but one argument, which may be collected thus:

Her Majesty and the state are bound to maintain the religion of her famous
noble Christian progenitors Kings and Queens of this land:

But they were all known to be of the Roman religion, and as he himself
says, Papists, page 59. lin. 7. Ergo.

First let us see how he proves the proposition or first part of this
argument, and then how the second.

1. Many of them were holy Saints, and miraculously witnessed of God to be in
heaven, even by Protestants testimony, Page 55. l. 24. etc. Page 55. lin. 4,
5. etc.
etc. whom the Protestant Ministers must needs condemn to hell and damnation,
if they will leave any little hope for themselves to be saved, Untruth 109.
for one heaven cannot possess them both. We do not condemn them to hell.


The Antilogie.
1. IF this were a good argument, then Christians borne at their first
conversion of idolatrous parents in many ages succeeding together, should never
have changed their religion, but continued in Pagane idolatry still, for fear
of condemning all their progenitors to hell: neither Constantine the great in
the Roman Empire, nor Lucius in England should have become Christened Kings.
Parents corrupt religion not to be followed.
If Idolatrous parents be in state of damnation, shall the children tread in
their steps to go the same way? The scripture teaches otherwise, that though
the father dye in his iniquity, yet if he beget a son, that sees all his
fathers sins which he has done, etc. he has not lift up his eyes to the
idols of the house of Israel, Ezech. 18.14.
nor defiled his neighbors wife, etc. he shall not dye in the iniquity of his
father, but shall surely live.

2 If the son be bound to his fathers false religion, as idolatry,
superstition, wherein he erred, least he should think him to be condemned, he
were likewise obliged to imitate his auncesters vices and corruptions of life,
as adultery, oppression, violence, whereby they were polluted: should a man
certainly condemn himself, to believe that his predecessors are uncertainly
saved? Their sins being of ignorance might be pardoned, whereas the sons
seeing his fathers sins, and not amending, are more surely sealed.

3 That many therefore of the renowned Kings and Queens of this land are
Saints in heaven, is not by any Protestants denied, as he says by some it is
confessed: for they might be carried away with some errors of the time, then not
revealed, yet holding the foundation, thorough Gods mercy they might be saved.
It is a diverse case, Errors of simplicity in times of ignorance by Gods mercy
pardoned.
when a man sins of infirmity or simplicity, and when he offends
willingly and of obstinacy: to stumble, in the dark, craves pity; to grope
at noone days, is great folly: I say therefore in this case, as our Savior
to the Pharisees, If ye were blind, ye should not have sin, but now ye say we
see, John. 9.41.
therefore your sin remains. And as S. Paul says, The time of ignorance
God regarded not, Act. 17.30. God therefore might show mercy to them that
erred of simplicity, which is no warrant for them, that should now be seduced
willingly. Cypriane to this purpose thus says, as he is rehearsed by
Augustine, Ignosci potest simpliciter erranti, Lib. 4. de baptism. ca 5.
etc. He that erreth simply may be pardoned, as the Apostle Paul says of
himself, I was a blasphemer and a persecutor, but I was received to mercy,
because I did it ignorantly. Then it follows, Post inspirationem vero and
reuelationem factam, qui in eo quod errauerat perseuerat, prudens and sciens
sine venia ignorantiae peccat: But he which after the inspiration and
revelation of the truth should persevere in error, does sin wittinglie, not
ignorantly; and therefore must look for no pardon or pity. This is then the
different case between the parents erring in time of darkness, and the sons
stumbling in the day light: Their salvation does magnify Gods mercy in
pardoning their imperfections; it does not justify their religion, in
commending their superstitions. (...).
Our parents errings are our learnings, their wants are not our warrants: We
must not imitate and follow them, as Plato his scholars his crookednes,
Aristoteles his stammering, Alexanders courtiers his stouping.

The Apology.
1 THe 2. proof. Page 56.
Because all states that live in England are indebted to those Princes, Clergy
men for learning, the Noble for nobility, men of arms for heroical acts,
etc. her Majesty has received life, being, Crown, Page 57.
Kingdom and Diadem, won and converted etc. augmented and enlarged by so many
Henry's, Edwards, etc.

They builded Churches, Monasteries, common Schools, Page 58.
etc. What donations and free gifts were granted to the English Clergy, etc.

2 For the defense of this religion all those princely prerogatives were
granted by the free subjects of England to their Kings her Catholic
predecessors, Page 61.
which she still enjoys by that title, as alienations, aduousions, citations,
corporations, escheates, fools, forfeitures, franchises, deodands, etc.

3 The nobility possess their lands, castles, Page 62.
etc. titles of honor by their ordinance: And that miserable people of England
that untruly challenges the name of the Clergy among Protestants,
Bishoprics, Deaneries, degrees and titles of Schools, Universities,
Colleges, etc. was derived from our Catholic Kings, etc.

The Antilogie.
1 IS not here now great ado about nothing? and is not this a goodly
argument? The ancient Kings and Princes have been great benefactors to all
degrees and states in England, Ergo, we are bound to receive their faith and
religion. Who denies, but that all sorts of men, and degrees of callings
amongst us, How far we are bound to our predecessors for benefits received
by and from them.
are to give great thanks unto God for such worthy instruments of our outward
peace and prosperity? and yet who takes himself in religion to be tied by
this bond to the same conformity: thankfulness for benefits temporal, ought
not to abridge us of things spiritual, neither ought our duty to men, make us
forget our service to God. If this persuasion were sound, Constantine and other
Christian Emperors must not have forsaken the idolatry of their predecessors,
by whom the Empire had been much enlarged, and the City of Rome, with many
costly Temples and buildings, and other goodly foundations beautified, many
excellent laws also for administration of justice published, and to whom for
the outward state of the commonwealth, the Empire was as much bound, as any
Christian Kingdom at this day to their ancient Catholic Kings and founders.
(...).
That saying of Pericles, that when his friend would have had him take a false
oath for him, said, he was a friend only so far as the altar, might easily
have dissolved this doubt: our worthy founders have an interest in us for our
houses, Colleges, lands, etc. but not for Gods altar, or matters of religion.

2 First, all those privileges and immunities were granted to the King, as
belonging to his princely prerogative, not for the defense of the Popish
religion, as it may appear by those several statutes, which the Apologist
cites in the margin, which shall be examined in their order.

1 Forfeyture. 4.5. ann. Edward. 2.17. c. 16. the escheates of felons lands are
given to the King. Untruth 110.


Untruth 111.
2 Franchise. 20. The ancient prerogatives and authorities of justice, Acts of
Parliament examined, fal^ely alleged by the Apologist.
which had been severed by the gifts of sundry Kings, are restored, as the
pardoning of treasons, murders, man-slaughters, making and appointing of
Justices etc. ann. Henr. 8.27. c. 24.

3 Intrusion. 1. The heir of him that holds of the King in chief, if he
enter, before he have received seisin of the King, Untruth 112.
shall gain no freehold thereby, Edward. 2. ann. 17. c. 13. here is no mention
made of any such regard, for maintenance of Popery.

4 Mortdauncester. 1. The King shall have the seisin of their lands, that hold
of him in chief, ann. 52. Hen. 3. c. 16. Untruth 113.


5 Partition. 1. If lands holden of the King in chief, descend to many
partners, Untruth 114.
all the heirs shall do homage to the King, Prerogatiu. regis 5 Ed. 2.

6 Patents. 1. Aduowsions of Churches and dowers do not pass in the Kings
graunts, Untruth 115.
unless express mention be made, Ed. 2. ann. 17. prerogatiu. regis c. 15.

7 Primer seyson. 1. Untruth 116.
The King shall have primer seisin after the death of them that held of him in
chief, Ed. 2. an. 17. prerogatiu. reg* c. 3. here, as in all the rest, there
is no consideration pretended for defense of religion.

8 Provision. 21. Untruth 117.
All the Statutes made against provisions purchased from Rome in the time of
Ed. 3. Ric. 2. are confirmed. And it is further enacted, that elections of
Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, Deanes, be not in any wise interrupted by the
Pope, Hen. 4. an. 9. c. 8. This act overthrows the jurisdiction of the Pope,
so far is it from granting any thing to the King for the defense thereof.
Thus like an unskillful Apothecarie, taking quid pro quo, he has tempered a
contrary drugge, which as a dram of coll^quintida marreth the whole potion,
though it had been otherwise medecinable.

9 Tenure. 2. They that hold of lands escheated to the King, shall do the same
service to the King, Untruth 118.
which they did before, Mag. chart. c. 31.

10 Ward. 3. The King shall not have the custody of the heir that holds of
the king by free soccage, Untruth 119.
and of another by Knights service, Hen. 3. an. 9. Mag. chart. c. 27. Ward
13.14. 15. The King shall have the ward and marriage of all that hold of him in
chief, Ed. 2. ann. 17. praerogatiu. reg. c. 1.2.6.

Untruth 120.
11 Women. 2. That widows of them, that hold of the King in chief shall not
marry without the Kings license: praerogat. reg. c. 4. ann. 17. Ed. 2.

Untruth 121.
12 Wreck 2. The King shall have the wrecke of the sea throughout the realm,
praerogat. reg. c. 11. ann. 17. Edward. 2. Thus it is evident, that these laws
by this pettifogger alleged, do not serve his turn at all: neither is there
to be found so much as one syllable sounding that way, that these privileges
and graunts, were for that reason and intent given unto the Kings of England,
as he says, for the defense of the Popish faith: so that he is euide^tlie
convinced of so many untruths, as he has here quoted laws. And beside let it
be considered, that all these prerogatives were granted in the reigns of Hen.
3. and Edw. 2. who impugned the jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop, and
therefore are reckned up in the number of Kings of unhappy success, by this
Popes Register, p. 77. How then is it like, that these privileges were
granted them for defense of the papal seignorie, to the which they so much
opposed themselves?

3 But concerning the dignities of the Church of England, founded, as he says,
by their Catholic Kings, we do possess them with better right, then the
Popish Clergy did. For 1. whereas they erected them to the honor of God, which
was the principal end of their devotion, though they failed in the means, we
doubt not, but that these erections are now better employed to Gods glory then
ever they were in time of Popery: and that they, not we, Westm^n. 2. ca. 41.
Edw. 1. ann. 13.
used those frank gifts, contra formam collationis, against the form of
collation, and mind of the founder, employing them to superstitious and
idolatrous and riotous uses, Aedificia coru^ ^cclesiis vendicentur. Cod. lib.
1. tit. 12. l. 11. Honor. Theodos.
not pious and religious; and therefore did forfeit their state according to
the equity of the law.

2 Beside, this is consonant to the laws Imperial, that edificies abused to
heresy and superstition, should be added unto the true Church: and the reason
of the law is yielded, Certum est, quicquid a fide Christianoru^ discrepat
legi Christianae esse contrarium, It is certain, what soever differs from
the Christian faith, is contrary to the Christian law. Such things then as
were abused against true religion, were out of the laws protection.

3 These ecclesiastical dignities were first erected for the preaching of the
word: as the Apostle says, Popish hierarchy usurps places of the Church. 1.
Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things? Therefore an unpreaching Clergy, such as the Popish
Hierarchy is, has no right unto them: they were but usurpers, no true owners.

Therefore ye Popish Mass Priests, and Baals shauelings are the miserable
people spoken of, worthy with Elie his posterity to beg a morsel of bread,
and a piece of silver, rather then to bear the Priests office: 1. Sam. 2.35.
To whom that saying of Ambrose may fitly be applied, Nomen inane, crimen
immane, honor sublimis, vita deformis, ne sit religiosus amictus, irreligiosus
profectus, Let not your name be vain, your crimes certain; your honor hie,
your life awrie, your habit holy; (...).
but your hearts and works unholy. Such as Alexander said Antipater was, He
did wear white garments without, and was all purple within: Such is the Popish
Clergy, outwardly clothed with sanctity, inwardly full of hypocrisy.

The Apology.
1 NO place of error was left for those Kings, pa. 66. li. 7. The third proof.
Ergo their religion is to be received: that it is not likely that those
ancient Catholic Kings could err, he would prove 1. by the confession of the
Protestants, That it does appertain to the title and jurisdiction of Christian
Kings to determine matters and questions of religion, page 64. lin. 10.

2 Because of the zeal and devotion of those Kings etc. there is no
comparison, but rather Protestant Princes should err then they, page 64. lin.
32.

3 Because of the number, learning and piety of them by whom they were
counsayled, page* 64. lin. 30. as Cedde, Anselme, Dunstane, Thomas Becket,
Lanfranke, pa. 65. li. 30.

4 There was no place of error left for those Kings etc. because no decree of
faith without general consent of the whole Christian word, general Councels,
etc. except God would permit the whole world to be deluded, etc. page 66. lin.
6.10. etc.

The Antilogie.
1 TO prove the former Catholic Kings not to have erred, he begins himself
with an error and fiction of his own, that Protestants refer the deciding
and determination of questions of religion unto Princes, as though the
resolution of all such doubts were laid up and locked in the Princes breast.
What power Protestants yield to Princes in causes ecclesiastical.
We do attribute unto our Christian Princes no absolute power to determine what
they will, nor privilege them from error, as they do their Pope.

The allegations in the margent affixed are frivolous: for neither did the
Convocation ann. 1562. refer the deciding the questions of religion to her
Majesty: Untruth 122.
but they were first agreed upon by the Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of
the Clergy by the word of God, whereunto her Majesty afterward gave her
royal assent.

Neither can any such thing be showed out of any act of Parliament, Untruth
123.
ann. 1. ann. 5. ann. 13. Elizab. as he cunningly, according to his fraudulent
manner foisteth into the margent, only the chief government of all estates
and* in all causes, is given to her Majesty, and that they ought not to be
subject to any foreign jurisdiction: artic. 37.

Untruth 124.
The author of Synopsis is also in this behalf sclaundered: Synops. contr. 7.
qu. 1. par. 3.
for he speaks not, where that question is handled, of deciding of questions
of religion, but of the constituting of Ecclesiastical laws, the authority
whereof is showed to belong to the Prince with three limitations. 1. The Prince
is not to prescribe any laws, but such as require the true worship of God. 2.
He is to consult in these cases with the learned and godly of his realm. 3.
Such canons and ordinances, the execution whereof properly belong unto the
Ministers of the Church, are excepted: and so it is concluded, that no laws
ought to be made without the authority of the Prince, which the Prince is
bound to execute.

Now, sir, does it follow hereupon, that Christian Princes are absolutely to be
obeyed in all ecclesiastical laws whatsoever? unless you could show this by
the confession of Protestants, which you shall never do, your reason is not
worth a rush.

2 Neither does it follow, because some of them were men of great sanctimonie,
as instance is given in King Alured, of his devout prayers, godly exercises,
charitable works, pa. 64. whose singular virtues are as much magnified by
Protestant Historiographers, as by any: or because they were disposed to
justice, Fox page 143.
personally sat in judgment etc. pa. 56. li. 26. made good laws: that
therefore in matters of religion they might not err, and be deceived.

The mercy of Antoninus Pius, that said, Princes civil and moral virtues do
not justify their religion.
he had rather save one Citizen, then destroy a thousand of his adversaries:
the charity of Adrianus, that never saw poor man, whom he did not relieve:
the gentleness and clemency of Titus, who never dismissed any man from him
without hope to obtain his suite: the justice of Alexander Seuerus, who, when
he met any corrupt judge, was ready to thrust his fingers in his eyes: Iulians
liberality, which built Hospitals for strangers, Sozomen. lib. 4.15.
gave great store of wheat and wine for relief of the poor people. These
noble virtues much to be commended in Princes, do not therefore justify Pagane
idolatry, to the which they were addicted.

And to exemplify this matter in Christian Emperors, Constantius was a just
and temperate Emperor, yet an Arriane. Anastasius otherwise a good Emperor,
yet erred about the Trinity, who published, that men should worship not three
but four persons in the Godhead. Justinian, a wise and just Emperor, yet
infected with the heresy of Eutyches, who held, that Christ had two persons,
and so in effect made two Christ's: In like manner might diverse ancient Kings
of England be men of noble and excellent virtues, and yet carried away with the
errors of those times in matters of religion.

3 Neither were they the freer from error, because they were assisted with
Dunstones, Anselmes, Lanfranks, Beckets: they were so much the more like to be
deceived, because they were ruled by such superstitious deceivers: for if the
blind lead the blind, Math. 15.14.
they are both like to fall into the ditch. As for Cedde, who is numbered with
the rest, as he was some hundred years before them, so in judgment he was
unlike them, as shall even now be showed: Neither was virtuous King Alured
wholly for them, or of that faith which the Church of Rome now holds, as
follows presently to be declared.

The whole Christian world not deceived.
4 We do not think that the whole Christian world can be, or was ever deceived:
but God always therein in some part or other, had his Church, which held the
truth, though the same not always glorious and visible to the world: and so we
doubt not, but that in all ages and times since our Saviors ascension, there
have been, that professed the Gospel: Neither can it be showed, that ever
Popery possessed the whole Christian world.

But concerning General Councels, we know they have erred, General Councels
may err.
and may err again: As the general Council of Antioch, where Athanasius was
condemned: Another at Antioch, wherein the heresy of the Macedonians was
confirmed: the Synod Arriminens. concluding for Arrius: the second Ephesine
that favored Eutyches; and diverse other general Councels have erred, as is
confessed by our adversaries. And not only those assemblies of heretics and
their favorites, but even of Catholics, by the confession of the Papists
themselves have erred, as the general Councels of Constance and Basile,
Bellar. lib. 1. de council. ca. 7.
which decreed that General Councels had authority above the Pope, which the
Ignatian Divines hold to be an error. For ought then, that has yet been
alleged, the ancient Catholic Kings of this land, were not priuileged from
error, and therefore in matters of religion they might be deceived: So then,
though Abimelech said to the people, What ye have seen me, do the like: Iud.
9.48.
yet in religious affairs it is no sufficient warrant to do, as others have
done before: But like as (says Ambrose) in military affairs, the sentence of
men therein exercised and experienced must be expected: Quando de religione
tractatus est, cogita Deum: Epistol. 30.
So when religion is treated of, think upon God. God in his word must be
consulted with: Men's errors in faith are no more to be imitated, then their
faults of life: for herein should we be like Dionysius followers, (...).
who because he was dimmesighted, they feigned themselves to be so, stumbling
one upon another.

The Apology.
THe supernatural signs and miracles, The fourth proof.
written as is confessed by the Protestants themselves in the lives of Saint
Oswald, S. Edmunds, S. Edwards, Lucius, Kingylsus, Offa, Sigebertus, etc.
testify the truth of their religion, whereof some for the sanctity of those
Princes are hereditarie to their posterity, not by any desert of Protestants,
as the miraculous curing of the naturally incurable disease called the Kings
or Queens evil, obtained by the holiness of S. Edward, page 66. lin. 12. and
deinceps.

The Antilogie.
1 TO this argument of miracles I have answered before, Answ. to sect. 6.
that they are no certain demonstration of a true religion, because the
Paganes also boasted of miracles done amongst them. And whereas the heathen are
supposed to have forged many things, so it is not to be doubted, but that many
of these miracles given in instance, were the dreams and fictions of idle and
fabulous Monks: as Berinus walking upon the sea, Fox page 122. ca. 1.

Popish legend miracles.

Fox page 125. col. 2.


having not one thread of his garment wet: and how Aldelmus caused an infant of
nine days old at Rome to speak, to clear Pope Sergius, suspected to be the
father of that child: and how he drew a length a piece of timber, that went to
the building of the Church in Malmesburie. The like tale goes of Egwine, who
having fettered both his feet in yrons fast locked, and cast the key into the
Sea, to do penance upon himself, Fox ibid.
for certain sins committed in his youth, a fish brought the key to the
Ship, as he was sailing homeward from Rome. Of like truth is that fable of
Bristanus Bishop of Winchester, who as he prayed walking in the Churchyard for
the souls of men departed, when he came to these words, requiescant in pace, a
multitude of souls answered again, Amen. I report me now to the indifferent
reader, whether we have not just cause to suspect the credit of these legend
miracles.

2 But these miracles, which he says, were wrought by those Christian Kings
being admitted, he shall never be able to prove that these were of the Popish
Church or belief, Lucius, Oswald, Iua, Ceolulfus, with others, as in the next
defense, in the answer to the probation of the assumption, shall God willing
be made plain.

3 Whereas he names Offa and Sigebert among the miracle-makers, he has
committed a great oversight, or used a cunning slight, to face out the matter
with bare names: for Offa by the entisement of his wife, was accessorie to the
cruel death of King Ethelbert, Ex histor. Iornalens.
who came peaceably to sue for the marriage of his daughter: and therefore it
is not like that God would endue a murderer with such a miraculous gift. But
the cause is soon coniectured, why the Popes Clergy does so much honor the
memory of Offa, for in part of penance and satisfaction for that wicked act,
he gave the tenth of his goods to the Church, builded the Monastery of S.
Albons, gave the Peter Pence to Rome, and was a great benefactor to that See.

Sigebert King of West Saxons, was a most cruel tyrant, who caused the Earl
Combranus to be most cruelly put to death, because he admonished him to change
his manners, Fox p. 129. Stow an. 757. Sigebert a cruel tyrant.
and was himself by the just judgment of God slain by the Swineheard of the
same Earl: and yet this man is numbered among the Catholic Kings, that wrought
miracles. Another Sigebert there was King of East Saxons, who became a
Christian: but it is not like that this (Legender) means him, who was welnie
150. years before this Sigebert, who is named after Offa, in whose time he
lived, ann. 748. he then putting these two together, Offa, Sigebertus, Stow an.
^16.
may be thought rather to insinuate that Sigebert, which lived in the time of
Offa, then the other, who was almost 150. years before. Thus very skilfullie,
as we see, he has martialed and mustred his Mirabilists together.

4 Concerning the cure of the Kings evil first obtained by King Edward 1. it
is not to be imputed to the holiness of his person, but the efficacy of his
prayers, Of the cure of the Queens evil.
to the which that virtuous Prince was much given: as David by his godly songs
rather then his musical instrument allayed Saules malady. 2. King Edward did
not cure the woman brought unto him so much by miracle, Stow in Edward
Confessor.
as by ordinary means, as suppling and cleansing of the soar, pressing out
the corruption, and bathing the flesh. 3. He did not only cure the woman of
her disease, but she became fruitful, being barren before. He also healed a
man that had been blind 19. years, and caused him to see as the story
reports, the credit whereof I refer to the Reader: how comes it to pass,
that these cures also are not hereditarie as well as the other? 4. If this
miraculous cure of this disease is to be ascribed to the Popish religion, how
comes it to pass that a Protestant Prince our late Sovereign Qu. Elizabeth
therein was comparable to any of her predecessors, who yet did not ascribe it
to any desert in her self, or holiness of her person, or virtue of her crown,
but to Gods mercy inuocated by her prayers? 5. It is not yet proved, that the
beginning of this strange cure was founded upon any point of Popish profession,
but upon the confidence which that good Prince had in God, whom the Protestants
more truly worship then Papists. 6. Whatsoever is here alleged for
countenancing of the religion of these Christian Kings, the Paganes also can
produce the like for theirs. Traianus the Emperor made a blind man see, Ex
Suetonio. Cure of strange diseases among Paganes. (...). Plutarch. quaest.
Graec. 50.
and a lame man go. Among the Argiues the posterity of Alexida Amphiraus
daughter, are thought to cure the falling sickness, and are called Elasiae, from
driving away of that disease: Therefore this is no sound argument to grace that
religion, though all the rest were evident, which yet wants proof, that this
gift was first bestowed for the merit and desert of the popish belief, which
is thought rather to remain as a grace from God of that sacred calling, and a
sign of his special assistance and protection of Princes: though in his
strange cure the conceit and opinion of the diseased may somewhat help, some
other means medicine and diet more, but godly prayers most of all, that we
need not altogether pretend a miraculous work. Ambrose says, Moses non
imperabat, sed impetrabat, Moses precabatur, Christus operabatur: Sermon. 18. in
Psalm. 119.
Moses entreated, not commanded, he was the prayer, Christ the worker. Another
says, Elizeus cum spiritu magistri haereditario, Hieron. de vir. perfect.
scindere tamen aquas, nisi sub Dei inuocatione non potuit: Helizaeus, though
heyring his masters spirit could not divide the water without calling upon
God: so this gift howsoever to Princes hereditarie pretended, can not be
without prayer and works of piety effectually practiced.

The Apology.
THe proposition of the argument proposed, that Princes are bound to the
religion of their predecessors, has been thus handsomely proved, as we see:
now it follows that I examine his proofs of the assumption, that all these
Catholic Kings were Papists.

1 They builded Monasteries, and granted diverse privileges for praying to God
and Saints, for the souls of them, and their posterity, page 58. lin.
penultim.

2 They voluntarily forsook their Kingdoms, and professed Monastical life,
Kingylsus, Iue, C^lulsus, etc. page 59. lin. 17.

3 Thirdly, Christian Kings of the Britons from Lucius to Cadwallader, ann.
150. Kings of the English or Saxon, Danish, Untruth 125.
and Norman nation, embraced it with all zeal themselves, and promulged the
same by all laws etc. to their posterity, page 60. lin. 12. etc.

4 Her Majesty's father observed it all his life, and of denying the Roman
jurisdiction repented at his death, Untruth 126.
page 60. lin. 24. etc.

5 My Sovereign that is, in the time of her Sister Queen Mary, professed it
with much devotion, page 6. lin. 29. Untruth 127.


6 The King ought to take his oath upon the Evangelists, and blessed relics of
Saints etc. to maintain holy Church with all integrity and liberty,
Falsificat. or untruth 117.
according to the constitution of his ancestors, page 64. lin. 30.

Upon these evidences he infers thus: So that no man can doubt of what faith
they were, except it be a question whether he that prays to Saints prays
for the dead, offers sacrifice of the Mass, grants Church liberties,
honoreth the Sea of Rome, builds Altars, Monasteries, Nunries, etc. be a
Papist or Protestant, page 59. lin. 1.2.

The Antilogie.
ALthough I might safely insist in the proposition, that a Christian Prince
ought not absolutely to be addicted to the religion of his forefathers, yet
that the weakness of the Apologists defense may appear, I will discover his
nakedness in this behalf, that he has not gained by his slender reasons, that
those Christian ancient Kings were of the now Roman religion.

1 Though some Monasteries were built by the founders for the remedy of their
soul, yet all were not, specially those which were erected at the beginning,
between ann. 600. and ann. 700. when as yet superstition had not got such
deep footing: afterward they which had committed any murder or grievous sin
that troubled their conscience, they were persuaded to found some Monastery
for the remission of their sins: as Offa builded S. Albones for the murder
of King Ethelbert: Ex histor. Iornalens.
Ethelstane the Abbey of Midleton for consenting to his brother Edwines death:
Queen Alfrith the Nunrie of Amesburie because of the death of King Edward the
Martyr, Fox pa. 159. Monasteries built for redemption of souls. Fox pa. 279.
which she had procured. Yea in process of time as religion decayed, they had
a conceit by such works to redeem their souls: as King Henry 3. built the
Monastery of Conuerts, pro redemptione animae suae, and Iohannis patris sui
etc. for the redemption of his soul, and the soul of John his father. Is not
this good gear (think you) and sound Catholic doctrine, that men should play
Christ's part, and by their own works redeem their souls?

2 Though diverse of those ancient Kings became Monks, yet neither was the
Monastical life so far out of square as now it is: they made it not a cloak
of idleness, and filthy living, a nurserie of idolatry, and gross
superstitions; but they desired that life, as fittest for contemplation, and
free from the encumbrances of the world. Diverse of the heathen Emperors left
the Imperial administration, and betook themselves to private contemplation,
as Dioclesian, Maximinian; Lanquet, ann. Christ. 307. Neither does this one
opinion of the excellency of Monastical life show them to be resolute
Papists: for it follows not, because they were Monks, that consequently they
held transubstantiation, worship of images, and the more gross points of the
Romish Catechism.

3 He shall not be able to prove the tenth part of that great number of 180.
Kings either to have themselves professed the now Roman religion, or by laws
to have prescribed the same to others: some instances I will produce.

Stow ann. 179. Ancient Kings of England dissenting from the Church of Rome.
ann. 664. Fox pa. 123.
In King Lucius days not the Pope, but the King was Gods vicar in his kingdom:
and it was his part to gather the people together to the law of Christ, as
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome testifies in his epistle.

Cedde and Colman dissented from the Church of Rome about the celebration of
Easter. Wilfride about the same time confesses, that Images were invented of
the Devil, which all men that believe in Christ (says he) ought of necessity
to forsake and detest. Fox ibid. col. 2* lin. 8.9.


King Alfred or Alured translated the Psalter into English: and he was
instructed by Ioannes Scotus, Ann. 880.
who writ a book de corpore and sanguine Christi, Page 144.
which was condemned by the Pope in the Synod Vercellens. being of Bertrams
opinion against the corporal presence, which fancy was not as yet received in
the Church, Ann. 996. Fox pa. 1142. Fox pa. 147. to page 151.
as is apparent by the sermon of Elfricus against transubstantiation.

In King Edward, Athelstane, and King Edmunds time, the Prince had power to
constitute ecclesiastical laws, and to prescribe rules and orders for
ecclesiastical persons, as may appear by diverse of their laws.

In King Edgars time Priests marriage was lawful, Histor. Iornalens. in vit.
Edgar.
which began then to be restrained.

Many laws and acts have passed since in open Parliament, to restrain the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, to inhibite the purchasing of prouisoes
from thence, arrests, Ann. Edw. 3.38. c. 1, 2. Rich. 2. ann. 13. stat. 2. c. 2.
Henr. 4. ann. 9. c. 8.
processes, excommunications under pain of exile, imprisonment, forfeiture of
goods, and that not without express consent of the Clergy. See Richard. 2.
ann. 16. cap. 5.

These then which allowed not the worship of images, believed not
transubstantiation, gave the Prince authority in spiritual causes, approved
the marriage of Ministers, and the translation of the scriptures into the vulgar
tongue, restrained the authority of the Roman Bishop, may worthily doubted
of, whether they were Papists.

4 King Henry was so far from repenting his proceedings against the usurped
Roman jurisdiction, King Henry's purpose to reform religion.
that if God had spared him life, he intended a thorough reformation of
Religion, as was easily to be seen both by his resolution for religion
uttered not long before his death to Monsieur de Annebault the French
Ambassador, and his answer made nearer to his death to Bruno Ambassador to the
Duke of Saxony, Fox page 1291.
that he would take his part against the Emperor, if the quarrel were for
religion.

5 More untrue it is, that our late Sovereign in the late days of
persecution, professed that religion with such devotion. The cruel and
unnatural dealing toward her highness then, is a sufficient argument to
convince this large reporter of a great untruth: how she was sent for by
commission, Fox page 2091.
in great extremity of sickness, to be brought alive or dead: Page 2092.
committed without cause to the Tower: her servants removed from her: straightly
examined: Page 2093.
her own servants restrained to bring her diet: denied the liberty of the
Tower: Page 2095.
a strait watch kept round about her: in danger to be murdered: in continual
fear of her life: Queen Elizabeth's troubles and dangers in her sisters time.
her death by Winchesters platform intended, which by Gods providence she
escaped: Add hereunto Stories desperate speech uttered in the Parliament
house, that he was not a little grieved with his (fellow Papists) for that they
labored only about the young and little sprigs and twigs, while they should
have stricken at the root, etc. All this evidently bewrays what opinion they
had of her Majesty's resolution in religion, and what she had of theirs. In the
mean time their cruel proceedings are laid open, who (if it were as this
Coniecturer says) would so persecute an innocent Lady, whom they commend for
her devotion.

6.1. That evidence which he alleges from M. Fox his mouth out of the
Register book of the Guildhall in London, Fox p. 166. c. 1.
contains not the precise form of the Princes oath to be taken at the
Coronation (which before I have recited out of Magna charta) but certain
monitions and instructions concerning the duty of the King. 2. He uses great
fraud in setting down the words both inuerting the order, and leaving out what
he thinks good: as that the King ought to love and observe Gods
commandments, then must he be an enemy to idolatry, and to the doctrines
and commandments of men, such as many be observed in the Roman Church:
Beside he says, to maintain holy Church, whereas the words are to maintain
and govern the holy Church etc. but they can not endure that Kings should
rule and govern the Church. 3. For the King to take his oath upon the
Evangelists and blessed relics of Saints, it shows not, that the King did
worship those relics, or swear by them, The King swears not by relickes at
the Coronation.

Genes. 24.2. Genes. 31.53. Ambros. contr. Symmach.


though he lay his hand upon them: no more, then he does swear by the book,
that puts his hand upon it; or Abraham's servant by his masters thigh when
he swear unto him; or Jacob by the heap of stones over the which he took his
oath: But as Ambrose well says, Christianus imperator aram solius Christi
didicit honorare, A Christian Emperor has only learned to honor Christ's
altar: And so Christian Princes have learned to give all religious honor to
Christ, and not to impart it to his servants, to make them sharers with their
Master.

Thus has this (sophistical dialogist) failed as well in the probation of the
assumption, as in his enlarging of the proposition: But whatsoever her
Majesty's predecessors were, she was not bound, where they wandered out of the
way to err in their steps. Josias of idolatrous parents both father and
grandfather, was himself a religious Prince, and a true worshipper of God.
Heathen stories will tell us, that noble Pericles came of an evil race:
Pompeius the great of despised Strabo, Ulysses, Aesculapius, famous men, of
lewd parents. The grave Poet also does insinuate as much: (...): Homer. Iliad.
^.

The son excels in virtues fame, the parent evil of whom he came.


As of evil parents virtuous children may descend, so out of superstitious
antiquity religious posterity may issue and flourish: And as Ambrose well
answered the objection of Symmachus the Pagane, Maiorum ritus seruandus est,
The rites of the elders must be kept: Omnia postea in melius profecerunt, All
things, says he, have been made more perfect in time, etc. Will they find fault
with harvest because it is late, or with the vintage in the end of the year?
Even so the vintage of the Gospel is not to be condemned, because it falls
out in the end of the world: Dicant igitur in suis omnia debere manner
principijs: They may as well say, that every thing should keep the beginning,
and not grow unto perfection.

Now follows the second part, wherein the Apologist goes about to approve
the now Roman religion, by setting forth the unhappy success of those
Princes which any way have opposed themselves to the Sea of Rome, I will
examine all his demonstrations in order.

The 1. Demonstration.
Untruth 128.
1 THe gates of hell have been set open against it, and yet never prevailed, as
Christ has promised, page 67.

2 The Pagane Emperors could never conquer, nor command it, although they had
put the greatest parts of the Popes to death, page 67.

Untruth 129.
3 Rome was spoiled and sacked by Alaricus, Hunnes, Goths, Vandals,
Visigothes, but that holy Sea prevailed.

Untruth 130.
4 Alaricus caused miraculouslie to retire at the voice of Leo then Pope, page
67.

Untruth 131.
5 The very countenance of Pope Zachary forced Limprandus that had besieged it
to desist, page 68.

Untruth 132.
6 The Saracens burned the suburbs of Rome* and yet Pope Gregory the 4. without
force repelled them, page 68.

7 The Duke of Burbon miserably slain at the assault, when he had besieged
Rome, page 68.

8 That invincible Sea has been impugned by the might and endeavors of the
supreme Regents of Germany, Bauaria, Persia, Untruth 133.
and Armenia, Indias, Iapponia, yet that little Sea of Rome, and the faith
thereof has subdued them all, page 68.

9 It was assaulted of Julian, Valens, the Arrians, but they were confounded:
Untruth 134. Untruth 135. Untruth 136.
the Grecians, Armenians, Iacobines, denied their obedience unto it, and became
the Turks vassals.

The Remonstration.
1 THat promise, that the gates of hell should not prevail, was made to Peter's
faith, which the Church of Rome has lost, not to Peter's person: as Ambrose
says, Fides ergo est ecclesiae fundamentum, De incarnat. ca. 5.
non enim de carne Petri, sed de fide dictum est, quia portae mortis non
praeualebunt e^: Faith then is the foundation of the Church: for it was spoken
not of Peter's flesh, but Peter's faith, that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it. Neither can the city of Rome show such assurance of Gods
protection, as Jerusalem could, Psalm. 132.14.
where the Lord had promised to dwell for ever: yet was that holy city
forsaken. And whether by the gates of hell, we understand the external
assaults of Infidels and barbarous people, or the spiritual corruption of
doctrine, both the one way and other the Sea and City of Rome has been
subdued: For never any city has been so often besieged, and sacked, as that
has bin, eue^ since it was Christian, by the Hunnes, Goths, Vandales, Heruli,
Lombards, Saracens: neither any place professing Christianity, has been so
infected with error and heresy, that in both respects it is evident, that the
gates of hell have prevailed against it.

2 The ancient Bishops of Rome (for as yet they were not called by any
peculiar title Popes) died for the true faith of Christ, from the which the
Popes have a long time swarued: wherefore they succeeding in place only, not in
faith and doctrine, can not challenge any dignity or prerogative by those
holy Martyrs, whose steps they do not follow. As for Sibyls prophecy, that
the fishers hook should subdue the Roman Empire (though we rely not upon
such blind prophesies) it was then fulfilled, when the Apostles faith (whom our
Savior made fishers of men, and not only Peter) was embraced of Christian
Constantine, and the whole Roman Empire made subject unto it. Math. 4.19.
And Augustine rehearsing certain verses of Sibyll concerning Christ, which
begin with letters, which laid together make these words, (...): Jesus Christ
the son of God the Savior: And the first letters of these five words put
together bring forth this word (...), De ciuitat. Dei. lib. 18. ca. 23.
which signifies a Fish, he interprets the same of Christ, showing in what
sense he is compared to a Fish, because as a fish in the sea, so he in the sea
of this world, viuus mansit. i. sine peccato, continued alive, that is, without
sin: then as well by the fishers hook may we understand the doctrine of
Christ. But if ye will needs appropriate the fishers hook to the Sea of Rome,
then the sense may well be this, that the Pope, claiming under Peter's title, and
pretending the fishers hook for religion, should fish for advantage, and
subdue the Imperial dignity, arrogating the same to himself, leaving nothing
but the image, that is, the bare name and title of the Empire, as is prophesied
Apocal. 13.14. as we see it come to pass this day.

3. He makes mention but of four sackings of Rome, and yet that Sea
prevailed: But in truth, it was twice four times and oftener besieged, spoiled
and sacked, since they began to decline from the true Christian faith: As by
Alaricus, ann. 407. Ataulphus King of the VVisigothes, anno 414. By Attila King
of the Hunnes anno 454. Gensericus 357. By Odoacer King of the Heruli 478. By
Totilus King of the Goths, L^^quet.
anno 550. who spoiled Rome with fire, overthrowing the walls and towers,
leaving it almost desert: and it was taken again and spoiled by the same
Totilus anno 554. Rome besieged by Agilulphus King of the Lumbards by the space
of an whole year, Rome often taken and sacked, since it was Christian.
anno 605. Besieged by Luitprandus anno 738. By Aistulphus of Lumbardie anno
755. Subdued by Desyderius King of Lumbards anno 769. Rome besieged and the
suburbs subdued by the Saracens anno 837. And again, anno 923. And anno 915.
the Saracens of Afric entered Italy, and most cruelly entreated man, woman
and child.

We shall not find that old Rome under the Paganes was half so often
assaulted, and sacked in twice so many years by Brennus, Hannibal, Pyrrhus,
and the rest that surprised it: neither can any city in the world be named,
that has endured greater miseries and calamities then Rome since it first
received the Christian faith. The great miseries and calimities of Rome. Hieron
ad Principium.
Hierome in his time described ye miserable state of Rome being taken of the
Goths: Capitur vrbs, quae totum cepit orbem: The city is taken, that has
conquered the world, it perishes by famine before the sword, the bodies lie
slain in the high ways, the mother eats her own children, etc. Thus this
indefectible Sea, as this bragger ^aith, prevailed and vanquished: when as
never any city was more often subdued and brought to greater misery.

But he means, perhaps, that Rome for all this continues still: what then?
Secu^dum computationem. Lanquet and Cooperi.
yet it never flourished so long together as the Empire of the Assyrians, which
continued well nie 15. hundred years, from Ninus anno mundi 1788 unto
Sardanapalus anno 3132. The nation of the forlorn Jews is not yet
extinguished: what gain they thereby, but ignominy and shame? And Rome the
seat of Antichrist may have some remainder till the coming of Christ, but to
their greater judgment and everlasting confusion: 2. Thessal. 2.8.
whom the Lord (as the Apostle says) shall consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming. The spirit of God in his
word shall wound him, Christ at his coming shall utterly confound him: the
first we see already effected, the second we shall see in due time perfited.

4. Attilus was not miraculously caused to retire at the voice of Leo: but as
Blondus says, Facundus pontifex orando molliuit: De^ad. 1. lib. 2.
The eloquent Bishop did by his oration mollify him, and cause him to leave
Italy: It was not then the miracle of his voice, but the subtlety of his
speech that moved him. Some other affirm, that Leo obtained peace of this
condition, Co^peri chr^ni. anno 455.
that Rome should become to him tributarie: if money and tribute can work
miracles, then this was a miracle. As for that fable, that Attilus should say
that he was not moved at Leo his persuasion, but at the sight of two holding
naked swords and threatening him, which were supposed to be Peter and Paul; if
it were of any credit, it is not like it should here have been omitted: for
many things are here unlikely: First, the Apostles were preachers, not
fighters. Secondly, what need Paul threaten, could not Peter suffice. Thirdly,
visions are not showed to Pagans and Infidels, but to the faithful. Fourthly,
if any such matter were, it was not Leo his miraculous voice, but this imagined
meancing vision.

5. Neither was it the countenance of Pope Zachari^ that caused Luitprandus*
not Limprandus, etc. as he writes, to desist. For Blondus by him cited, says,
that Zachary at Narnia, inter missaria solennia orationem habuit: molliuit
sanctus vir barbari regis animum, Blondus dec. 1. lib. 10.
made a solemn oration in the time of solemn Mass, and the holy man did
mollify the mind of the barbarous King. But other stories report, that when
Luitprandus had fiercely besieged the city, the Bishop desired aid of Charles
of France, who by his friendly persuasion withdrew Luitprand his Godfather from
the siege: If then it were either the Bishops eloquent oration that mollified
him, Cooperi Chronic. ann. 738.
or Charles persuasion that moved him, it was not the contemplation only of
the Popes countenance, that turned him.

Thus he would bear us in hand, that where the enemy was mitigated sometime
by entreaty, sometime by policy, sometime by confederacy with other, that
the virtue of the Popes person, and the very beck of his countenance did it.
Ataulphus desisted from his enterprise, Lanquet anno 414.
who had purposed utterly to destroy Rome, and to build another city in place
thereof, by the intercession of his wife Plac^dia. Gen^ericus having invaded
Rome, by the intercession of Leo abstained from slaughter, Anno 460.
having first robbed Italy, and taken away all the riches thereof. So the
Lumbards that had invaded Campaine and took certain cities, by the rich gifts
and intercession of John the 6. Bishop of Rome were quieted. Cooperi anno 701.
When Aistulphus had besieged Rome, he was constrained by King Pipinus to give
over and yield to his mercy: Anno 755.
to whom Stephen then Bishop went into France to crave aid of him against the
Lumbards: It was not then Pope Stephanus face, but King Pipinus force that
repelled Aistulphus. So Stephen the 3. sent to Charles of France to quiet
Desyderius, Lanquet anno 769. Ann. 773.
that kept great revel in Rome. Adrian likewise perceiving that his threatening
excommunication could not stay the rage of Desyderius, desired help of Charles.

And if the Popes countenance and manly looks can do such feats: how came it
to pass, that Theodorick, not fearing Pope John's face, caused him to be
banished, being afterward famished to death? Anno 525.
Martin Bishop of Rome was banished by Constantine the Greek Emperor. John
the 11. was deposed by Otho the Emperor, Ann. 6^6. Ann. 963.
and afterward being restored to his Bishopric was taken and slain in
adultery. John 12. was cast into prison. John the 17. had his eyes put out.
Anno 966. Anno 995. Anno 1053.
Leo the 9. was vanquished of Gysulphus and taken prisoner. Benedict 6. was
taken of Cynthius, and cast into the tower of S. Angel, where he was famished.
Many of the Italian Popes had such miserable ends. I do much marvel, that
the Popes maiesticall countenance could not deliver him from the sword, from
putting out of his eyes, from imprisonment, from banishment, from captivity.

6. And why could not John the 10. as well without force expel the Saracens
that spoiled Italy, but was feign thereto to use the help of Romanus the
Emperor of Greece, as Luithbertus; or of Albericus Earl of Hetruria, as
Blondus says: Cooperi Chronic. ann. 1009.
Or why might not Gregory the 5. as well as this Gregory the 4. without force
drive the Saracens out of Italy, which took Capua, and besieged Barum? But
they were overcome in battle of Vrceolus Duke of Venice and Gregory a
Captain of Constantinople.

And why could not Gregory the 4. as well have kept them from burning the
suburbs of Rome, if he had such a facility in chasing the enemy, as from
entering the City? And as Ambrose well answers Symmachus, who boasted of the
deliverance of Rome from Hannibal: Cur se obsideri passi sunt* etc. If your
gods drove Hannibal from the walls, why did they suffer him to come so near
as to besiege them? But if Rome under Popes had been so strangely delivered, as
it was before from the French by the cackling of Geese: how would then this
Friar have cackled, and craked of this exploite, as Symmachus by this act
pleads for idolatry? whom Ambrose thus wittily taunteth: Senones capitolij
secreta penetrassent, nisi eos p^uido anser strepitu prodidisset: en qual^s
templa Romana praesules habent: vbi tum erat Iuppiter, number in ansere
^^quebatur? The secrets of the Capitol had been to the French betrayed, if the
fearful geese had nor them b^wrayed: such Priests the Roman Temples have:
whore was Iuppiter then, did he speak in the geese?

7. He might have spared for shame to make mention of the Duke of Burbones
besieging of Rome: for never was any enterprise more dishonorable to the Pope
and his Cardinals: for the soldiers brake in upon the Pope being at Mass, and
he was constrained to flee to the Castle of S. Angel, where he was besieged,
and notwithstanding his curses, forced to yield himself, and to grant his
Bulls: in the mean time they spoiled the city, made jests of the Pope: they
had one riding like the Pope, with an whore behind him, sometime he blessed,
sometime he cursed, Fox. page 988.
sometime they called him Antichrist. And all this was done by the Emperors
soldiers, not Protestants, but Papists.

What if the Duke died in the last assault, of a stroke with an handgunne, and
(as he says) censured? first, this is the condition of war, it spares none.
Secondly, this notwithstanding the City after his death was taken. Thirdly,
the Pope was forced afterward to absolve and release, whom before he had cursed.

8. The reason why so many Kings and Regents of the world prevailed not in
their attempts and endeavors against the Sea of Rome, Why the Pope in times
past so much prevailed.
is evident, because they had before given their power and authority unto the
beast, with one consent, Revel. 17.13. and therefore Gods justice required that
they should be beaten with their own rod, and suffer under that power, which
another by their authority first usurped. But the time shall come, that the
same Kings and Nations, which before gave their kingdom to the beast, shall
hate the whore and make her desolate and naked, Revel. 17.17.

But concerning the Indians, if the Spanish tyranny had not prevailed more then
Popish subtlety, and cruel violence obtained more then Monkish conscience:
they were like to have had a cold suite of it and a simple harvest.

9. Julian was punished for Apostasy from the faith, not for denying fealty
to the Pope, and Valens judged for his Arrian heresy, not for gainsaying the
Papal hierarchy. The Grecians and Armenians were subdued to the Turks, not
for resisting the jurisdiction of the Pope, but for other grave and weighty
causes, which may be alleged: first, because the Empire being divided anno
101. when Leo the 3. proclaimed Charles the great Emperor of Rome, was thereby
weakened, and so by little and little decayed, till at the last it became a
pray to the Turk. The Pope then himself was the first occasion of this
judgment, which befell them. Secondly, in that the Greeks began to have small
respect to the Roman Bishop, the Pope himself was the cause, for that he first
forsook the Greek Empire, erecting another in the West: as the author of the
tripartite work says: Schisma hoc fecit partitio imperij, etc. The partition
of the Empire made this schism: because the Empire, that was but one, was made
two: Et hinc probabile est, Op^scul. tripartit. lib. 2. cap. 11.
quod Graeci cum suo domino coeperunt rebellare ecclesiae Romanae: And hence it
was that the Greeks with their Lord began to rebel against the Roman Church:
The Pope therefore may for this thank himself. Thirdly, The causes of the
overthrow of the Greek Empire.
but the greatest cause of all this division of the Empire, and so consequently
the confusion thereof, was the idolatry of the Greeks, who in a general
Council held at Nice confirmed and allowed the adoration of images about the
time of Adrian the 1. by whose counsel Irene the Empress took up the body
of Constantine her husband, and burned it, Cooperi anno 778.
and cast the ashes into the sea, because they disanulled images. Immediately
upon this inhumane fact of Irene, and for their idolatry, followed the
division of the Empire, by Leo the 3. the next successor of this Adrian. And
for the same cause, namely their idolatry, was the City of Constantinople
surprised and sacked of the Turks: for after the City was taken, the great
Turk caused the image of the Crucifixe, which was set up in the great Church
of Sophia, to be taken down, and writing this superscription over the head:
Hic est Christianorum Deus, This is the God of the Christians, made it with
sound of Trumpet to be carried round about the Camp, and every man to spit at
it: ex Ioann. Ram. lib. 2. rerum Turcicar. This is more like to be the cause of
the destruction of that city. Fourthly* and as God has punished the East
Churches for their backsliding; so must idolatrous Rome look to have her part,
which both in manners and doctrine is as corrupt, as ever was the Greek
Church. Many years since it was said: Latini licet ad ea, Opuscul. tripartit.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
quae sunt fidei verius adhaereant deo, quam Graeci; tamen quoad mores multo
pluribus sceleribus implicati sunt: The Latins although in matters of faith
they cleave more truly to God, yet are in manners more corrupt. But now the
church of Rome is notoriously known both in faith and manners to be much
worse: If the Greeks were judged of God for failing in one, the Latins cannot
escape, that come short in both.

10. Lastly, he tells us, that in the Primitive Church before Constantine,
almost an hundred Pagane Emperors, either truly elected, or reputed,
persecuted it, and all them, excepting ten or eleven, died miserably, when
the persecuted Popes put to death by them, came not to the third part of that
number, page 69. lin. 3, 4. etc.

Untruth 137.
1. Untrue it is, that there were before Constantine almost 100. Pagane
Emperors: there were not many above half that number. 2. Neither were then
the Bishops of Rome called Popes by a peculiar style, as now they are. 3. This
makes nothing for the present Papal Hierarchy: for the Bishops of Rome are
declined and fallen away from the faith and doctrine of those first persecuted
Bishops and Martyrs. 4. Whereas, I confess, there was then great difference
between the imperial and ecclesiastical state, both in the short reign, and
miserable end of the one, and the long continuance and glorious death of the
other: the case is now altered, for since the time of Gregory the 1. when the
Bishops of Rome began to fall away from the true faith, the Popes both for
their wretched end and short reign may compare with either the Imperial, or
any Episcopal seat, and far exceed them. For the first, Anastasius voided
his entrals into the draught. The miserable end of Popes.
Siluerius died in banishment. Vigilius drawn up and down by the neck in the
streets at Constantinople. Sabinianus died being frighted in the night. Ex
Platinae Functio, Balaeo, de act. Roman. pontificum.
Agathon that condemned Ministers marriage died of the plague. Constantin. 2.
condemned to prison, and his eyes put out. Leo. 3. cast from his horse, and
beaten to death. Stephanus. 8. wounded in a tumult, and so battered, that he
never would show himself afterward abroad. John. 13. slain in adultery.
Bonifacius 7. died of an apoplexy, his body was drawn through the streets
with ropes, and stricken through with spears. Siluester 2. slain of the
Devil, being a Necromancer. Benedictus 9. suffocated by the Devil. Lucius 2.
beaten with stones to death. Adrianus 4. choked with a fly. Innocentius 4
suddenly died in his bed. Nicholaus 3. died suddenly and speechless.
Clement. 6. died suddenly of an aposteme. John 15. had his eyes put out and
died of the stinch of the prison. Now sir, what have you gained by obiecting
the miserable end of the Pagane Emperors: I think your Popes may therein
compare with them; more wretched and desperate ends shall we not find of any
Princes or Prelates* then of profane Popes.

For shortness of reign, Popes go beyond all regents either temporal or
ecclesiastical, that ever were in the world, not to speak of the regiment of
two or three years and not above, of which sort many Popes may be numbered: how
many of them attained not to a year, Ex Bal^o Platina Functio etc. The short
reign of Popes.
how many not to many months, yea not to many days? Leo 2. Benedict 2. did
not pope it above ten months: Benedict 10. nine months, as many Benedict
11. Alexander 5. eight months: Christophor. 1. Lando. 1. seven months: Leo
6. as many: Celestinus 2. six months: Ioannes 19. five months: Romanus 1.
three months: Benedict. 5. Gregor. 8.2. months.

Some of their Popedomes are reckoned by days: as Siluester 3* was Pope but
49. days: Adrianus 5. forty days: Pius* 3.27. days: Bonifacius 6.25. days:
Damasus 2.23. days: likewise Marcellus 2. Sosimus 2. twenty days: Celestinus
4. eighteen days: Stephanus the successor of Zacharias three days: And is
not now this bragger ashamed to object the brevity of the Imperial dominion?

Concerning the number of Popes, since the declining time of that Sea, from
Gregory 1. you shall find for one Emperor two or three Popes. There have
been under Queen Elizabeth's reign not fewer then 8. or 9. Popes. And because
it may be answered, that Princes do reign by succession, and so many come very
young to the Crown; Popes enter by election, and are aged when they are
chosen: let comparison be made between the Papacy and other Episcopal seas,
to the which also men of gravity and years are elected, you shall find three
Popes to one Bishop. As to give one instance for many, in the Archiepiscopall
Sea of Canterbury: Fox page 134.170.394.675.778. edition 1583.
There have been since Augustines time, who was sent into England by Gregory 1.
about ann. 600. and odd, only 73. Archbishops: But Popes since Gregory 1.
there are numbered almost 200. for he was the 64. Bishop of Rome: Caranza
Concilior. sum.
and there have been in the whole number 240* Bishops of that Sea or
thereabout. Wherefore as Ambrose well answered Symmachus who thus objected,
Vnde rectius, quam documentis rerum secundarum cognitio venit numinis? Whence
better may the presence of the Gods be known, then by prosperity? says
Ambrose, Odi bimestres Imperatores, and terminos regum cum exordijs coniunctos,
I like not two-moneth Emperors, and reigns ending and beginning together:
Many such two-moneth Popes may be produced, and popping aside, as soon as they
are pooping. Such infelicitie of the head, does give no great cause to those
Popes-creatures to brag of their prosperity. So that as Leosthenes said of
Alexanders army, (...).
their Captain being dead, that it was like to blind Cyclops, that groped with
his hands, having lost his ere: so may the papal Hierarchy be resembled, so
often changing their head* and as one said to Dionysius, that a tyranny was a
fair sepulcher; such is the Popedom, as a pompous and garnished sepulcher,
wherein the Popes take their ease, tyrannizing over the Church for their own
advantage, but in respect of any profitable work in Christ's Church, they are
as mued and closed up in a sepulcher.

The third Demonstration.
THis Popes Chronicler goes forward and tells us of diverse Kings and
Emperors that have been punished, and some of them deposed from their
Kingdoms, for resisting the Sea of Rome* as the two Frecards of Scotland:
Sanetius King of Portugal, Bolislaus King of Polonia: King Phillip of France,
the Empire translated for disobedience from the French to Otho the 3. Henry the
4. Frederike the 2. Otho the 4. Lodouike the 4. deposed. The East Empire taken
of the Turk. Alibrettus King of Navarre; the two Henry's of Burbon deposed and
deprived, page 69.70. I will examine these examples in order.

The Remonstration.
1 FRequard the younger was stricken of God with a painful disease whereof he
dyed, Untruth 138.
not for his disobedience to the Pope, but for his wicked life: for he killed
his wife and defloured his daughters, and was therefore excluded from the
communion of Christians: his nobles were purposed to have taken punishment of
him, but were stayed by Colmannus, who told them, that Gods vengeance was at
hand: Bucanan. lib. 5. reg. 54. Cooper. an. 646.
and not long after he was wounded by a Wolf in hunting, and thereby fell into
a strange disease, and so died. Thus Bucanane reports, who is falsified to
say, that all this fell upon him for his disobedience to Rome* which beside
that there is no such mention in the history, was not like, seeing Colman
himself dissented from the Church of Rome about the celebration of Easter, as
has been before showed, and so might be touched himself for his disobedience
to that Sea. Untruth 139*


2 Frequard the first was indeed disgraded of his Lords and cast into prison,
and for sorrow slew himself: yet this happened not for any attempts against the
Pope, but as Bucanane says, Bucanane untruly reported lib. 5. reg. 52.
because he maintained factions amongst the nobility, and the Pelagian heresy
and the contempt of baptism were objected against him: and as others write,
Cooper. an. 630.
this judgment befell him for his cruelty and negligence in the affairs of
the commonwealth.

Untruth 140.
3 If it be Sanctius the first whom he means (for diverse Kings of Portugal
were of that name) he was with the consent of Honorius the third deposed,
Conestaggius lib. 3. de reb. Portugal.
and the government committed to one Alphonsus, not for disobedience to the
Pope, sed propter ignauiam, for his slothfulnes in the administration of the
kingdom.

Munster lib. 4. c. 5.
4 Bolislaus being rebuked for adultery of Stanislaus Bishop of Graccouia, slew
him, and was deprived therefore of the Crown by the Pope, Untruth 141.
and fell into madness: Munster shows this to be the cause, not his resisting
of the Pope. He might as well say that Pompilius a King also of Polonia, who
was devoured of Mice with his wife and children, Munster lib. 4. c. 3.
which came from the bodies of those whom he had commanded unjustly to be
slain, was judged thus of God for his resistance to the Pope.

Untruth 142.
5 Whatsoever befell Phillip of France, is not to be imputed to any offense
committed against the Pope, but to his adulterous life, Lanquet chron. ann.
1060.
who repudiating his first wife Bertha, by whom he had children, coupled to him
Bertradam the wife of Iulio: but howsoever it fared with him, in the mean time
Vrbane for his disloyalty to Princes escaped not unpunished, Ann. 1098.
who for fear of his enemies hid himself two years in the house of Peter
Leo, and so dyed.

But why omitted he to make mention of an other Phillip of France in the time
of Boniface the 8. who more resisted the Popes authority then ever any King of
France did: Fox page 341.
he defeated the Pope of bestowing ecclesiastical dignities, forbad any gold or
silver to be exported out of the land to the Pope, who also thus wrote unto the
Pope: To Boniface, bearing himself for chief pastor, little health or none.
Fox page 343.
Let thy foolishnes know, that in no temporal things we are subject to no man.
Was Phillip punished for being thus bold with the Pope? No, but Boniface
himself smarted for his contempt of Kings, for he was taken prisoner by King
Phillips soldiers, robbed of all his treasure, forced to ride upon an unbroken
colt, with his face to the horse tail, almost famished for meat, if he had
not been relieved by the alms of the town of Anragum where he was, and
returning to Rome for sorrow he dyed. Fox page 348.


6 Neither was the Empire translated from the French to the Saxons for
disobedience to the Sea of Rome, Untruth 142. Untruth 143.
but the line of Charles ending in Chunrade the Emperor, he appointed Henry
the first Duke of Saxony to succeed him in the Empire, Chron. Cooper ann. 920.
who yet was never crowned of the Roman Bishop: his son Otho the first, not
Otho the third (as this blind historian shuffleth at it) was after his father
admitted to the Empire, which Otho, to whom he supposes the Empire to be
translated, did curb the Roman Bishops as much as any before him: for he
reproved John the 11. for his adulterous life, condemned him in a Council, and
deposed him. This instance then which he has produced, shows rather the
evil success of the Roman Bishops, then of the Christian Emperors.

7 This Otho the third, to whom he says the Empire was transferred, Untruth
144.
was not such an obedient child as he thinks to the Sea of Rome: for he
caused one Crescentius, that had set up John the 17. to be Bishop of Rome,
Cooper an. 995.
to be put to death, and the Bishop to be deposed and bereft of his sight, and
elected in his place Gregory the 5.

8 Henry the fourth was a most courageous Prince and of happy success, he
reigned 50. years, Untruth 145.
and in 62. battles encountered his enemies. Gregory the 7. assoyled most
treacherously his subjects of their oath, and set up Rodolphus against Henry
the fourth, whom he overcame in four battles, and in the last Rodolphus was
slain. Paschalis the 2. incited Henry the 5. against his own father, and
moved him most unnaturally to make war against him: Lanquet ann. 1106.
during which war the aged Emperor for sorrow died. He might then have
spared this example, which shows more the Popes pride and tyranny, then the
Emperors misery: for about this time when the Popes thus ruffled with the
Emperor, Ann. 1108.
a certain Bishop of Fluentine taught that Antichrist was come.

9 True it is, that Frederike the 2. was strangled to death by his bastard
son Manfredus, set a work, as is supposed, Hieronym* M^^ius: Petr. de
vineis. Platin. in Innocent. 4. Lanquet ann. 1254
by Innocentius 4. who also poisoned Conradus, the next Emperor Frederikes
son, being under the Popes curse: and this treacherous parricide Manfredus
was afterward for his good service rewarded by Alexander the 4. with the
Kingdom of Sicily: this example bewrays the Popes treachery more then the
Emperors infelicitie.

Untruth 146.
10 Concerning the excommunicating and deposing of Otho the 4. Jews the 4. King
Alibret, the Henry's of Burbon, etc. the Pope was an agent in all these
affairs, and a judge in his own cause, showing himself the right Antichrist,
The ruffling of Popes against Emperors. Cause. 15. qu. 6. c. alius.
taking upon him to depose Emperors and Kings at his pleasure. Thus did Pope
Zachary depose Childerick King of France, and set up Pipinus in his stead.
Thus Innocentius the 3. served King John, interdicting his whole realm,
causing him to surrender his Crown. Vrbanus 2. put down Hugo Earl of Italy,
discharging his subjects of their oath. Cause. 15. qu. 6. c. 5. Naucler.
Innocentius the 2. took the Dukedom of Sicily from the Emperor, and made
Roger King thereof. Adrianus the 4. did excommunicate William King of Sicily,
Vitae pontific.
and would have deposed him of his kingdom, if he had not been superior in
battle. Bull. Adrian.
The same Adrian did excommunicate Frederike the first for setting his name
before the Popes in writing. This insolency of the Popes and their tyrannizing
against Kings and Emperors, was justly suffered of God, because they had
given their power to the beast, and helped to advance his proud throne, and are
justly recompensed not for their disobedience to that Sea, but for their
disobedience to God, in submitting their princely estate, which is Gods
ordinance to Antichrists command. Untruth 147.
These calamities then not brought upon these Emperors by Gods handie work,
but wrought by the Popes malice in his own cause, do convince him of
Antichristian tyranny, not them of disloyal obstinacy. They may as well
condemn Gedeons sons, Judge. 9.
that were wickedly murdered, and justify Abimelech that cruelly put them to
death: and magnify Zimri, 1. King. 16.9.
that prevailed against the King his master and slew him. And as well may the
thief, that robs by the high way and kills, boast of his good success,
as these treacherous Popes, that rebelled against the Emperors and Kings their
Lords and Masters.

11. In that Constantinople was taken in the festiuitie of Pentecost, and of
the holy Ghost, Untruth 148.
concerning whose proceeding the Greeks are in error, as he says: this
shows that not for denying of the Roman jurisdiction, but their corruptions
in the Christian religion, Demonst. 2. artic. 9.
and for their idolatrous superstition, as has been before showed, that famous
city, new Rome, was surprised. Let old Rome in time take heed, least being
partaker of new Romes corruption, it taste not ear long also of their
destruction: for the Scripture says, Be not partaker in her sins, that ye
receive not of her plagues* Reuelat. 18.4. And I say unto them with Hierome:
Maledictionem* Lib. 2. aduers. Iouinian.
quam vrbi saluator in Apocalypsi comminatus est, potes effugere per
poenitentiam, habens exemplum Niniuitarum: Thou may escape (O Rome) the curse
threatened in the Apocalypse by repentance, having the example of the Ninevites.
Seneca said well: Fulmina paucorum periculo cadunt, omnium metu: Thunderbolts
fall to the hurt of few, to the fear of all. So it were good for old Rome to
fear that punishment, which is fallen upon new Rome for the same sins.

The fourth Demonstration.
HE tells us further of the miserable ends of Luther, Oecolampadius,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmer: of the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue taken
prisoners: of the pitiful deaths of the Prince of Condie and the Admiral,
like ^ezabel cast down at a window: of the Prince of Orange miserably slain
in Flaunders: of James the bastard in Scotland dishonourably put to death: of
Christierne King of Denmark deposed from his kingdom, etc. page 71.

The Remonstration.
Untruth 149.
1. LVther, Oecolampadius, Calvin, as they were men of virtuous life; so was
their end not miserable, but comfortable: what railing Cocleus says, it
skilleth not. Sleidane, Beza, with others, that had better cause to know them,
do report no otherwise of them. This blind Censor had forgotten the pitiful
ends of some Popish champions of that time, as of Ex Jllyric. de vocabul. fidei.
Hofmeister, Carrion. fol. 250.
Eckius, Iacobus Fox. p. 2106.
Latomus, which all three died roaring and raging in desperation.

2. Zuinglius was slain in the field dying in defense of the truth: Untruth
150.
so was good Josias wounded in battle and thereof died. Cranmer was put to
death for the Gospel, as Stephen was stoned for the faith of Christ: you may
as well urge the examples of the one, as judged and punished of God, as of the
other.

3. Much better was the Duke of Saxonies and the Lantgraues case, that were
persecuted of the Emperor and taken prisoners, then he, whose captives they
were: for they would rather die, then forsake their faith: but the Emperor,
Fox page 2112. col. 1.
that great Charles the 5. the Popes stout champion died in contempt and
ignominy, being in his old age become ridiculous unto children.

3. The P. of Condie and Oranges death are monuments of Popish treachery, not
arguments of Gods severity: he might be ashamed, thus to blaze and boast of
the perfidious conspiracies of Papists against Protestant Princes: and it is
not far from blasphemy to make that Gods act, which the devil wrought by
his wicked ministers: As though Judas also betrayed not his master, and brought
him to his end: note this also I pray you as a judgment of God upon Christ.

4. As for that godly Admiral of France, he was as innocent Naboth, suspecting
nothing, cruelly murdered: but as Naboths blood was revenged in Ahab and
Iezabels blood; so all the wicked instruments of this horrible and almost
inexpiable massacre, were judged of God: the bloody end of Charles the 9. then
King; of Henry the 3. then Duke of Aniow, and of the Guises, great doers in
that bloody enterprise, are well known to the world, I need make no
rehearsal of them. Who sees not how this blind fencer, is beaten with his
own weapon, and confounded with his own examples?

5. Whatsoever happened to James the bastard, Untruth 151.
was not for any resistance against Rome, but his own misdemeanour was his
ruin. This James Hamelton the bastard (if it be he who^ he means) was
condemned, and beheaded, and his body quartered for treason: Quod certo die
cubiculo effracto regem trucidare constituisset: Because he had appointed upon
a certain day to break into the Kings chamber, and kill him: This was his
offense. But otherwise he was no enemy but a friend to the Church of Rome: for
in the same story it follows, that few grieved at his death, but his kindred
and the Popish priests, Bucanan lib. 13.
Qui in eius incolumitate omnium suarum prope fortunarum spem collocarunt: Who
in his safety placed the hope of all their happy state. But I marvel that
this great trauailer, making mention of the affairs of Scotland, could forget
the notable example of Gods judgment showed upon David Beaton Cardinal of S.
Andrews, Fox pa. 127^. col. 1.
a cruel persecutor, who was slain in his bed, and lay unburied 7. months,
being at last raked up in a dunghill: this happened not (I think) for any
disloyalty to the triple crowned beast.

6. Christierne King of Denmark was deposed, Untruth 152.
not for his gainesaying of the Papal jurisdiction, but for his cruelty and
misgouernment: and in open Parliament was for his tyranny deprived of his
kingdom, and his uncle Frederick Duke of Holsatia chosen in his place.

7. Penda, Redwaldus, Osricus, Eaufridus were not punished for resisting the
jurisdiction of Rome, Untruth 153.
but for impugning the faith of Christ being Pagane Idolaters: of the two
latter Beda thus writes: Vterque sacramenta regni coelestis, Beda lib. 3.
histor. gent. Anglor. c. 1.
quibus initiatus erat anathematizando perdidit, etc. Both of them standing
accursed lost the sacraments of the heavenly kingdom, which they had received,
and yielded themselves again to be defiled, idololatriae sordibus, with the
filth of Idols: and they were both slain of Cedualla King of Britons. First
then they were punished for their apostasy from the faith of Christ, not from
the fealty of Rome. Secondly, they were rather judged for holding the faith of
the now Church of Rome, in worshipping of Idols. Thirdly, yet if it were
directly proved, which he intends, these arguments drawn from outward
calamities, Beda lib. 2. c. 20
which are common both to good and bad, are but uncertain: for the same Beda
also makes mention of Edwine Oswaldus, Sigebertus* Egericus all Christian
Kings: Lib. 3. c. 9. Lib. 3. c. 18.
the first slain of Carduella King of Britons, the other three by Penda a
Pagan Prince.

8. He says further, that eleven thousand Monks of Bangor were slain of the
Pagane soldiers, for their disobedience in dissenting from the Sea of Rome,
only in the paschall observation and manner of shauing, page 72.

1. Who sees not this Popelings uncharitable judgment, Untruth 153.
who would have them slain as rebels, which were in truth put to death as
Martyrs, for preaching and praying for good success against Ethelbertus a
Pagane King of Northumberland? 2. And is he not ashamed to sit in Gods place of
judgment to award so heavy a punishment for so small a matter, as dissenting
about shauing of crowns, etc? 3. But God suffered not this pitiful slaughter
to go unrevenged: for cruel Ethelbert was slain in the field by Christian
Edwine, ^ succeeded him. 4. And because he talks of shauing of crowns, Fox
pa. 119.
we read also, that Suanus the Dane took the city of Canterbury and put to
death 900. Monks, by tithing of them, that is, saving every tenth man alive:
and 8000. of other persons were put to the sword likewise. Fox. page 161.
We may as well say that these religious persons had their crowns thus pared,
because they were shaven after the Roman fashion, as that the other were
slain for not being so shaued.

9. King Edwine was not deposed from his kingdom, Untruth 154.
and Edgar substituted in his place for banishing of Dunstane, as this
Dunstanist supposes, Fox. page 152. col. 1.
but for his licentious life: who in the same day of his coronation used the
unlawful company of a certain woman whose husband he had slain before.

Thus this trifler makes every thing serve his turn: and would make us
believe, that all judgments and calamities, which befell those Princes, were
inflicted for the Popes cause. He is herein much like Colotes the Epicure, who
in a certain book takes upon him to prove, (...).
that a man could not live according to other Philosophers rules, that there
was no life but among the Epicures: and so this Roman Epicure thinks, that
there is no life nor safety without the Epicurean fellowship of Rome. But the
law tells us, In re propria nemo idoneus iudex: Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20. leg. 9.
Gratian.
No man is a fit judge in his own cause: no more is he in this. And so I
proceed.

The fifth Demonstration.
WIlliam the Conqueror, William Rufus, Henry the 2. King John, Henry the 3.
Edward the 2. Richard the 2. are brought in as impugners of the Papal
jurisdiction, and for the same strangely punished of God, from page 73. to page
79. These examples shall be examined in order.

The Remonstration.
1. IT appears not in story, Untruth 155.
that William Conqueror did oppose himself to the Popes seignorie: for he
caused Stigandus Archbishop of Canturburie to be deprived, and Lanfranke a
great champion for the Pope to be set in his place. Indeed at his first
conquest he dealt hardly with some Monasteries, spoiling them of their gold and
silver: but for that he made amends: For he founded Battle Abbey in Sussex,
and Selbie Abbey in Yorkshire, Stow anno VVillel. 20.
the Priorie of S. Nicholas at Excester, the Abbey of S. Stephen at Cane in
Normandy.

He caused the Lady Church at Meux in France to be burnt, and two Anachoretes:
but the first was repaired again at his charge: Stow.
the other were wilfully burnt, because they persuaded themselves, they ought
not to leave their Cell and cave in that extremity.

This victorious Prince greatly repented with tears at his death of all his
outrageous deeds: commanding all his treasure to be distributed unto
Churches, poor folks and Ministers of God: and made a large confession of his
sins before his death, with an eloquent exhortation to his sons and Nobles,
forgiving all men, and opening all prison doors to them which were there
detained: what reason then had this Popish pickthanke, so ill to requite this
Prince, so great a benefactor to the Papal professors?

Concerning the punishments noted to have befallen this Prince: as the great
famine in his days, and of the breaking of his entrails, and the denial of
burial: the first was a judgment rather upon the whole land, being by
conquest made desolate, then upon him that did conquer it: the second is no
rare thing, for a man by the leaping of his horse over a ditch to break the
rimme of his belly, as this Prince did: for the third, true it is, that a
gentleman forbad his burial, because it was taken by violence from his father,
where the Duke had founded the house of S. Stephen: This wrong was done, not
for any private gain, but for the erection of that Church, which the Papists
count a meritorious work: and yet the gentleman was compounded with, and the
body peaceably interred. These were neither such extraordinary judgments,
and whatsoever they were, might be laid upon him for his transgressions, not
for his disobedience to the Sea of Rome.

But has not this Popes hireling showed great thankfulness to such a liberal
benefactor and principal founder, who augmented and enlarged nine Abbeys of
Monks and one of Nuns in Normandy: A notable benefactor evil requi^ed*
Stowe.
and in whose time 17. Monasteries, and 6. Nunries were builded, as he himself
confessed upon his deathbed, whom the Bishop of Ebroike commended, in his
funeral sermon, for his magnificence, valor, peace and justice. Among many
other, this brabler had least cause to take exception against this valiant Duke.

2. Concerning William Rufus, 1. his resisting against the Pope was just, and
upon good ground, because of his insatiable exactions, alleging this reason,
Quod Petri non inhaerent vestigijs, praemijs inhiantes, etc. Ex Math. Parisiens.
That the Popes follow not Peter's steps, gaping for bribes, neither have they
his authority, not imitating his sanctity.

2. Whereas he would not suffer Anselme without his license to go or appeal
to Rome, but for his stubborn behavior banished him, the King therein
alleges the custom of the land from his fathers time, and all the Bishops
took part with the King against Anselme. Fox page 185.
3. The death of William Rufus being slain by the glaunsing of an arrow shot
by one Tyrell, as the King was hunting in the new forest, is noted by
historians as a judgment of God upon him for his oppression: As Richard an
other son of William the father was slain in the same forest which he had
made, Fox page 189. Stowe.
plucking down Churches and dis-peopling towneships 30. miles about: Untruth
156.
It was not then the Kings restrayning of the Popes usurping, but his own
usurping upon other men's possessions, that might be thought to incense the
divine wrath against him.

3. It is also untrue, as this dreamer surmiseth, that Henry the first could
not be quiet in conscience, till he had restored the Ecclesiastical (he
means Papal) liberty: for he reformed the too great liberty and
licentiousnes of the Clergy, Fox page 191. col. 1. Cooper.
and seemed little to favor the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome: neither
would suffer any Legate to come from the Pope unless by himself required.
Beside, he obtained of Calixtus the 2. that he might use all the customs used
before of his forefathers in England. Fox page 199. col. 1.


Untruth 157.
4. Whereas this fabler affirms, That never any Governor before King Henry the
8. challenged any such prerogative of supremacy, except in the inuestiture of
Bishops, page 74. lin. 20. This is a notable fiction, as may appear by the
words of William Rufus to Anselme, The custom (says he) from my fathers time,
has been in England, that no person should appeal to the Pope without the
Kings license: Fox page 185. col. 1.
He that breaks the customs of the realm, violateth the Crown and power of
the Kingdom.

Untruth 158.
5. Neither is it true, that such troubles befell Henry the 2. for his
disobedience to the Bishop of Rome, as foreign wars and business abroad, and
the rebellion of his own children at home: But these troubles are by the best
historians imputed to other causes, as some make the original thereof to be
his refusal to take the protection of Jerusalem against the infidels, Fox
page 228. col. 2.
being humbly sued unto by Heraclius the Patriarch, who in his Oration to the
King, foretold of the plagues like to ensue. Others affirm, that the King was
punished for his licentious life: Histor. de regib. Angl.
for he was a great wedlock breaker, keeping a famous concubine called
Rosamond, after whose death he deteyned the daughter of Jews King of France
married to his son Richard, Stowe.
and kept Ellanor the Queen in prison twelve years.

Neither is it true, that after (...) reconciled to the Church of Rome, Untruth
159.
that (...), but they rather then began: for the (...) upon his oath of the
death of Thomas (...) certain conditions from the Pope (...)* of his reign,
Fox page 227. col. 1.
and immediately after followed (...) with his son Henry, ann. 1173. and with
the Flemings and Scots ann. 1174. of his reign ann. 20. or after others ann.
22. Stowe. Cooper. Ann. 1174.
It is therefore untrue, that the same day of his reconciliation the Earl of
F^anders retired, and the next day after the King of Scots was taken prisoner.

Untruth 160.
Neither immediately upon this reconciliation of the King were his sons
reconciled, and he himself restored to his pristine tranquillity of mind and
body: for his sons Henry and Geffrey raised war against their father
again ann. 30. of his reign, and shot at him, pearcing his uppermost armor,
though some semblance there had been before of their submission to the King:
And afterward in the 35. year of Henry's reign, his sons Richard and John
levied an army against their father, who for sorrow thereof dyed: whose dead
corpse at the coming of Richard bled abundantly at the nose, thereby strangely
accusing his unnatural proceedings against his father.

6. Neither was King John punished because he had controversy with the Sea of
Rome as is pretended for after he was released of his excommunication, and
absolved, Untruth 161.
which was in the 15. year of his reign, Stow in King John.
and the land released of the interdiction, which had continued 6. years, then
began his cruel wars with the Barons; and Jews the French kings son, ann.
17. and 18. notwithstanding that the Pope took part with the King, and
excommunicated the Nobles: Caxton lib. 7. and Gisbur^e.
and last of all he was poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted. The cause of this
strife between the King and the Barons, is alleged, Cooper in King John.
for that he would not use the laws of S. Edward. And some part of his trouble
may well be imputed to his stubborn behavior against King Henry his father,
who finding his son John to be numbered amongst his enemies in a certain
schedule exhibited to him, thereupon sickned with grief, Stow in Henry the
second.
and gave his sons Gods curse and his, which he would never release till his
dying day.

7. King Henry the third was not punished with civil wars for opposing
himself against the Pope, Untruth 162.
but rather for being too much ruled by him: for after that in a Parliament
held at Oxford in the 42. year of his reign he had condescended to certain
ancient laws and ordinances, whereunto he had before refused to yield, Stow
in Henry the third. Lanquet in Henry the 3.
and for conservation whereof, those douzen peers, which he speaks of were
ordained, the King Ann. 44. procured an absolution of his oath from Rome,
whereby he had before obliged himself to maintain the said ancient laws,
whereupon followed those intestine wars between the King and his Nobles, in
the which the King and his sons were taken. This contention then was caused,
not for the Kings disobedience to the Pope, but his too great confidence in the
Popes authority to absolve him from his oath, to abrogate the laws enacted.

8. True it is, that many miseries and calamities, as civil war, famine
strange diseases happened under the reign of Edward the second, and he
himself at the last lost first his Crown, Untruth 163.
and then his life: but as untrue it is, that these troubles fell upon him, for
meddling too far against the Sea of Rome: It is most evident in histories,
that he was deposed for misgouernment, following the counsel of covetous,
Stowe in Edward the 2. Lanquet anno 1320.
cruel and wicked persons, Pierce Gaueston, and the two Spencers, in whose
quarrel he in a short space put to death 22. of the greatest men in the realm.

9. The like cause is showed in histories of the great troubles that happened
between Richard the second and his Nobles, and of the great misery he fell
into, namely, his negligent administration of the commonwealth, the intolerable
exactions of his officers, Stowe. Lanquet anno ^387. and 1397.
his cruelty in causing his own Uncle Thomas of Woodstock and other Nobles to
be cruelly put to death: for these and the like causes he was deposed and
deprived of his Crown and regal dignity. It was not then his meddling in
ecclesiastical jurisdiction (as this wisard calculateth) but his loose,
Untruth 164.
unjust, and careless government that wrought him this woe. And if it were
enacted in this Kings time, that Vrbane the Pope should be acknowledged for
head of the Church, as is here affirmed; small reason there was in this
discourser to exemplify this King for his disobedience to the Sea of Rome,
which is the scope of all this senseless section.

10. King Henry prospered well in all his affairs after he took upon him to
be the supreme governor in Ecclesiastical matters; so did his son virtuous
King Edward the 6. so did not Queen Mary: nothing had good success almost
that she enterprised: whose reign was shortest of all her predecessors,
unless it were usurping Richard. He therefore speaks untruly and
uncharitably, that King Edward was not unjustly punished in his fathers
fault: Untruth 165.
for neither had his father of famous memory faulted herein, nor himself
punished for the same, but blessed of God with a godly reign, and an happy
end. And thus has this fabulous chronicler held us with a long tale, feeding
the reader with his own fancies: for among all these examples by him produced,
he has not verified his conjecture in any one of them, that they were punished
of God for resisting the papal jurisdiction.

But the contrary may easily be showed, The unhappy end of Princes devoted to
the Pope.
that no Kings had worse success, then they which were devoted to the papal
usurped authority, and none better then they which impugned the same: and for
the proof hereof, I will not go far from home. And first concerning the
evil hap of Princes made slaves to the Pope, other countries yield plentiful
choice of examples: as of Ladislaus King of Bohemia, Ex Aenea Siluio in histor.
Bohem.
a great enemy to the doctrine of John Husse, who died suddenly of the
Pestilence. Another Ladislaus much about that time King of Polonia, at the
incitement of Eugenius the 4, Fox page 741. col. 1.
brake truce made with Amurathes the great Turk, and was miserably slain.
Rodolphus rebelled against the Emperor Henry the 4, Fox page 180. Lanquet
anno* 1080.
being set up against him by Gregory the seventh, and was slain in battle.
The strange ends and bloody deaths of Henry the second, Charles the ninth,
Henry the third, Kings of France, great patrones of popish religion, are very
well known, the first slain with a shiuer of a spear as he iusted against
Montgomery; Fox page 2112.
the second dyed of bleeding at the ears and nose and diverse other parts; the
third was murdered by a Friar.

But leaving to make mention of foreign stories, this one Island of Britannie
does afford sufficient supply: who was more devoted unto the Pope and Popes
religion before the Conquest, then Offa and Edgar? and yet none were more
punished in their posterity. Ex histor. Iornalens. Stowe.
King Offa first gave the Peter Pence to Rome, he founded the Abbey of Bath and
of S. Albons, and was himself at the length shorn a Monk: he most unjustly
caused Ethelbert King of East Angles, who gently came unto him mistrusting
nothing, to be beheaded. But what befell the posterity of this Offa? not one
of them prospered: Eg fredus reigned but four months, the rest that succeeded
were either slain or expulsed: Kenulphus, Kenelmus, Ceolwulphus, Bernulphus,
Ludecanus, Withlacus, of the which Ceolwolfus was banished, all the rest were
slain: the last two Kings of Offa his race were Berthulfus, Fox page 111.
Stowe.
and Burdredus, which were expulsed of the Danes, and so the Kingdom of Mercia
was extinguished. This Offa had a daughter called Ethelburga, which was married
to Brithicus King of West Saxons, which first poisoned her husband: then she
fled into France, Fox page 132. Stowe ex Asserio.
and became Abbess of a certain Monastery; from whence, for committing
adultery with a Monk she was expelled, and ended her days in poverty and
misery. And such success had Offa his posterity. Edgar was a great friend to
the Pope, and one of the greatest Patrones of Monkerie, he restored and new
founded 47. Monasteries: but it fared full evil with his posterity, his base
son Edward was slain by the counsel of his stepmother Queen Alfrede: his
other son Ethelred was expelled his Kingdom by Swanus the Dane, Stowe.
and constrained to live in exile in Normandy: his son Edmund surnamed
Ironside, was forced to divide his Kingdom with Canutus the Dane.

Since the Conquest, Richard the first was much addicted to the Church of Rome,
and the Ministers thereof: he took his scrip and staff at Canturburie to go
in pilgrimage to Jerusalem to recover the holy land (as they called it) from
the Infidels: and he betook the regiment of his Kingdom to William Longshamp
Bishop of Ely the Popes Legate. In Palestina he fought many battles
prosperously, yet returning home, he was taken captive by the Duke of Austria,
and sent to the Emperor, paying for his ransom an hundred thousand pound: at
the last, after he had reigned not many years, nine and nine months, Stow.
Lanquet.
he died of the stroke of a poisoned quarrel shot at him at the besieging of
the Castle of Chalne.

Richard the 2. was a great factor for Pope Urban, whom he decreed by act of
Parliament to be obeyed as head of the Church: Rich. 2. ann. 2. c. 7. Stow.
Lanquet.
yet was he an unhappy Prince in all his proceedings, and at length was
deposed and cruelly murdered in Pumfret Castle.

Henry the 4. was a great agent for the Pope in persecuting of Christ's
members: Fox. page 523. col. 1.
in the second year of whose reign was made the statute ex officio, wherein
they are adjudged to be burned, that should hold any thing contrary to the
determination of the Church: by virtue of which statute many good men were put
to death under the reign of the three Henry's, one succeeding another. But
what followed? Stow. Lanquet.
the father and the son reigned not long, not making much above 23. years
between them, and Henry the 6. holding on the same course against Christ's
members, was deposed from his Crown.

Richard the 3. much affecting and affected of the Popes ministers* for whose
sake the Archbishop of York being Cardinal undertook to persuade the Queen
to deliver Richard Duke of York to his uncle, Stow ex Thom. Mor.
as a lamb into the lions mouth, and prevailed therein: his butcherly end is
well known, how his dead carcass was carried naked behind a Pursiuant of
Arms, all be sprinkled with blood and mire, and homely buried.

Queen Mary had both a short and an unprosperous reign: she lost Calice,
deceived in her childbirth, Fox. page 29^.
left desolate and forsaken of King Phillip her husband before she died, and
ended her days in grief and sorrow.

But contrariwise, as these Princes, which yielded themselves to be directed by
the Pope, were of all other most unfortunate: so those magnanimous Kings which
maintained the liberty of the Crown against the usurped authority of the
Bishop of Rome, were prosperous in all their affairs.

Edward the 1. first made the statute of Mortmaine, Ed. 1. anno 7.
that no lands and possessions should be given to any religious house without
the Kings license: Kings of England prosperous that bent themselves against the
Pope. Ed. 1. ann. 25. Ed. ^. ann. 25.
the statute also of Praemunire made against provisions of Bishoprics and
other Benefices to be purchased from Rome was then ordained. King Edward the
3. also abridged and cut short the Popes jurisdiction, prohibiting under great
penalties, that none should procure any such provisions at Rome, or prosecute
any suites in the Popes Court, the cognizance whereof appertained to the Kings
Courts. King Henry the 7. would admit of no more Cardinals in England, Fox.
page 1071. col. 1. ex orat. Dom. Radulp. Sa^ler.
after he was rid of one. King Henry the 8. abolished the Popes authority.
King Edward the 6. expelled the Mass and other Popish trumperie* yet were all
these victorious Kings. Edward the 1. against the Welsh: Edward the 3. against
the French: Henry the 7. against that tyrant and usurper Richard the 3. Henry
the 8. for his valiant battles famous: Edward the 6. in suppressing of Rebels
and other enemies prosperous.

And concerning the reign of our late noble Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, whom
God in his mercy appointed to be a reformer of religion and a nourisher of his
Church, what Prince in the world (I speak not of this age only, but of many
hundred years before) can compare with her Majesty's time, in any kind of
outward blessing? The prosperity of Queen Elizabeth's reign.
first, in the years of her life she went beyond al her progenitors. Secondly,
in the length of her reign she exceeded all, but only two, Henry the 3. and
Edward the 3. Thirdly, in peaceable government for so many even 44. years,
none came near her. Fourthly, in love of the subjects at home. Fifthly, in
honor and reputation among foreign Princes. Sixthly, in prosperous success
abroad, in deliverance from more then twenty conspiracies at home: Queen
Elizabeth had no peer. Seventhly, add hereunto the wealth of the kingdom.
Eighthly, the pureness of the coin. Ninthly, but most of all the pureness of
religion. Tenthly, the abundance of learned men, such as no nation under heaven
has the like, of grave Counselors, and Martial Commanders: who can but
confess, that in all these kinds the Gospel has brought a rich blessing to
this land. And as Queen Elizabeth loved and lived in peace, so she ended her
days in a good old age, full of years: and, which of all other may worthily
be accounted the greatest blessing, has left the kingdom to a most worthy and
noble successor, a professor and protector of the same faith and religion, our
renowned King that now is; by whose hands, we doubt not, but that the Lord will
accomplish, whatsoever he sees needful for his Church.

But because this Romish southsayer takes upon him to play the blind prophet:
What is like (says he) to be the event thereof hereafter, I had rather others
should write and show their conjecture, which I for reverence to my Sovereign
will here omit: And hereupon he hops that his prudent Princess, will imitate
the examples of her noble predecessors* Henry the 1. and Henry the 2. in
recalling that, which they did in their inconsiderate times, etc. page 79.
Hereunto I briefly answer, that his prognostication and exhortation are both
alike, they both show a dreaming and fantastical spirit. His foolish hope (we
see) is vain and frustrate: for her Majesty left her happy reign in the
same faith wherein she began it: and as she did nothing inconsiderately at her
entrance, but with great advice; so had she no cause to repent her in the end.
If her Majesty's predecessors were inconstant, in pulling down what before
they had set up, she being appointed of God to be a wise builder, was not
therein to follow so simple a plot.

As is his hope and expectation, such is his lying spirit of prophesying.
Indeed the Papists did promise themselves a great day at the next change: The
vain hope and expectations of Papists made frustrate.
they did not mutter it in corners, but clatter it in their vain pa^phlets:
Parsons made a book of reformation against that time: but blessed be God,
which has disappointed their hope. I nothing doubt but that righteous Abel
shall offer still acceptable sacrifices unto God in the Church of England, when
all hypocrites and Popish sacrificers shall hang down their heads with Caine.
Yea and I hold this to be no small miracle, that God, where such trouble was
feared, has with such peace, consent of hearts and minds, approbation of all
good subjects, acclamation and rejoicing of the whole Church of God, set the
imperial diadem upon so godly, christian, and virtuous a Prince his head:
such grace from God few expected, all good men desired, England I am sure has
not deserved, yet God in his mercy has granted: So that we have just cause to
say with the Prophet David, This is the Lords doing, and it is maruailous in
our eyes. Psalm. 118 23.
It is written of Sylla, that after Italy was delivered from the civil wars
coming to Rome, the first night he could not sleep for joy: (...).
But we the Church and people of England have greater cause, not one but many
both nights and days to awake to give thanks unto God, for our deliverance
from troubles not so much felt, as feared. And thus also I have at length
dispatched that tedious and frivolous section.

THE EIGHT SECTION: HIS DEfense to the honorable Council, and all other men of
Nobility.
THis Section being as the rest confusedly shuffled up, and as a rude chaos
tumbled together, I will, if I can bring it to some form, not vouchsafing an
answer to all his idle words and vain repetitions, which are not to be
regarded, (...).
as Aristotle well answered a certain brabler, who said, O Philosopher, I am
troublesome unto you with my speech: no (says he) for I marked thee not.

The first Defense.
SVppose ye might contend in politic government with many, etc. let it be,
some might be admitted fellows in arms etc. yet to that, which is most or
only material in this question and controversy of learning, religion, etc.
are too wise to make so unequal a comparison, to balance your selves with so
many Saints most holy, learned, professed Divines and Bishops, etc. page 80.
lin. 12.

The Answer.
1 THeir honors are much beholding to this cunning Caruer, that he will allow
them in matters of policy, and of martial affairs to equalize those in the
popish times employed in both: but in learning and religion they must come
far short of popish Bishops etc.

2 But herein also I doubt not, for true religion and knowledge of God, that
our honorable Lords and Nobles far exceed most of that shaven crew: for who
knows not, that in a popish Bishop, Popish Bishops what learned Clarks. Fox
page 949.
learning and divinity is not of the greatest regard? Was not the Bishop of
Cauaillon a profound Clerk, that said to the Merindolians, that I^ was not
requisite to salvation to understand, or expound the articles of faith: for
there were many Bishops, Curates, yea and Doctors of Divinity, whom it would
trouble to expound the Paternoster and the Creed. Such another learned Prelate
was the Bishop of Dunkelden in Scotland, that said to Thomas Forret Martyr,
that it was too much to preach every Sunday: for in so doing, you make the
people think* that we should preach likewise. He said further, Fox. page 1266.
col. 2.
I thank God I never knew what the old and new Testament was: whereof rose a
proverb in Scotland, You are like the Bishop of Dunkelden, that knew neither
old nor new law. Such religious and devout Bishops were some other in Scotland
much about that time, which held, Fox. page 1274.
that the Paternoster should be said to Saints: whereupon it was used as a
byword in Scotland: To whom say you your Paternoster?

I appeal now to the indifferent Reader, whether our learned Nobles of England
may not be compared in true learning and sound divinity, with such unlearned
popish Bishops? But I pity this poor man's case, that could play the Orator no
better then at the first dash to alienate their minds, into whose bosom he
sought to insinuate himself, forgetting that rule of Ambrose, Qui tractaet,
debet andientium considerare personas, ne irrideatur prius, Lib. 7. in Lucam.
quam aud^atur: He that treats of any thing, must consider to whom he
speaks, least he be laughed at, before he be harkned to: (...).
for, Like as they that drink bitter potions, do loath the very cups; so they
which accuse at the first, win no grace with their hea^ers.

The second Defense.
NExt, this bold lad braueth it out, producing certain examples of the hard
haps of some Nobles among the Protestants: as of the Lord Cromwell, condemned
by the law which he had provided for others: the Dukes of Somerset and
Northumberland, basely disgraced and put to death: Page 81.
Robert Earl of Leicester miserably died, terrified with monstrous visions of
Devils: Sir Frauncis Walsingham his miserable death, despairing words, filthy
stink of body, basely buried in the night, Page 82.
will be an eternal infamy against him.

The Answer.
Untruth 165.
1 THe end of the Lord Cromwell was neither unfortunate nor miserable, making a
virtuous and a godly end, The Lord Cromwell defended.
with confession of his sins, and confidence in God, and faithful invocation
of his name: he was attainted by Parliament, misled and misinformed, not
condemned by any law of his own making: Stowe anno Henric. 32.
whom King Henry afterward wished to be alive again, which he would not have
desired, had he been persuaded he was a traitor. Thus wise Princes are sometime
swayed with false reports, and overcome with flatterers, and repent, when it is
too late.

But miserable indeed was the end of Bishop Fisher, who was attainted by
Parliament, for practicing with Elizabeth Barton called the holy maid of Kent
against the King, Fox page 1069. col. 1.
who died in a bad cause, giving his life for the usurped authority of the
Pope, against the lawful calling of the King. Such was the death of Sir Thomas
Moore, who dyed scoffingly and profanely, Fox ibid.
suffering for the like obstinacy and superstition. How could he omit or
forget these two notable examples of deserved misery, and object the much
lamented case of that honorable Lord Cromwell* dying in his innocence?

2 Concerning the death of the good Duke of Somerset, it was no judgment upon
him for his religion, Untruth 166. The good Duke of Sommerset defended. Fox
page 1372. col. 2.
which as he had zealouslie maintained while he lived, so therein he
constantly died. But herein it might be, that God chastised the oversight of
the Duke, in condescending to the death of his brother the Lord Thomas Seymer,
wherein secretly his own overthrow was intended, though he simply perceived
it not. And again this is rather to be supposed a judgment against that
ambitious Duke of Northumberland, who by his Machiauilian devises cut off these
two brothers, the Kings Uncles, to make a way for some of his to the Crown, as
the event of matters afterward showed: but he was overtaken in his own plots,
and suffered justly in the same place, where the other good Duke by his means
not two year before innocently ended his days.

3 As for the Duke of Northumberland, take him to your self, for at his death
he denied the Gospel, Untruth 167.
and in hope of favor consented to the Popish religion, and exhorted others to
do the like, whose recantation was presently published to the world: Fox page
1408. col. 1.
Therefore let that Church challenge him, in whose faith and communion he dyed,
his end full well declared, that his religion was more for his own advantage,
then in conscience.

4 That which is reported of the Earl of Leicester, the credit thereof
relying upon this braggers bare word, Untruth 168.
alleging no author for it, may with as great reason be by us denied, as it
is by him affirmed. Yet admit it was so, that he was in his sickness troubled
with fearful visions, that is not to be imputed to his religious profession,
but to his licentious conversation, wherein it is like enough he committed some
things not beseeming a professor of the Gospel. But he needed not to have
noted this, if it were true, as he says, for so strange a thing, for men in
their sickness to be troubled with illusions of Devils, and terrible visions,
Visions of Devils not strange in Popery.
seeing it is so usual a thing in Popery, and often happening to popish
professors: Did he think so to blind the world, and possess men with his
strange reports, that they could not call to mind the fearful examples of
Pope Siluester the second, Ioannes Stella. Platina.
of Innocentius the fourth, of Cardinal Crescentius? whereof the first gave
his soul to the Devil to obtain the Papacy: Ioann. Baleus.
the second in the night was stricken on the side by a certain Bishop that
appeared to him in vision, Math. Parisiens. Flores histor.
and was left for half dead, and not long after dyed: the third being
vicegerent for the Pope in the late Tridentine chapter, sitting up late to
write letters to his unholy Fatherhood, was so frighted with the sight of a
great black dog which appeared with flaming eyes, Sleidan lib. 23.
and long ears, that he fell by conceit thereof into a grievous sickness,
whereof he not long after dyed.

5 Sir Frauncis Walsingham, neither dyed miserably, nor in despair: Untruth
169.
as he was in his life faithful to his Prince, a lover of his country, The
commendation of worthy Sir Francis Walsingham.
a great patron of scholars and martial men, sound in religion: so we doubt
not, but he ended his days in comfort and peace of conscience. This worthy
Counselors memory honorable among Protestants, and all that love their
country, is odious to Papists, because by his industry and vigilant eye many
dangerous conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth were discovered, Stowe ann. 28.
Regin. Elizabeth.
and by name that most horrible treason of Babington and Ballard, with their
accomplices, in the 28. year of her Majesty's reign, wherein those traiterous
Papists intended the utter overthrow both of their country and religion: to
such indeed that excellent man was an adversary, and for this cause, this
vile raker in dead men's ashes spitteth his venom at him.

Where he obiecteth the filthy stink of his body, etc. as herein the
testimony of an adversary is little worth, speaking upon his own bare word;
so he might have remembered what is truly reported of Cardinal Wolsey, that
his body being dead, was black as pitch, and so heavy, that six could scarce
bear it: and that it did so stink above the ground, Fox pa. 996. col. 2.
that they were constrained to bury it in the night season.

The like end had Stephen Gardener that great patron of Popery, whose tongue,
before he died, Fox pa. 178^. col. 1.
hung out of his mouth all swollen and black. And I pray you what a sweet
co^se was Bonners fa^ bellied carcass, that was buried full honorably, as he
deserved, between two thieves in S. Georges Churchyard in Southwarke.

As for the wanting of funeral pomp, it is no disgrace to the dead, but it
was rather an honor to him, whose liberal expenses in the service of his
country, and beautiful relief to the living, could leave very little to be
bestowed upon himself, when he was dead. Lazarus had but an homely burial in
the world, yet was his soul attended upon by Angels. Augustine well says: Si
aliquid prodest impio sepultura pretiosa, ob^rit pio vilis aut nulla: Lib. de
cur. pro mortuis. c. 3.
If the wicked be profited by their sumptuous sepulture, the godly is hindered
by his mean burial furniture. We may say in this case of this honorable man,
as noble Agesilaus, who forbad that any picture or monument should be made of
him, when he was dead, giving this reason: If I have done any thing well, that
shall be my monument; if not, (...).
no tombs or pictures are any thing worth. So this man's worthy acts, while he
lived, shall be his monument now he is dead: which do more commend him, then
the sumptuous pillars of some that lie not far from him, of far unlike
desert.

The third Defense.
1. HE takes upon him to prove, that the Popish religion has made the
professors thereof honorable and glorious: Untruth 169.
It was never yet (says he) accounted dishonorable to any to be a professor
of that religion, which made him glorious* page 82.

2. The children of the greatest Princes and Nobles were Priests and Bishops in
England, page 84. as S. Guitlacke, S. Suitbert, Thomas of Hereford son of the
noble Cantilupus, etc. Cedda, Dunstane, etc. page 83.

3. The only order of S. Benedict has had twenty Kings, above 100. great
Princes, many Popes, 1600. Archbishops, 400. Bishops* 15000. famous men.

Untruth 170.
4. He rehearses diverse Archbishops of Canterbury most honorable in their
time: Baldwine, Hubert, Kilwarbie, Peccham, Stratford, Offord, Braidwarden,
Islip, Langhton with others, page 84.

The Answer.
1. THe Popish religion is a dishonor to such Princes and Nobles, Popish
religion a dishonor to Princes.

Platina. Ex Auentino.


that profess it: unless any man be so simple to think it was an honor for
the Emperor Henry the 4. to wait upon the Pope Gregory the 7. three days
and three nights in winter at the gates of Canossus: or for Frederick the 1.
to yield his neck to be troad upon by Alexander the 3. and to be rebuked for
holding Pope Adrians stirrup on the wrong side: or for Henriricus the 6. to
suffer Pope Celestine to set the crown on his head with his feet, and to cast
it off again: or for King John to kneel down at the feet of Pandolphus the
Popes Legate, and to surrender his Crown to the Pope. Does not now this Popish
profession add great honor to Princes, Ex Chronic. v^rnac.
submitting themselves unto it?

2. That the sons of Princes have become Priests and Bishops, in the time of
Popery, is not denied: and so have Priests and Bishops been made Kings and
Princes: as Adelualphus son of Egbrichus being Bishop of Winchester, was made
King of England, anno 829. Daniel a Priest was elected King of France anno 719.
Stow. Lanquet.
It was not devotion, but ambition, that made Bishops prick forward to be Lord
Chancellors, The ambition of Popish prelates.
Lord Treasurers, chief Justices of England, as we find in former ages:
neither was it the sanctity of Popery, but the riches of the Clergy and
their bravery, that allured unto them the Nobility.

3. If Bennets order have brought forth so many of all degrees, it is more
like that their fat offerings, great revenues and idle bellies procured it,
then any devotion of that sect wrought it: neither is it a good argument to
prefer those colors, because so many have worn them. The Epicures sect had
more scholars and disciples, then any of the rest: The Scribes and Pharisees
had more followers, then Christ: and Diana of Ephesus was worshipped of all
Asia and the whole world, Act. 19.27. He has said yet no more for the
Benedictines, then the Epicureans, Pharisees, Dianas worshippers can allege
for themselves, that many Kings, Philosophers, Priests, and many famous men
were of their sects. Lastly, if these Iudasites have indeed such a good opinion
of Bennets rule, what ailed Friar Parsons to be so fierce against poor
Barkworth a Mass Priest of the College of Valledolid, Of Bennets order.
to cause him to be expulsed, to be buffeted upon the face, and drawn by the
heels upon the pauement, because he was a furtherer of certain youths that
entered into the order of Benedict? The story is reported by their own
Mass Priests in their reply to Parsons, Manifestation, page 69. I would
think, that his fellow Friars should give him little thanks for speaking so
honorably of the Monks of Maledictes (I would say) Benedictes order.

4. Concerning the Bishops of Canterbury, which he has rehearsed, to have
bin so honorable in their time: it is but his own fancy. The most of them
have left no notable memory behind them, unless it be of their ambition,
contention, rebellion against their Prince, cruelty against the members of
Christ.

Baldwine is famous for his contention with the Monks of Canterbury: Of the
Popish Archbishops of Canterbury.
he suspended the Prior from his Priorship, and 22. Monks from service. And
Kilwarbie for contending with Walter Archbishop of York, for bearing up his
cross thorough the middle of Kent, ann. 1272. Fox page 394. to page 396.
So Peccham excommunicated Thomas Bishop of Hereford, who appealed to Rome: he
contended also with William of York for bearing up his Cross thorough Kent:
and at another time with the Prior and Monks of Canterbury. John Stratford
being refused and not suffered to visit in Norwich diocese, excommunicated
the Bishop, suspended the Prior, interdicted the Covent, anno 1343. Offord and
Braidwarden sat each of them but ten months: and therefore could leave no
great memory behind them of their doings.

Some of them are noted for their disloyalty to their Prince, Popish
Archbishops of Canterbury traitors to their Prince. Ex Chronic. S. Albani Ann.
21. Rich. 2 tit. 16.
as Thomas Becket, who set himself against Henry the 2. Winchelsey was
banished the Realm by Edward the 1. because he was a disturber thereof, and
took part with Rebels. Langhton suffered King John his liege Lord to kiss his
feet. Arundel was adjudged by act of Parliament to be a traitor, and condemned
to banishment, and his goods confiscate. As for Courtney and Chichley, they are
detected in stories for their cruel hatred against the Church of Christ: the
first a great enemy to Wickl^ffe and his followers: the other a most butcherly
persecutor of Gods Saints, Fox. page 440. Fox. page 588. and 641.
and a contriuer of the virtuous and valiant Lord Cobhams cruel and unjust
death, against whom Arundel his predecessor gave sentence, and he executed the
same. Sudburie is pitied in Chronicles for his misery, being most cruelly
beheaded of the Rebels, not for religion, Stow.
but because he simply counseled the King, not to go to satisfy the
tumultuous peoples demands and complaints, which afterward he did, before they
could be appeased.

Islip is famous for nothing more, but that he prohibited upon pain of
excommunication the people to abstain from labor upon certain Saints days.
Fox. page 396. col. 2.
Murton is commended, not as a Bishop for true devotion, but as a wise and
politic man for his sage advice for conioyning the two houses of York and
Lancaster. Stow.


We see then what small honor Popery gives to the sectmasters thereof: true
religion would have made them shine, whereas their superstition has buried
them in oblivion: according to the saying of the Wiseman, The memorial of the
just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prou. 10.7.
Ambrose well says of Valentinian: Non ego floribus tumulum eius aspergam, sed
spir^tum eius Christi odore persundam; Ambros. in o^it Valentin.
hoc eius reliquias sacrabo, hoc gratiam eius commendabo, I will not sprinkle
his grave with flowers, but perfume his spirit with the sweet savor of
Christ, with this will I honor his relics, and commend his gracious memory:
So had those Princes and Prelates by true religion purchased an eternal
memory, whereas by their idolatry and superstition, they have gained rather
shame and ignominy. Thus has this brrgger faced us out with a glittering show
of honor, which is turned to dishonor rather and disgrace: and so as Seneca
says, quae decipiunt, nihil habent solidi; tenue est mendacium, Epistol. 79.
perlucet si diligenter inspexeris: deceitful things have no soundnes: a lie
is but a thin metal, if you mark it well you shall soon see thorough it.

Now this cauiller turns himself from defending of his religion, to pick
quarrels with ours, and to lay open the infirmities and offenses of it, and to
object against it.

The first objection.
1 HE obiecteth out of Luther, that he should write, A great sclander of Luther.
it is the nature of the Gospel to cause wars, that there is no Magistrate,
Untruth 171.
no superior, etc. it is to be entreated by many prayers, that the countriemen
obey not their Princes, etc. no law, nor any syllable of law can be opposed
upon Christians, more then themselves will, page 86.

2 Calvin, Beza, with others, decreed in their conuenticles, A devilish
sclander.
that all lawful policy and civil government must be taken away; they kept a
council to destroy the King of France, Untruth 172.
his children and wife, the Queen mother, etc. a Tailor, and Cobbler at
Frankeford instituted new courts, page 86.

3 Tyndall taught, and Fox maintains these propositions following, Heaps of
lies and untruths many. 173.
that it is impossible for us to consent to the law of God: the law requires
things impossible: the law makes us hate God: every man is Lord of other men's
goods: the children of faith are under no law, page 87.

4 The Protestants did write a book against the temporal regiment of women,
page 87. Untruth 174.


5 The Lord Cromwell, John Duke of Northumberland, Untruth 175.
Cranmer, were put to death for treason, page 87.

Untruth 176.
6 The Council of King Henry the eight (only the Lord Chauncelor Wriotheslie
excepted) did violate the Kings will and testament, page 87.

7 The Protestant Council of King Edward would have disinherited her Majesty,
and Queen Mary, page 88.

The Reiection.
Epist. ad frat. inferior. lib. de potestat. secula. lib. contr. Turc. lib. de
captiuitat. Babylon.
1. FIrst concerning Luther, my answer is 1. that in those books which are
quoted in the margen, and cited by the adversary, Luther has no such words in
the edition of his works at Wittemberge, at the least not in any such sense
that I by diligent search could find. 2. for if he could have been detected of
such gross and erroneous sayings, it is not like that Leo the 10. in his Bull
against Luther, wherein his errors are condemned, would have omitted them. 3.
in which Bull artic. 34. these words are fathered upon Luther, that he should
say, Praeliari aduersus Turcas est aduersari Deo, etc. To war against the
Turks is to resist God visiting our iniquities: which words Luther in his
answer denies not, thus expounding himself, Luthers opinion of the wars
against the Turks.
that he simply condemned not the war against the Turks, but the Popes
subtlety, that under that color sought to enrich himself, Hoc praeliari
contra Turcas saepe pontificib. magno fuit lucro, This warring against the
Turks, has brought great advantage to the Bishops: 4. For otherwise Luther
taught obedience to the Magistrate, and misliked all tumultuous and disordered
courses, as it may appear by his misliking of Carolostadius violent
proceedings, who stirred up the people by violence without the Magistrate to
cast down images at Wittemberge: Ex Ioann. Sleidan. lib. 3.
which Luther did not disprove, as though he maintained Images, but that this
ought to be done by the Magistrate, and not by force, upon every private man's
head without order and authority. 5. But they are the Papists, not
Protestants, that encourage the people to rebellion: as Innocent. the 3. did
discharge the subjects of their oath and fealty to King John. So did Pius 5.
and Gregory the 13. incite the subjects against Queen Elizabeth, proclayming
in their wicked Bulls, that all Catholics might lawfully withdraw their
obedience from her. They were your popish Divines of Salamanca, Traitorous
conclusions of Iudasites.
no Protestants that hatched these traitorous conclusions as Cockatrice eggs:
that it was a meritorious work to assist Tyrone against the Queen; that the
Catholics of Ireland, that did fight against the Queen, were by no
construction Rebels, etc. Reply to the Manifestat. fol. 66. page 2.
This shameless Iudasite might have blushed to object this untruly against
Luther, that which his own faithless crew, and generation of vipers is
guilty of. 6. Lastly, Protestants not bound to all Luthers opinions or sayings.
if Luther had so said or writ, we defend him not, neither take upon us to
justify all his hasty sentences and rash speeches: We are no Lutheranes,
neither have we received our faith from Luther, or yet depend upon him. Why may
not Protestants take the like liberty against their writers, which Papists use
against theirs? When Harding was pressed with the absurd sayings of Syluester
Prierias, and Pighius, he makes this answer, We bind our selves neither to
the words of Syluester nor of Pighius, if they err, Answ. to Apolog. page 608.
what is that to us? let them bear their own burden.

2 Secondly, it is a most uncharitable sclaunder of Calvin and Beza, and other
Protestants, that they should conspire the death of Princes: It is usual with
Papists not Protestants so to do, as witnesses the treasons of Morton,
Saunders, Allen, Ballard, Hall, Gifford, Reynolds, Parsons, Walpole, with
others, who all have been detected to be practisers against the life of our
late Sovereign, and the state of this land. The Tailor and Cobbler at Frankfort
were Anabaptists, as was John Leyden the beggar at Munster, who came nearer
Papists then Protestants: for they said, of the two, namely, the Pope and
Luther, Luther was the worse. Lanquet ann. 1534.
Against these Anabaptists did write Melancthon, Vrbanus Rhegius, with other
Protestants, while the Papists let them alone.

3 Tyndals opinions are sound and good doctrine as he propounded them, and
Master Fox maintains them, not as the Papists wrested them. 1. He says,
that it is impossible for a man to fulfill the law of his own strength, Fox.
page 1247. art. 2, 3.
and of our selves to consent to the will of God: says not the Apostle as
much? Tyndals opinions justified.
That which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak, etc. the
wisdom of the flesh is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be,
Romans 8. 2, 7. Fox. ibid.
2. He says not, that the law makes us to hate God: but in the law we are
proved to be enemies to God, and that we hate him: so the Apostle says, I knew
not sin but by the law, Romans 77. and the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God, Romans 8.7. 3. When he says, every man is Lord of an others goods,
he speaks not of a community in possession, but of the Christian and
charitable use, which in pity is to be extended to our poor brethren: Fox.
page 1248. art. 18.
If thou show not mercy to the poor, etc. thou robbest him of his own.
Does not the wise man say as much? Withhold not the good from the owners
thereof, Pro. 4.27. meaning the poor, who before God are owners in respect of
their necessity of that which the rich have in abundance and superfluity.

4. Where he says, the children of faith are not under the law: Fox. page
1250. art. 18.
he expounds himself, that they are not compelled for fear of the law to
do their duty, but for the love of Christ: How the faithful are not under
the law.
for the spirit of God works in them a willing obedience which proceeds of
love: He says herein none other thing, then S. Paul before him: Against such
there is no law, Galath. 5.23. The law is not given to a righteous man, 1.
Timoth. 1.9. which places are not to be understood of the precept and substance
of the law, but of the effect and terror of the law, which works not upon the
faithful. Tyndals doctrine is herein all one with Saint Paul's: and this
cauiller does but bewray his ignorance herein mixed with malice.

4. Fourthly, what if some one Protestant have of a singular opinion, provoked
by the cruel government in Queen Mary's time, written against the regiment of
women, let the author answer it himself: Protestants are not to be charged
with men's private conceits. We do bless God for the government of Infants and
women: God has used these weak means for the good of his Church in the
happy reigns of King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth: yet we hold it a greater
blessing when Kings, not Queens, men, not children, are left to succeed in the
kingdom: as to the praise of God we see this day.

5. Whether the Lord Cromwell were guilty of treason, (howsoever the
Parliament, being misinformed and misled by the malice of his enemies, might
judge of him) by this it is cleared, because the King not long after wished,
that his Cromwell were alive again. Fox. page 1189.
The Duke of Northumberland did suffer worthily for treason against the Crown,
and died a Papist, whatsoever show he made before of the contrary: therefore
the Church of Rome has best right to him, he is no disparagement to the
Gospel. It is utterly false that Cranmer was put to death for treason: for he
was thereof acquitted at his arraignement in the Guildhall at London: neither
are traitors in England adjudged to the fire as Cranmer was, Fox. page 1418.
col. 1.
but otherwise punished.

6. He shows not wherein King Henry's testament was presently violated, and
therefore we may suspect the reporter of untruth: His body was interred at
Winsore, his legacies to the poor of 1000. marks, and of the gift of twelve
pence by the day to twelve poor Knights, were performed, his son succeeded
in the Crown: and all this was done according to the Kings last will and
testament. But if it had been in some point violated (as it is not like that
the Chauncellor, who had racked most cruelly Anne Askew an innocent woman with
his own hands, was a man of such conscience, only to refuse) so there were
diverse of the Kings executors resolved Papists, as Cutbert Tonstal, Southwell,
Peckam, with others: Stow ann. 1547*
so that the blame hereof will be upon the Papists shoulders, especially seeing
most of them, then counted Protestants, afterward in Queen Mary's time turned
Papists.

7. That ambitious practice of the Duke of Northumberland to disinherite both
the Queens Mary and Elizabeth, as it is confessed by us: so it touches not
the credit of the Gospel, seeing, as is before showed, the contriuer of this
disinheriting of the right heir, ended his days in the profession of the
Popish faith, Fox pa. 1408. col. 1.
to the which he exhorted the people to return.

Thus this agent for the Pope goes on still to tell leasings, and would have
his own word go for pay. But the law says: Vox vnius, vox nullius, licet
honoratae personae: The voice of one, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20. leg. 8. Constantin.
Ad Pammach. aduers. Ioann. Hierosolymit.
is the voice of none, though he were an honorable person: and as Hierome
says, Testimonium pro se, nec Catoni creditum: No not Cato was credited in his
own cause. Were this Ignatian sectarie of a more worthy order, and an
honester man then he seems to be, he must not think his own surmises can
surprise the the truth; nor his bold assertions shall be taken for good
evidence: It had been more commendable in him to be bashful to speak the
truth, then shameless to utter any thing: (...).
as Cato said well, he liked better of young men, that were given to blushing,
then of pale and wanne.

The second Objection.
Untruth 177.
1. IT is a common opinion with this people, that the laws of Magistrates do
not bind in conscience and in secret, but only in public and open show for
avoiding of scandale. What treason may not privately be plotted and put in
practice by this doctrine? page 86.

Untruth 178*
2. What other thing does their approved doctrine of sole faith portend to the
world, but a desolation of all order, etc. if a man be only justified by
faith, etc. all offenses against a commonwealth, even to take away the scepter
and Crown of the Prince, may securely be put in action, etc. page 86.

Untruth 179.
3. That law enacted by Parliament of King Henry the 8. that all contracts of
marriage whatsoever were void by a second marriage consummate, was revoked by K.
Edward the 6. yet by the first Parliament of Queen Elizabeth is revived: from
which opinion, and the doctrine of remarrying for incontinencie, etc. what
diuorcements, dissensions, breaches of wedlock, etc. have ensued? page 89.

The Reiection.
1. THe Protestants deny not, but that the laws of Magistrates as touching
external rites and observations do bind in conscience, but not in regard of
the things commanded, which are of themselves indifferent, and touch not the
conscience, as the prohibiting of eating of flesh, wearing of apparel, but in
regard only of our obedience due unto the Magistrate in lawful things. How
Magistrates laws bind in conscience.
But concerning Princes laws of things necessarily appertaining to Gods
service and the keeping of the commandments, such do simply bind in
conscience, enioyning the same, and none other things which God commands in
his word. And this is that which is affirmed in Synopsis, Synops. cont. 4. qu.
7. part. 1.
which doctrine the adversary shall never be able to disprove: and therefore
he seeks to obscure this truth by lying; being not ashamed to utter here two
great untruths, as though it were affirmed, that Magistrates laws do not at
all bind in conscience and secret, and as though the question were of all
laws, and not only of external rites and vsages, which are in their own
nature indifferent: for treasons and treacheries are directly contrary to the
law of God, and do pollute the conscience: and such laws do bind absolutely
in conscience, both in respect of the particular thing commanded, and of the
general rule of obedience.

2. Though Protestants teach, that only faith does justify, yet they affirm
not only faith to be necessary. And our opinion is, Faith justifies* alone,
but must not be* alone.
that justifying faith cannot be without fruits: that whereas there are no
good works there is no faith: neither was that ever a right faith, which never
brought forth good works. It is therefore a foolish consequent brought in by
him: Protestants are justified only by faith: Ergo, felons, murders, treasons
may be safely practiced among them: for where these things are maintained there
is no faith perceived. Good fruits make not a tree good, but only declare it
to be good: does it therefore follow, that it is no matter whether a good tree
bring forth fruit or not? nay, if it do not, it is found to be no good tree.
We say therefore with S. Paul, that they which have believed should be careful
to show forth good works; Tit. 3.8.
these things are good and profitable to men. But this shall clear our
doctrine of justification by faith only from all suspicion of treasons,
treacheries, that these cursed attempts are not to be found among the
solifidian Protestants, but among the nullifidian Papists, who standing upon
the merit of their works, make no conscience (a great sort of them) to
practice against their Prince and country, as it has been more then twenty
times in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, attempted by Romish Priests, and
Iudasites and their sectaries, and by Gods great mercy and watchful
providence discovered.

3. That law of reuersing precontracts by marriage consummate, was made in the
Popish Church, and as yet the whole body of Popish religion remained in
England, only the Popes supremacy excepted, anno 32. Henric. 8. But it was
reuersed under a Protestant Prince King Edward the 6. The law of precontracts
whether in force.

A great untruth.


This exception tends rather to the disgrace of Popery, then Protestancie.
It is further a most impudent forgerie, that the statute against precontracts
was revived anno 1. Elizabeth: only so much is revived, as was repealed by
Queen Marie, as touching other prohibitions of marriage, not that which was
revoked by King Edward. The practice also of the Church shows the same, where
a sound and lawful precontract is admitted, against an usurped marriage though
consummate. As for marriage after divorce for fornication, where Christ has
given a liberty again to marry, Matthew. 5.32. except for fornication: and
Matthew. 19.9.
it ought not to be restrained for fear of any ensuing inconvenience, least
man should seem to be wiser then God. And yet greater danger is feared, and
more mischief like to be intended, where marriage upon divorce is denied,
Whether marriage after divorce for fornication be lawful.
then where it is admitted: for there, one party being a continual offense to
another, they shall be constrained to live unchastly and incontinently, or
tempted to practice one against the life of another, that the yoke may be
loosed: whereas when a second marriage, where the iustnes of the cause to the
Magistrate is approved, is granted, the foresaid dangers, are the one helped,
the other prevented. Augustine thus resolves: Potius vxore viuente aliam ducat
quis, quam humanum sanguinem fundat: Cause. 33. qu. 2. c. 9.
It were better for a man to marry another, his first wife living, then to
shed blood. And Ambrose concludes peremptorily: Viro licet vxorem ducere si
dimiserit vxorem peccantem: It is lawful for the man to marry a wife, Ambros.
in 1. Cor. c. 7.
having dismissed the first for her offense against marriage.

Thus it is apparent, with what weapons our adversaries fight, with slanders,
wrestings, misreports. But as the law is, Testi non iurato non credendum: Cod.
lib. 4. tit. 20. leg. 8. Constantin.
A man is not to be credited, not speaking upon his oath: So this fellow is not
to be trusted, who I am sure, would hardly swear, unless his conscience be
cauterised, these things to be true, which here he has objected. I remember
Augustine writing to Hierome, commends the faithfulness of one Ciprianus, that
carried his letters: Non illi diligentia deerit in custodiendis rescriptis,
alacritas in perferendis, nec fides in reddendis: He wants not neither
diligence in keeping my rescripts, nor cheerefulnes in carrying them, nor trust
in delivering them. But this talebearer in reporting of Protestants opinions
wants all these: he is neither diligent in understanding them, nor willing to
remember them, nor faithful in rehearsing them. Where he would foil others,
he shows his own folly; where he would blame us, he shameth himself: he
pretends to accuse others, and had more need himself to be excused: much
like to the soldier, that Cato so much misliketh, which in walking uses his
hands, and in fighting his feet: (...).
when he should in walking stir his feet he uses his hands, and when in
fighting he should exercise his hands he runs away with his feet: So
plays this freshwater soldier, when he should lay on sound strokes in
telling the truth, he runs on with fables, thinking so to carry all before
him.

The third Objection.
NOw this quarrell-picker proceeds, and takes exception to the marriage of
Ministers, which he would prove to be prejudicial to the Commonwealth: I will
abridge his discourse being confused, and follow his sense, though it be
needless to rehearse all his words.

There have been accounted 40. thousand parish Churches in England, admit the
least survey of thirteen, fifteen, Untruth and sclaunder 180.
or sixteen thousand: There being so many married Ministers, for among all
those it is a dishonor at this day to be unmarried: if 75. persons of the
Israelites descending into Egypt in the space of 400. hundred years multiplied
to 603550. people, there being for every married Israelite a thousand married
Ministers, in the like space of time they will amount to 603550000. a greater
number then many Englands are able to maintain, unless they should be sent
out to the wars to be slain. But to permit multiplication of men to such
ends, to utter them by slaughter, is wholly Turkish, etc. page 90. to page 92.

The Satisfaction.
1. TO let pass his uncharitable slander, that it is a dishonor among
Protestant Ministers to be unmarried, whereas we honor the gift of true
chastity, and reverence them that have it: and there are diverse among the
Protestant Ministers, both Bishops and others, which have embraced single life:
The number of Parishes in England.
likewise not to touch his false account of the number of Parish Churches,
which neither makes 40. nor yet 13. or 15. thousand. The whole sum upon a
diligent survey taken in the 44. year of Edward the 3. not exceeding beside
London 8600. Parish Churches, Stowe*
Stow 5. Elizab.
and London contains 108. Parishes: In the whole they are not above 8700. or
at the most 9000. Parish Churches. But to let this matter pass.

2. If marriage by the word of God be free for all men, as the Apostle says:
For avoiding of fornication let every man have his wife, 1. Cor. 7.2. And,
Marriage is honorable among all men, Hebr. 13.3. then how absurdly does this
fellow infer that for fear of some inconvenience, Restraint of marriage
against the ordinance of God.
Gods ordinance should be restrained, and some forbidden to marry: shall men
presume to control Gods works, or to infringe his ordinance, or to seem to
be wiser then he? as the Prophet says, Isay 40.13.
Who has instructed the spirit of the Lord, or was his counselor, or taught
him?

3. By as good and much better reason may the marriage of the poorer sort and
common people be forbidden, who are ten to one for every Minister, and have
less provision for their maintenance. This Pope politician belike would give
advice, that least people should multiply too fast, there might be a law, that
a certain number only should attend upon the duties of marriage, and be set
apart for procreation: that as it is among horse and other cattle, that the
goodliest beast is kept for a stale, so it might be among men: such seem his
profane conceits to be. And with as good right may any other order be
restrained from marriage, as Ministers, in respect of the Commonwealth, seeing
that they have the best means of education for their children. And we see by
experience, that from their families have issued forth many worthy men both
for Church and Commonwealth, whom the world should have been deprived of, if
this wizards conceit might take place.

4. And if the marriage of Ministers were like to be so burdensome to the
Commonwealth: how came it to pass that Moses that wise lawgiuer could not
foresee it in the marriage of the Levites, who were the 13. part of the
Israelites, and all lived upon the tithes and offerings of their brethren,
whereas the Ministers now are not the 200. part of the people. What intolerable
presumption is it in this shallow brain, to sound a depth beyond his plumme,
and as another Hobab, to take upon him to teach Moses: but without either wit
or honesty, both which Moses father in law had, and the direction of the
spirit withal.

5 The scripture says, The multitude of the people is the honor of a King.
Prou. 14.28. Among the heathen, Lycurgus and Solon deprived those of certain
honors, Plutarch. Laconic. apophthegmat. in Lycurgo.
which lived single, or had no children. Among the Romans they had great
privileges, that were increased with many children. Procreation of children
Gods blessing.
A certain Spartane young man doing no reverence to the Captain Dercyllidas,
as he passed by (among whom it was ignominious not to reverence old age) gave
this reason, (...).
because you have begotten none to rise up unto me when I am old, which saying
was misliked of none. If the heathen then did count it such a benefit to have
procreation of children, shall Christians skoffe at the fruits of generation,
and despair of provision for such a multitude? As though God which feeds the
fowls of the air, and upon whom all creatures depend, could not provide for
his people otherwise, unless they should be sent to the wars, that the sword
might devour them. For thus this seraphicall Apologist concludes, if wars
had not been to prevent so many marriages, and kill so many thousands of men,
how could this nation have provided for so many? page 92. What could sensual
Epicures, profane Diagoras, or skoffing Lucian, have said more to the
derogation of Gods providence? What is it to limit Gods providence, if this be
not? as though God sees not an hundred ways to provide for his, without this
bloody stratageme, in appointing them to the sword?

6 But whatsoever he ridiculouslie has objected against Ministers marriage,
that it is against a commonwealth, is truly verified upon popish monastical
single life: what horrible pollutions, whoredoms, fornication, incest,
sodomitrie, bastardie, secret murders of infants then reigned, Forced chastity
mischievous to a common wealth.
by reason of forced and dissembled virginity, it would offend Christian ears
to hear. In Gregory the first his time, there were found six thousand infants
heads in a Moate or Fish Pond, which he perceiving to have been caused by
forced single life, revoked his decree made before for the same. It was one of
the greeuances of the Germans exhibited by the Princes in the Council of
Noremberge against the Romish Clergy, That whereas Priests were by the canons
forbidden to marry, they went about night and day to attempt and try the
chastity of matrones, virgins, wives, daughters, and sisters of lay men: and
it has been found by experience, that partly with gifts and flattering words,
partly by secret confessions, Fox page 860. col. 1.
many virgins and matrones have been moved to sin and wickedness, etc. And
it happens oftentimes, that they do detain and keep away wives and
daughters from their husbands and fathers, etc. They complained further that
they suffered the Clergy for a yearly stipend to dwell with concubines and
harlots, and to beget children by them: they compelled also chaste Priests to
pay tribute for concubines, Fox page 862. col. 1.
and so it should be lawful for them, either to live chaste, or to keep
concubines. The chastity and single life of the Monks and Clergy of England,
was according to the same pattern, Praefat. Bal. ad librum de actis Romanor.
pontific.
whose dissembled sanctity and pharisaicall hypocrisy was laid open at the
suppression of those houses, and their filthy abominations and uncleanness of
life discovered. All which abuses had no other beginning, then from that forced
virginity and devilish prohibition of marriage: as Bernard well perceived in
his time: Super Cantic. sermon. 66.
Toll de ecclesia honorabile coniugium, etc. Take from the Church honorable
Matrimony, shall you not fill it with incestuous persons, concubinaries,
Sodomites, etc. Thales is brought in, thus aduising Periander, Plutarch. sympos.
when his heardman had brought in a foale, which in the foreparts resembled a
man, but behind an horse: I would wish thee to set none to keep Mares, unless
you give them wives, or women: (...).
whereby he insinuated, that where the natural remedy is denied, unnatural
lusts and desires rage.

Now let any good commonwealths man judge, whether honest marriage, or dishonest
and unchaste life be fitter for humane society: This brabler condemning the
first, must incline to approve the second: as indeed one of their Popes
Nicholas 1. is reported to have said, Honestius esse plurib. occulte implicari,
Szegedin. in specul.
quam aperte cum vna ligari, That it was more honest secretly to use many
women, then openly to be tied to one. And herein they are right Platonists,
(...).

Plat dial. 5. de Republic.


whose opinion was, that it was profitable for wives and children to be common:
Neither is it any other like, but that then many simple foster-fathers kept
other men's children at their fires, and that frierlie companions presumed too
far of Platoes community. Thus this sclaunder I trust is answered, though it
be not much to be regarded: for as the Emperor says, In re propria nemo
idoneus iudex, No man is a fit judge in his own cause: Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20.
leg. 9. Gratian.
no more is this coapesmate, in the defense of his Ignatian carnal community,
and accusation of matrimonial chastity.

The fourth objection.
HIs next exception against Protestants, is for the omission of fasting days:
Untruth 181.
whereas, if there be but twelve thousand parishes supposed, and in every
parish an hundred persons, if they should fast but an hundredth days in the
year, and spare every of those days one meal, estimated but at a penie,
every man should spare an hundred pence, which is ten shillings; every parish
fifty pound in the whole land; the sum would arise to six hundred thousand
pounds: yea, making account of thirty hundred thousand men according to the
muster books; and so many women put to them, the sum would amount to thirty
hundred thousand pounds.

He further calculateth the charge of the progeny of Ministers, reckoning them
at an hundred thousand, and their diet at threepence a day, which would come to
547500. pounds, which would serve for the maintenance of wars, that so many
taxes might be spared, raised upon better subjects, page 93.94. Thus much he
pratleth in effect.

The Reiection.
1 TO omit his simple and silly calculations, and vain suppositions, as that
an hundred pence make ten shillings (every child could have told him that
fiuescore pence make but eight shillings four pence) and that the offspring of
the Ministers within these forty years rises to an hundred thousand (he can
not find half that number) and that threepence a day for so many amounts to
five hundred thousand, 47. thousand, The Apologists loose calculations, and
simple countercasting discovered.
and five hundred of pounds, which in true account comes but to 456250. for
threepence a day in the year consisting of 365. days, makes but four pound
eleven shillings threepence, which for an hundred thousand reaches to the
foresaid sum, and no more: But it is lost labor to trace him in all his
triflings: as is his divinity, such is his arithmetike.

2 Concerning days of abstinence for maintenance of fishers and preservation
of flesh, he can not be ignorant, but that they are observed among Protestants,
Fasting not neglected among Protestants.
though not for any supersti^ious opinion of religion therein, as among
Papists. Likewise the forbearing of one meal once or twice in a week is a
thing in practice in England, and was enjoined by public order in the late
years of scarsitie, and is still observed upon friday at night, in the houses
of great men, and of the abler sort. As for the rest for poor artificers and
laborers, I fear me in most towns of England, their meal more then twice or
thrice in a week costeth them not above a penie. And is his meaning such to
rake out so many pence out of the hungry bellies of the poor, whereas (poor
souls) their empty stomachs had need be better filled: for I dare say that
the third man in this land especially in the country is of this number, that
does either fast of necessity, or fares often very meanly and courselie: he
then is like to come short of his reckoning. But I know why he is so eager for
these pence, either to help his holy father with his Peter Pence again, or
his fellow Friars with their begging pence.

2 But as Protestants mislike not abstinence and fasting for maintenance of the
commonwealth, and relief of the poor, but wish that the abler sort would
spare of their superfluities from their tables to feed poor Lazarus; so I am
assured that true fasting is better exercised among Protestants then among
Papists: For what is their fast? forsooth they will eat no flesh, but
marmelade, sucket, iellies, spiced cakes, wine, all manner of conserved and
preserved dainties they will feed of on fasting-nights, and lick their sweet
fingers: Such was the fasting of some in Hieromes time, that would eat no
oil, but they would seek for figs, pepper, nuts, dates, cakes, etc. some
would eat no bread, Hieron. ad Nepotian.
nor drink water, sed sorbitiunculas delicatas and contrita olera betarumque
succum, etc. but seek for delicate suppings, The manner of popish fasting.
and herbs shred together, and the juice of beetes, etc. This is the right
pattern of popish fasting. And least I might be thought to do them wrong, the
Mass Priests and Iudasites herein do one accuse another: Parsons Manifestat.
fol. 4. page 2.
these lay to the others charge their drunkenness, playing at dice, the finding
of a maid in one of their chambers: and these things were done in prison, where
it is most like, if in any place their fasting and chastity should be best
performed: I trow drunkenness comes not by fasting and abstinence, nor yet
dallying with maids in corners.

3 Concerning the great charge of Ministers progeny, admit it come to so much
in 40. year space, as this Popes auditor has laid his counters, Ministers
progeny not burdenous to the land.
to five hundred thousand pound and odd, as in deed, it does not, as is before
touched, neither the number of them being so great, nor the charge rising to
such a sum: but be it granted: 1. may not the same objection be urged against
any other order or calling, of lawyers, artificers, laborers, or such like?
might not every parish in England spare an artisane or labourer some one or
other, whereas one Minister is necessary for every parish? will not the
progeny of any one, either Tailor, Shoemaker, Weauer, Husbandman, through the
land, accounting for every parish but one, arise in like time to the like
multitude? And in his profane and popish conceit, are Ministers, that draw the
people to God no more necessary, then botchers, cobblers, hedgers, etc? 2. If
the offspring of Ministers should all be of the same calling, as the sons of
the Levites and Priests were, and all be maintained of tithes and offerings, as
the other were, they might with greater show of reason be thought to be
burdenous, and yet the other were not: but seeing they are dispersed into other
callings, and so diversely employed some in trades, some in merchandise, some
in profession of learning, some for the seas, some for the wars and other
services of the King; the same exception might be taken as well against any
other of the Kings subjects, as against them. 3. Who sees not, what a foolish
reckoning he has made: he makes account of an 100. thousand now after 40.
years continuance, and of 500. thousand pound now by the year increasing,
which he holds sufficient for the maintenance of war, and supply of taxes
etc. But let him be asked what the number of the one was, and the sum of the
other, 10.20.30. years since? he must come short by so many parts and degrees
of his account: and yet so many years since, the English wars began, and
subsidies were thought needful to be levied, when as yet the increase of
Ministers and of their charges came not to the fifth part after that rate, when
as notwithstanding the yearly expenses of the wars in Ireland and other
places did rise to 200. thousand pound by the year. 4. But what is this
counter-casters meaning? would he have this sum of 500. thousand levied
yearly of the Clergy? Of raising of subsidies.
all their revenues and livings to a groat will not reach it: wherefore would
he have it collected? to maintain wars, and spare subsidies? I trust they
shall cease: our greatest wars are like to be against the Pope and his
adherents. Let it be noted then, that this popeling gives counsel how wars
might be maintained against the Pope his unholy father, who is the greatest
enemy to this nation. And for the sparing of subsidies and taxes, raised upon
better subjects, I answer, first, that both the occasion thereof, the
necessity of wars being removed, and the Kings princely disposition so
standing, that he would have subsidies rarely lifted up, I make no doubt, but
hereafter they will more sparingly be required, (...). Page 99.
that there need no such supply. Again, the Clergy toward the raising of
these subsidies were always most forward, Ministers good subjects.
and paid more for their number by five parts at the least, then any of the
Laity: for whereas they make not for their number the hundred part of the
land, and for their reuenew receive nothing near the tenth part, so many
impropriations being deducted; yet their share in the subsidy was very near
the fifth part of the whole, if not more: And therefore in this regard there
were no better subjects then they, as also in respect of their loyalty in
themselves, and service to the Prince, in retaining the people in due
obedience. But if they were no better subjects then traiterous Jesuits and
Seminaries, I say not it were no great matter if they were one hanged against
another; but if they were all shipped to the Sea, and sent to the Indians and
Cannibals, or whither else, so they were not in England. I think the whole
land would be in greater quiet and safety. 5. Lastly, this cruel wretch
shows himself another Haman, who to have the Jews destroyed offered to
bring in 10. thousand talents into the Kings cofers, Esther. 3.9. So this
fellow offers five hundred thousand pound to have the Ministers and their
offspring rooted out: like another Caligula, that as he wished all the Roman
citizens had but one neck that he might strike it off at once; the same in his
heart he desires in the Ministry of England. But I doubt not, but I shall
sooner see the Frogs of Egypt, that crauled in every place, with an East wind
to be cast into the Sea, then the Doves of the Church to be driven to forsake
their holes. But whereas he adds, That the behavior and disobedience of
Protestants in commonwealths is worse then among Jews, A wicked ^^ander and
^ntruth 182.
Turks, Paganes, etc. neither can it be imagined, how amendment should be had,
except a reformation of Protestants disobedient doctrine be made. page 94.
Untruth 183.
His own cauterized conscience knows, that this is an abominable slander or
fiction of Protestants, but a true narration of Mass Priests and Jesuits: for
if Mortons rebellion in the North, Saunders commotion to war in Ireland,
Allen, Parsons invasion by the Spaniards, Babingtons conspiracy, Lopez
poisoning, Parries murdering be laid together, with many other traiterous
attempts both against Prince and country, it will evidently appear, as clear
as noone day, that never any such villainy was attempted against any Turk or
Heathen Prince, as has been practiced by those Papists.

And concerning doctrine, Popish traitorous position^ and practices.
Protestants teach obedience to Princes even in Ecclesiastical causes, Papists
deny it: yea they maintain monstrous positions, that the Pope may
excommunicate and depose Princes, may absolve the subjects of their oath and
fealty: that the Pope inuading a country for religion, ought to be assisted
by the subjects against the Prince: that the Popes designement to invade a
country by force to the same end, ought not to be revealed to the state: these
are Parsons positions. Manifestat. fol. 13. page 1.
Add unto these, the Jesuits conclusions at Salamanca: that it was
meritorious to assist the rebels in Ireland against the Queen: Reply fol. 66.
page 2.
that they which took part with the Catholics against the Queen, were by no
construction rebels, etc. Wherefore seeing there can be no amendment or
redress of Popish traiterous practices, till both they and their doctrine be
avoided the land, we are to wish and hope in time, that as Popish doctrine is
already sent back to Rome the mother thereof; so the traiterous Jesuits and
Priests, and all their factious crew, and adulterous seed of that strumpet,
may in good time also be dispatched thither, to suck their own mothers
breasts: that both the bondwoman and her sons may be cast forth, and not be
heirs with Isaac. And if they will with Judas depart from the Ministers of
Christ to the Pharisees, we may wish unto them Judas end, as one says: Judas
iuit ad Pharisaeos, non iuit ad Apostolos; iuit ad di^iso^ and diuisus perijt:
Judas went to the Pharisees, not to the Apostles; Cause. 33. qu. 6. de poenit.
c. 1. Innocent.
he went to those which were divided, and being divided in the midst perished.
And happy were it with the Church of England if it were honestly rid of such
make bate companions, that we might dwell by none but good neighbors; as it
is said of Themistocles, when he offered his ground to sell, (...).
caused it to be proclaimed, that he had a good neighbor. Now this adversary
breaking off here his uncharitable accusations, returns to his former
defense, which how silly and weak it is, shall in the discovery thereof
appear.

The fifth Defense.
1. WHat disloyalty of behavior to Commonwealths can be noted in Catholic
religion? Untruth 182.
do we not teach all duty unto Princes and superiors? page 94.

2. What is there in that sacred function of Priesthood, now treason by the
proceedings of England, Untruth 183.
that can be guilty of so great a crime? in the statute of treason in Edward.
3. nothing is remembered but that which tends either to the betraying of King
or country. page 95.

3. What is in Priesthood now, that was not in former times? Untruth 184.
which ever in Parliament has been reputed the most honorable calling, etc.
the same Priesthood, which was given to S. Peter and his Apostles: the same
which S. Augustine and his associates had, that converted England. page 96.

4. There is in that sacrament (of Priesthood) no renouncing or denial of any
authority in England, Untruth 185.
no conspiracy to Prince, no betraying of kingdom, etc. page 96.

Untruth 186.
5. That Priests do absolve from sins, etc. the cause is no temporal thing,
and yet it cannot be the cause of this treason: for Deacons, which have no such
authority, are traitors by the same statute. page 96.

6. That our Priests are consecrated in foreign countries, is not the cause:
Untruth 187.
for in former times it has been the greatest honor to our Clergy to be
consecrated in those foreign countries: and to be ordered in France, to which
we be friends, and in England is equally treason. page 97.

7. The Grecians and Germans diverse in doctrine to the Church of Rome, have
their Seminaries of Priests maintained by the Pope, Untruth 188.
and yet they condemn not their Priests for traitors: and it is as improbable,
He has such an intent.
that the Pope has an intent to bring England under his temporal government,
as it is improbable in those countries.

8. How can those religious Schools be such adversaries, etc. where there is
no Reader, no professor, no Lecture, Untruth 189.
no doctrine against our English government: where prayer is continually made
for her Majesty! The rules and government there consent with the ancient
foundations of Cambridge and Oxford. page 98.

9. What disobedience can it be to deny to any temporal Prince supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical? Untruth 190.
It is great disobedience.
a preeminence distinct, etc. which our Kings themselves ever approved in the
Roman See: which never any Turk, or Goth, or Vandale or Infidel challenged,
etc. nor any temporal Prince, Untruth 191.
unless it be in England. page 98.

10. The enemies to this See do not condemn it as a disobedience, to appeal
to Rome in spiritual cases, Untruth 192.
to go on pilgrimage to Rome, to fetch any Crucifixe or picture from thence:
all Catholics and Christians of the world, without prohibition of their
Princes, have access thither. page 99.

11. Our most triumphant Kings have performed those offices (in visiting of
Rome) in their own persons. page 99.

The Answer.
1. Do ye ask what disloyalty there is in your Cacolike religion? when by
Popish doctrine Princes are not chief in their own kingdoms over
Ecclesiastical causes and persons: The disloyalty of Iudasites and
Mass Priests.
and the Pope has authority by the same to excommunicate and depose Princes,
and absolve subjects from their oath of obedience? And do ye teach all duty to
Princes, when the pestilent vipers the Iudasites do hold, Parsons Manifestat.
f. 13. p. 1.
that subjects ought to assist the Pope inuading a country by force for
religion against their Prince, and that they are bound to keep secret the
Popes designements to that end: that they were no rebels which aided the Popes
Cacolikes in Ireland against the Queen: Reply to the Manifestat. fol. 66.
page 2.
I would not so often allege these matters, but that this brablers confused
tautologies can not otherwise be answered.

2. There be other points in that statute, beside betraying of King or
country, that are made treason; as to violate the Kings wife, or his eldest
daughter, or the wife of his eldest son: but these matters are impertinent:
they serve only to show the untruth of his speech. And even by this statute,
popish Priests and Iudasites that maintain a foreign Potentate, a known enemy
to Prince and country, are found to be traitors: for they which are adherent
to the Kings enemies in his realm, Ed. 3. ann. 25. ca. 2.
giving them aid and comfort within the realm, or elsewhere, are by that
statute judged traitors.

Popish priesthood much differing from the ancient priesthood.
3. In popish Priesthood there are many things now, which were not in former
times: as to have power to make Christ's body, that it is a sacrament, and has
an indeleble character; their shauing, greazing, to have dependence upon the
Bishop of Rome; the vow of single life annexed to orders; these things in the
honorable calling of the Ministers of the Church, the ancient and pure age of
the Church did not acknowledge. And though the popish priesthood for some
hundred years past, has been in great credit, yet was it another manner of
Ministry, which was honored of the ancient Christian Emperors: As the
Bishops of the Nicene Council, whom Constantine so reverenced that he would
not sit down, till they had beckoned to him. Meletius, whose eyes, lips and
breast Theodosius kissed and embraced: Socrat. 1.5.
Chrysostom, whom Goinas the Goth did reverence, Theodoret. 5.^. Theodor. 5.33.
and caused his children to fall down at his knees: all these were Bishops of
another order, then the Popes creatures now are. It is also a vain boast, that
S. Peter had the same priesthood. S. Peter's presbyters were not Lords over
Christ's flock, as the Popes Clergy is, 1. Pet. 5.3. Peter does make himself
a sympresbyter with the rest, not lord over the^, nor they to depend of him:
and confesses Christ to be the (...), the chief shepherd 1. Pet. 5.4. he
dare not arrogate that title to himself as the Pope does. In some respects
they may have the same priesthood which Augustine the Monk had, (though as
yet the sacrifice of Christ's body was not annexed to the priesthood, nor many
years after) for he came from Rome, and sought the preeminence of that See: Ex
libro Iornalens. and Fabian.
but before his coming there were in England other Bishops, who depended not
upon the Roman Bishops, neither did acknowledge Augustines authority, and
refused to yield obedience unto him.

4. In the very receiving of popish priesthood, the Mass Priests bind
themselves to be subjects to the Roman Bishop in spiritual things, and so
deny the lawful authority of the Prince in causes Ecclesiastical. The
Iudasites beside do enter into a vow of obedience to execute whatsoever their
superior shall command them to do: by virtue of which vow, many treacherous
conspiracies have been contrived: yea they have a special vow of mission,
Jesuit. catech. lib. 2. ca. 16.
whereby they bind themselves to go whither soever the Pope shall send them.
Who sees not, how fit an engine this is, to draw them on to practice against
both King and Country, as has been seen in England, but to their own cost
hitherto (thanks be to God) and I trust shall be so still.

5. Popish priests and Deacons are not deemed traitors for their absolutions,
or any other priestly function, To acknowledge a foreign* Potentate is a
treasonable* act.
but because they do receive priesthood by authority of a foreign Potentate
claiming jurisdiction in England, and who as a temporal adversary has
displayed his banner in the field against the Prince, the maintenance of whose
authority is judged traiterous.

6. To receive orders in foreign countries simply is not made treason; for
the Church of England receives such Ministers as were ordained in other
countries professing the same religion, as at Basile, Geneua, in Germany: But
either in the realm or without the realm to be ordained by any authority
derived, or pretended from the Sea of Rome, Elizabeth ann. 27. c. 2.
is by the law decreed to be treason, because therein they which are so
ordered, acknowledge and receive the Popes usurped power and authority in
England, who is an enemy both to Prince and country, wherein they are guilty
of treason.

7. Though in some free cities in Germany and in Greece under the Turk
Seminary Priests be tolerated, that is no president for England, neither can
it stand with the policy of this kingdom to admit any such mixture: And in
that they are not there taken for traitors, the case is not like; Difference
between the state of England, and other countries and free cities.
for if they had practiced there against the life of the Prince, and state of
the country, as in England, there is no question but they would have taken the
like order with them. Neither in England, for more then twenty years was it
made treasonable to be made a Popish Priest, till such time as the state
perceived that their entering into the land, seducing of subjects, conspiring
together, tended to the subversion and overthrow both of Prince and country.
And it can not be, but that the Pope should have an intent to bring England
under his temporal government (whatsoever he intends in other countries)
seeing both the Iudasites and Priests acknowledge that the Pope has indirectam
potestatem in temporalib. has an indirect power even in temporals, Parsons
Manifestat. f. 16. p. 1. Priests reply fol. 40. page 2.
by force of arms to restrain Princes, and to reform them, and to dispose of
Kingdoms.

8. This article is wholly untrue: for neither are the Lectur^s read in the
Jesuits Colleges very commendable, when one Maldonat a Iudasite in one
public Lecture proved there was a God by natural reason, Jesuit catechism.
li. 2. c. 7.
and in another, that there was none. And Parsons would have had his traitorous
book of titles publicly read in the College at Rome to the Students, as his
fellow priests report. What the professors of the Jesuits College are, and
how affected to the Civil government, may appear by their treacherous
attempts. Varade a Iudasite in France approved the wicked treason of Barriere
against the King: so did Commolet, who openly in his Sermons said, Jesuit
catechis. lib. 3. c. ^^. Lib. 3. ca. 13. ibid.
they wanted but an Ehud: Walpoole a Jesuit delivered a poisonfull confection
to Squire, ann. 1597. to destroy the Queen: Parsons before that, with other of
the Spanish faction, practiced with Lopez to the same deed. Sutclif. de
Turcopapis. lib. 1. ca. 8.
As is their practice, so is their doctrine: Parsons maintains as a
principle, that necessity of true (he means his Cacolike religion) is
required in all pretenders to the Crown: whereby he means that no title
should be admitted, Manifestat. fol. 67. page 2.
though nearest by blood and lawful succession, unless the profession of the
Roman faith were coincident to it. Jesuits position and doctrine. Jesuit.
Catechism. lib. 3. ca. 21.
Guignard made a book, wherein he maintained, that to kill offenders (he
means Princes that stood not for them) was meritorious: Chastell one of their
scholars, that was executed for attempting the Kings death, maintained before
the Judge, that in some cases it was lawful to kill his King. At Salamanca in
Spain, Ibid.
these conclusions were resolved upon by the Divines of the Jesuits College,
that all Catholics did sin mortally that took part with the English against
Tyrone in Ireland: that they, which did fight against the Queen, were by no
co^struction rebels, etc. These and such other positions were subscribed by
John de Sequenza, Emmanuel de Royas, Jasper de Mena, Reply to Manifestat. fol.
66. page 2.
professors of Divinity in the College of Jesuits there, and by Peter Osorio
preacher there. What a brazen face now has this fellow, that says there is no
professor, lecture, doctrine in their Colleges contrary to the English
government? and what manner of prayers they used to make for Queen Elizabeth,
we may judge by these their practices and opinions. And if it were not so, that
these Schools and Seminaries are corrupters of youth, the Court of Parliament
of Paris, upon the apprehension of John Chastel, who stroke the King with a
knife in the face, who was a student of the Jesuits College of Clairemont,
would not have decreed, the whole company of priests and students there, as
corrupters of youth, Jesuit. catechis. lib. 3. ca. 18.
disturbers of the common quiet, enemies of the King and state, to avoid within
three days out of Paris, and within 15. days out of the Realm.

9. We grant that when the Pope was in his ruff, many Kings, made slaves unto
the beast, yielded unto his usurped jurisdiction in affairs ecclesiastical:
but of ancient time it was not so: for the good Kings of Judah, David,
Iehosophat, Princes chief in causes Ecclesiastical. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 4. leg.
1. and leg. 3. Toletan. 3.2. Matisconens. in fine. Toletan. 4.58. Toletan. 8.
Toletan. 12.
Hezekiah, Josias, had the chief stroke in religious causes: So had the
Christian Emperors, Gratianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Martianus, that made
laws concerning the faith. Likewise the Christian Kings of the Goths in
Spain decreed, ratified, and confirmed ecclesiastical laws, as Reccaredus,
Guntranus, Sisenandus, Reccesinuthus, Eryngius, as is extant in these Synodes
Provincial here alleged.

10. To have free access to Rome, only to see the City, and the behavior of
the people, may by Princes in their discretion to their subjects be permitted
(though I think it be hard for any with a good conscience, in regard of the
public offenses there occurrent, so to do) but to bring from thence a
crucifixe or a picture, as a mark of the beast, can not be but dangerous:
which although it be not treason in England, though a disobedience, yet Adam
Damlip for a less matter by Winchesters procurement was condemned of treason,
for receiving a French crown of Cardinal Poole in Rome, only for his relief.
But to make appeals to Rome, as to a higher Court, and to the Pope as to a
superior Judge, Appeals to Rome not to be suffered. Fox page 1229.
is a great derogation to the imperial dignity, and no well reformed
commonwealth can endure it: Neither is England here alone (as he untruly
says) but other reformed Churches, of Scotland, Geneua, the Heluetians, have
cut off such unnecessary and unnatural appeals.

11. What Kings and Princes have done in times past in visiting Rome and going
in Pilgrimage in their own persons, when they were led with blind devotion, it
makes nothing to us: Of ancient time Princes were wiser, and I trust God will
open their eyes at the last to acknowledge their error, and shake off the yoke
of Antichrist, according to the prophecy of the Revelation, that they shall
hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, etc. Revel. 18.16.

Thus with all his subtilties and shifts of descant this Mass Priests proctor
has endeavored to free that order from suspicion of treason: But as the
Prophet Ezechiel says, He has daubed up a wall with untempered mortar, Ezech.
13.10. with like workmanship has he made a bulwark for his order: But as it
is in the law, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 20. leg. 10. Honor.
Particeps criminis non idoneus testis, He that is partner in the crime is no
sufficient witness. So is he an unfit advocate for the Ignatian order, being
himself of that treacherous brotherhoode: I could advise them, if they had
grace to receive good counsel, that they would not suffer themselves to be any
longer abused by their unholy father, to run upon the pikes at his pleasure,
and hazard both their bodily life, and the salvation of their souls: not to
be so desperate, as Scipio his soldiers, of whom he boasted, that at his
bidding they would cast themselves headlong into the Sea. What though you would
reduce your country to your opinion, and the obedience of the Pope: your
purpose is not good your counsels prosper not, you are deceived in the disease
which you would cure, at the least, with peril of body and soul you use too
costly a remedy, (...).
as Marius to the Phisician that came to cut him of a certain disease, made
this answer, that the remedy was not worthy of so much grief.

The sixth defense.
1. FIrst he stands upon the glory of the popish kingdom, Untruth 19^.
Consider (says he) the glory of King Henry the 8. and this kingdom before
his fall, and their infamy after: the short or turbulent season of King
Edward, and for this present what it is, and what like to be, etc. I leave to
the lamentable consideration of all men now, and the pitiful experience of
those which shall prove it afterward: France, Spain, Italy may be named the
flowers of the world: the power and jurisdiction of the Pope more glorious,
Untruth 19^.
then was ever any Regiment of any spiritual superior: the kingdom, riches,
revenues of the K. Catholic, are the greatest of any Monarch. p. 100.101.

2. Their religion consists of all affirmative positions, teaching duty to
God, Untruth 195.
honor to Magistrates, equality to all, oppression to none, etc. page 101.

3. Quarrels and contentions between King and subjects, Nobles and Nobles,
Untruth 196.
as in the time of Henry the 2. have been comprimitted by the spiritual
Roman authority, etc. rigorous onerations imposed by Princes eased:
unappeasable wars with France and other nations brought to an end, page 101.

4. The Protestants denial of restitution and confession, what wrongs and
abuses has it wrought, Untruth 197.
etc. who can now keep subjects from devising against Sovereigns, etc. for
want whereof so many suites and actions of law, such a multitude of Lawyers:
what dilatorie pleas, non suites, etc. practiced, and uncontrolled by
Protestants doctrine, etc. page 102.103.

5. The Religious Clergy enjoyed the third part of the substance of our
nation, etc. which was employed toward the necessaries of their poor, Untruth
198.
chaste, and single life: they did furnish armies, more then all the Ministers,
and Abbey gentlemen, the poor were relieved, etc. were they not better
bestowed, then in hunting, hawking, carding, courting, etc. page 103.104.

6. Catholic Religion left and kept England in amity and league, Untruth 199.
with the Popedom, Empire, Spain, etc. whereas no history makes relation of
so chargeable and prolonged wars of this kingdom, with other nations, as our
late and now present, Spanish, Irish, Flemish, page 104.

7. Lastly he shows that by separation from the Roman religion, Untruth 200.
Noblemen and Gentlemen have lost much learning and knowledge in seeing other
Princes Courts and countries: Soldiers the skill and honor in arms: Scholars
the benefit of study in other Universities: Merchants their trade and
traffic, etc. and so he concludes to this effect, that these things
considered, it were better to be in such condition as England was in, in the
22. year of Henry the 8. when this reformation began, then ever it was by
Protestancie since, now is, or by probability will grow to be in time to come,
page 106.

The Answer.
1. KIng Henry his government was as glorious, his battles as victorious,
his success as prosperous after the reformation of religion, as before, if not
much more* As in appeasing the commotions in Yorkshire and Lincolneshire anno
28. Again, Stow in Henri^. 8.
another in Yorkshire suppressed anno 3^. Notable victories obtained against
the Scots anno 34. And again anno 36. And in the same year he prevailed
against the French, when Boloigne was yielded to him.

King Edwards reign was neither so short, nor troublesome, as Queen Mary's
was; which both at home was plagued with mortality and famine, and abroad
dishonored with the loss of Calice, that had been English well near 300.
years. This is too unshamefast dealing to object the one, and conceal the
other.

Queen Elizabeth's reign has been most flourishing with love of subjects at
home, and honor of other nations abroad: and as his Majesty truly witnesses:
She did so long with such wisdom and felicity govern her kingdoms:
Praefat. ad (...).
as (I must in true sincerity confess) the like has not been read nor heard
of, either in our time, or since the days of the Roman Emperor Augustus.

As for your lamentable consideration and pitiful experience, what England is
like to be: you show your self herein but one of Baals false Prophets, that
prophesied good success to Ahab: as you promised to your selves, at the next
change of the kingdom, a glorious day in England, and an utter subversion of
the Gospel: As his brother Friar, or father Parsons utters with the like
boldness, Manifestat. fol. 57. par. 1.
God will most certainly at his time appointed restore the realm of England to
the Catholic faith again. But the Lord be blessed that has disappointed
their vain hope, and frustrate their wicked desires: I trust thorough Gods
mercy that England still under the Gospel shall see as flourishing days as
ever before.

As for those flowers of the world, etc. some of those have brought forth but
simple flowers: as may witness that bloody massacre of France, and the
continual civil wars for many years together, wherein not so few Christian
people as 100. thousand have perished: England (thanks be to God) has no such
flowers growing in her garden, neither I trust ever shall. Neither do we
desire, nay we would not for all the kingdoms of the world, change our state
with any of those flower countries, Italy, France, Spain, which in deed are
flowers and leaves without true fruit.

Though the Popes jurisdiction has been large, yet can he not compare with
the pontifices maximi among the Romans, which was an office of such high
authority and great command, that the title was afterward annexed to the
Empire: and the Emperors took upon them to be called, the high Priests. The
other Patriarchall Seas also did equalize Rome in largenes of jurisdiction,
especially Alexandria, The Pope equalized in largenes of jurisdiction. Nicen.
1. c. 6.
to the which was subject al Egypt, Libya, Pentapolis, with all the Christian
Churches of Africa. The Pope has no great cause to brag of his greatness: for
his wings are well clipped, and I doubt not but to see yet more of this proud
birds feathers pulled. Neither is largenes of dominion a good argument for
religion: for then Pagane idolatry, which was more universally received at
once in the (...), then Christianity, should thrust out the Gospel of (...).

And as for the King of Spaine^ (...), he may thank the poor Indians for it,
whose throats the Spaniards have cut for their gold: Riches and external
glory no good argument of religion.
neither is it such, but that he knows how to spend it, and for all his
great treasure, his coffers are often empty enough. But let it be remembered,
how these popelings measure religion by riches and outward glory, which if it
were a good rule, the rich Chaldeans, Assyrians, Persians should rather have
bin the people of God the^ the poor Israelites: and the rich Scribes and
Pharisees should be preferred before the Apostles.

Popish religion derogatorie to God.
2. Popish religion denies duty to God, making other Mediators beside Christ,
teaching invocation of Saints, adoration of images, which are peculiar to God:
neither does it give honor to Magistrates, abridging them of their lawful
authority in matters ecclesiastical, and giving the Pope authority, to
excommunicate and depose Princes, and to absolve their subjects of their oath.
Concerning the particulars of Popish profession, what little comfort is in
them, how derogatorie to God, contrary to Scriptures, I have showed before in
the answer to the 5. section.

3. The Pope so well appeased the quarrels between Henry the 2. and his
Nobles, that after the King had reconciled himself to the Pope for the death
of Thomas Becket, and yielded to do penance, Stow.
his troubles began afresh between him and his sons Richard and John, that
he died for grief. The Pope a mouer, not a compounder of wars.
And the Pope by his Legates and factors in England and other countries has
been a mouer, not a compounder of strife; a raiser, rather, then layer of
war. Did not Gregory the 7. set up Rodolphus against Henry the 4. the
Emperor, between whom many bloody battles were fought? Did not Pope
Paschalis incite Henry the son against the Emperor Henry the father, and
dispossessed him of the Empire? Ex Platina cause. 15. qu. 6. c. Iuratos. Ex
Mario.
Urban the 2. did put down Hugo Earl of Italy, discharging his subjects of
their oath and obedience. Gregory the 9. did excommunicate Frederick the 2.
and raised up the Venetians against him. And in England, Pope Innocent the 3.
commanded under pain of his great curse, that no man should obey King John:
he gave definitive sentence in his consistory, that he should be deposed from
his Crown: Fox. page 252.
and appointed Philip King of France to execute this sentence, promising him
full remission of his sins to kill or expel King John. Urban the 4. set Henry
the 3. and his Nobles together by the ears, Lanquet anno 1262.
absoluing the king of his oath made to perform certain articles agreed upon
at Oxford: whereupon the Barons wars were renewed. Pope Boniface set variance
between England and Scotland, Ex Chronic. Thom. Walsingham.
in the reign of Edward the 1. challenging Scotland, as proper to the Sea of
Rome. But in steed of easing the people of rigorous exactions imposed by
Princes, the Pope himself has used unreasonable extortions. Rigandus de
Asteri^ the Popes Legate in England in Edward the 2. his reign, demanded of
the Clergy 8. pence in the mark toward the Legates charges, The Popes
intolerable exactions.
but they granted only 4. pence in the mark: He also labored to bring in a
new manner of collection of Peter pence, Fox page 370.
but was resisted by the King. The like did Henricus the 3. Repressit impetum
Legati propter violentiam denariorum: Matthew. Paris. anno 1215.
He restrained the attempts of the Popes Legate, touching his violent exactions
of money. The Bishops of England after great and forcible entreaty agreed to
pay to the Pope 11000. marks. Ex ^od. anno 1247.
The King of England (says the same author) made payment to Pope Alexander the
4. upon a very frivolous and fond matter 950000. marks. Anno 1^57.
Bonner himself witnesses, that the Popes pray in England came almost to as
much as the revenues of the Crown. In Praefat libel. Steph. Gardi^.
The Pope had the first fruits of all the Bishoprics in England, which came
to a great sum. Canterbury paid 10000. Florences, and 5000. for his pall:
York as much. Winchester 12000. Elie 7000. The whole sum of all the first
fruits in Europe, A Florence is four shillings six pence starling.
which came to the Popes coffers, amounted to 2460843. Florences, which makes
well nie 6. hundred 15. thousand, two hundred and ten pound starling. Judge by
this now (Christian Reader) what an impudent man this is, to make the Pope a
mitigator of great exactions, whereas he has been the most cruel extortor and
exactor in the world. As is his credit in this, so let him be believed in the
rest.

4. Popish confession is so far from keeping subjects from devising against
their Prince, as that it has been the special engine and instrument to
contriue treachery against the state. Caxton lib* 7.
Simon the Monk was confessed and absolved of his Abbot when he enterprised to
poison King John. Stow anno Henri^. 8.30.
Friar Forest in secret confession declared to diverse subjects, that King
Henry the 8. was not supreme head of the Church, and so abused confession to
sedition. Peter Barriere was confessed in the College of the Jesuits in
Paris, and took the Sacrament, Jesuit. catechis. lib. 3. ca. 6.
when he intended to murder the french King that now is. John Chaestell also
that conspired the like, had been often schooled in the Jesuits chamber of
meditations. Ibid. ca. 20. page 204.
These are the fruits of popish confession, devising of treasons, revealing of
secrets, seeking occasion to do evil; for by this opportunity, Abuse of
popish confession.
diverse lewd Priests solicited the parties that came to be confessed unto
evil. As mention is made in the papal rescripts of one, Lateranens. council.
part. 50. cap. 21.
qui cum alterius coniuge frequenter in ecclesia dormiuit, which oftentimes in
the Church slept with another man's wife: And this should seem to be so usual
a practice, that for restraint thereof they decreed against it, non debet
episcopus, Cause. 30. qu. 1. ca. 10.
vel presbyter commisceri cum mulierib. etc. the Bishop or Priest ought not to
lie with the women that come to be confessed. Wherefore, seeing auricular
confession gave occasion and opportunity to such evil, they shall not easily
persuade, that for want of such confession, such abuses and injuries have
grown.

Concerning restitution, Protestants deny not restitution.
Protestants allow it and require it to be made, approving of that sentence,
non tollitur peccatum, ^isi restituatur ablatum, that of sin there is no
remission, where there wants restitution. But we affirm and teach that
satisfaction to God by us can not be wrought: we must let that alone for ever:
that work Christ only has performed. Multitude of suites, dilatorie pleas,
corrupt judgments, are not uncontrolled by Protestants doctrine, but we
mislike and condemn them, and trust by our prudent Prince in time convenient,
to see many of those disorders redressed: Neither were the popish times free of
such unnecessary suites and contentions between Bishop and Bishop, Bishop and
Prior, Prior and Covent, among the Friars and Monks, as I have showed before at
large, in my answer to the second section, page 8. Yet these quarrels and
suites of law notwithstanding, our Church and Religion is not for that abuse to
be condemned, no more then the Church of Corinth ceased to be of Christ's
family, because they went to law one with another, and that before heathen
Judges, 1. Cor. 6.

But sure it is, that these abuses have not sprung, because auricular
confession is intermitted, which was as a heavy yoke and burden upon
Christians shoulders, and did rather terrify, then certify the conscience:
which superstitious use the wiser heathen condemned: as Antalcidas being asked
of the Priest what great sin he had committed in his life, (...).
made this answer, if I have done any such thing, the Gods know it: he thought
it superfluous to declare it to men.

5. And was it not think you a very poor life, that had the third part of the
substance of the land, as is confessed to maintain it? Neither is it true,
that the Abbeies furnished more armies, then all the Ministers and
Abbey-gentlemen: for, I think not, but the Clergy in England alone has
contributed more in subsidies, tenths, beneuolences, yearly toward the
maintenance of the Princes wars, then all the Abbeies in England yielded to
the Crown: for they stood upon their privileges and immunities, and gave but
what they list themselves. The poor you say were relieved, so many statutes
against them, and to burden the country were not known. True it is, that the
Abbeies maintained the idle vagrant life of rogues and beggars: and it is
verily thought, that the fry of the^ which was bred then, has so spawned
forth into the whole land, Of the Abbeys relieuing of beggars.
that unto this day this nation could not be disburdened of them. You seem to
mislike the statute of late made for the restraint of vagrants and vagabonds,
then the which a more wholesome law could not be made in that kind, if it were
well executed: neither is the country more, but less burdened, in relieuing
their home-borne poor, and being eased of other common walkers. But it is no
marvel, that this Friar holds with beggars, for he is cosen-germane
himself to the begging friars: no thanks then to Abbeies and Frieries in
relieuing of lay beggars, when they sent out such a number of irreligious
beggars of their own: they should have done better to have kept their own
begging mates at home, that the lay people being rid of such unshamefast
beggars, might have been better able to maintain their own. But concerning
this relieuing of common beggars, wherein he gives such praise to Abbeies,
their own canons have utterly misliked it: sint autem mendicantib. validis non
solum hospitalia clausa, etc. To valiant beggars, let not only the hospitals be
shut, but let it be utterly forbidden them to beg from house to house: for
better it were to take bread from the hungry, least being provided of his
bread, he should neglect equity and justice, that is, live idly, Coloniens.
part. 11. ca. 5.

You ask, if they were not better bestowed, then in hunting, Of the bestowing
of Abbey lands.
hawking, carding, courting, etc. I answer, 1. that although we wish that
Abbey-lands had been converted to better uses, yet they were abused as much
before as now, and much more. 2. for beside, that it is not to be otherwise
thought, but that the lord Abbots, and fat Monks disported themselves with
hunting of wild game abroad, and tame at home, in carding, and courting of
Nuns, and pretty pewling cloister virgins, more then I think Abbey
gentlemen now use to do: those lands then served to maintain idle and
unprofitable persons, whereof there was no use in the commonwealth: whereas
now many serviceable gentlemen are thereby brought up and sustained, fit for
the dispensing of justice in peace, and to stand for the defense of the land in
time of war.

6. It is a great untruth here uttered: for never did this land enjoy greater
peace, and of longer continuance with other countries, Spain only excepted,
then it has done for the space of these 40. years under the Gospel: What
bloody and cruel wars have been in time past between England and France, in
Henry the 2. King John, Edward the 3. Henry the 5. with Scotland, in Edward 1.
Edward 2. Henry the 8. But under the Gospel peace with these countries has
been firmly established, and we trust is like to continue still.

7. As for knowledge and experience gotten by travail, our Gentlemen and
Noblemen of England are not therein unfurnished: Rome and Spain are not so
safe and free for trauailers, that would preserve a good conscience: but there
is little lost by that: for few are there, that visit those countries, but are
made worse thereby, according to those ancient proverbs, The nearer Rome, the
further from Christ: He that goes once to Rome, sees a wicked man: he that
goes twice, Fox page 843. col. 1.
learneth to know him: he that goes thrice brings him home with him. But
there are other Countries more safe to travail unto, and more profitable to be
conversant in, then either Rome or Spain.

Neither are all martial feats there learned: England since this division
from Rome and Spain, has sent forth as valiant Captains and commanders both
by sea and land, as ever it did: nay former ages therein can not compare with
these times. What Captains are more famous in our histories, then General
Norris, Captain Williams, Morgane, the noble Earl of Essex, and others in
land affairs: who more renowned then Captain Drake, Furbisher, Hawkins,
Candish, with the rest in Sea travails?

Our Merchants indeed have been somewhat hindered of their traffic and
intercourse in the King of Spaines dominions, Of the hindrance of Merchants
traffike.
but that has been as much loss to them, as to English Merchants: neither
has England wanted any necessary merchandise, notwithstanding this restraint.
And we doubt not, but religion and the Gospel standing and flourishing still in
England, that passage hereafter may be more open and free for Merchants. If it
should not, England has no cause to repent of her bargain, though she had
bought the Gospel yet more dearly, with the loss of all traffic and
intercourse with other nations. For be it known unto you (ye Popelings) that
this land never flourished more with all kind of blessings, then since it has
been under Gods blessing by the Gospel, and the Popes curse: Neither would we
for all the world be in the like condition, as we were in the 22. of King Henry
the 8. We thank God for this happy change, and heartily pray, that in this
change, we never know any other change, until the world change: that as the
Apostle says, We may keep the commandments without spot and unrebukable
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Timoth. 6.4. that as Origin
well says, Ignis semper ardebat super altar, sic semper nobis ignis fidei and
lucerna scientiae accensa sit. That as the fire always burned upon the altar,
so the light of faith and lantern of knowledge may always shine unto us in
this land: (...).
And as Augustus Caesar said to Piso that builded his house most curiously and
sumptuously, You rejoice my heart, building so, as though Rome should last for
ever: I trust God shall so direct the heart of our chief builder in this
Church of England, to lay such a foundation, that Gods house among us shall
stand for ever.

THE ANSWER TO THE NINTH Section of the Authors defense to all honorable
Ladies and Gentlewomen.
The Defense.
1. I May not suffer the foundresses of so many Churches, Chapels, Aultars,
Monasteries, Nunries, Colleges, to be reproved for that piety, page 107.

2. I can not suffer such a triumphant company, so famous for miracles,
renowned for sanctity, etc. whose bodies many years after their death
remained uncorrupted, etc. whom so many testimonies from heaven and earth have
confirmed to be most happy Saints, to be condemned, page 107.

3. Which for the love and honor of our religion, forsook all temporal
pleasures, etc. and became sacred Nuns, as Edelburga, Etheldreda, etc.
Alfritha wife to King Edgar, etc. Editha king Edgars daughter, etc. with many
others which are there reckoned up, page 108.

4. He urges the fearful examples of the principal Protestant Ladies of
England, etc. grieuouslie afflicted of God, and made dishonorable to the world,
page 108.

5. In the next place, page 109. he seems to frame this argument, because the
Ladies of England in their daily and new devices, esteem it not dishonorable
to learn of the Ladies of Italy, France, Spain, and Rome: that therefore they
should imitate them in their religion.

6. All your earthly honors, titles, names, were either first founded, or
afterward confirmed etc. by the Popes, Emperors, etc. page 110.

7. That religion defended your marriages to be honorable, and a sacrament; by
that religion, your matrimony was not in the pleasure of your Lords:
repudiations and diuorcements at their wills were not known: concubines could
not possess the maintenance of your honors, their bastards might not enjoy the
inheritance, etc. page 110.

The Answer.
1. NEither do Protestants reprove the ancient founders of Churches, Untruth
201.
Chapels, Colleges, for their piety, but praise God for them: but for their
superstition in erecting Monasteries to a false end, Abbeies builded to a
superstitious end.
for the remission of sins, and redemption of their souls: as King Offa
builded S. Albons, for the murder of King Ethelbert: K. Ethelstane founded the
Abbeyes of Middleton, Ex histor. Malmesbur.
and Michelenes, to make satisfaction for the death of his brother Edwine.
Elfrida wife to K. Edgar, Fox 149. col. 1.
erected a Monastery of Nuns for the remission of sins, for the death of
her husband Ethelwoldus: VV. Malmesb.
as has been declared before, answer to sect. 7. page 58.

2. We condemn not any, that have been famous for sanctity, renowned for true
miracles, and witnessed to be Saints from heaven. But we receive not all those
for Saints, that have been canonized in the Popish Church, as Thomas Becket,
that was a traitor to his Prince: and there is mention made in the decrees of
one, that was worshipped for a Saint, Decr. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 45. c. 1.
that was slain in drunkenness. And many of their miracles, as of Dunstane,
Berinus, Bristanus, Brendanus, with others, we hold be Monkish dreams and
fabulous fictions: as has been also before showed, answer to sect. 7. page 55.

Untruth 202. Fox page 157. col. 1.

Fables of incorruptible bodies.


Of the like credit are the tales of their incorruptible bodies: as that of
Editha, that the rest of her body being consumed to earth, her thumb, her
belly, and the part under her belly were uncorrupted, the first for her
piety in using to cross her self, the other for her chastity. As that also
is held to be a fable, that William the Conquerors body was found vncorrupt
more then 400. years after his burial. The Papists themselves deride the
tale, which is told from the Indies, of the body of Xauiere, Stow in Will.
Conqueror. Jesuit. Catechis. lib. 1. c. 17.
which six months after the burial looked as fresh, as when he lived. These
are silly arguments for one to ground his conscience and religion upon. And
the Friar may barrel up these fictions, to disport his Italian and Spanish
dames with, our Ladies and Gentlewomen of England are more wary birds, then to
be taken with such a thredbare Falconers stale.

3. Concerning those noble Ladies, Of the superstitious choice of Monastical
life.
which became Nuns: 1, the profession simply of Monastical and single life,
is not a sufficient argument of a good religion: for the Romans had their
vestal virgins, that professed single life, the Jews had their Esseni, that
embraced a strict and solitary kind of life, Menauinus de religion. Turcar. c.
2.
and the Turks at this day have their Mahometane Monks, whereof there are
four principal orders. 2. And seeing most of them had a superstitious opinion
of Monastical life, as being a state more meritorious and worthy of heaven,
therein they deceived themselves, and with the Pharisie, that boasted of his
righteousness, of his alms and fasting, were so much the further off from true
justification: and while they placed religion, in touch not, taste not, handle
not, in superstitious abstinence from external things, in not sparing the
body, they followed the doctrines and commandments of men, not of God,
Coloss. 2.22. 3. Though in the choice of Monastical life, they were
conformable to the Roman Church: yet in many other opinions they dissented:
for transubstantiation was not yet hatched, and many gross errors beside,
since forged by that black Smith. 4. Neither was Monastical life then like to
Popish Monkerie in these days: their life more chaste, their time not so idly
spent, their superstition not so gross. And that there was great difference
between old and new Monkerie, some of their own side do bear witness:
Multis persuasum est aliam tunc fuisse, quam nunc est Monachismi rationem: Many
are persuaded, that the profession of Monks then, was diverse from that is now,
Coloniens. par. 10. c. 1. 5. Lastly, let us see what devout persons some of
these women were, which are here rehearsed. Ethelburga wife to Edwine King of
the Northumbers, VV. Malmesb. lib. de reg.
was not the daughter of Anna King of Eastangles, but of Ethelbert King of
Kent: neither do I find, Vntr. 203.204.
that she became a Nun: so here are two untruths couched together. It may be,
he means another Ethelburga, the daughter of Offa, which poisoned her husband
Brighthricus K. of Westsaxons, and fled into France, where she was thrust into
a Monastery, Ex histor. Malmesbur.
from whence for playing the harlot with a Monk, she was expulsed. This belike
is one of his sacred Nuns. Of popish holy and virtuous Nuns.
Etheldred being married to king Egfride, refused to company with him, and
having been 12. years married, she forsook her Lord, and took the habit of a
Nun at the hands of Bishop Wilfride, Stowe.
(with whom she is thought to have been too familiar) whom her husband had
before deposed: Was this one of your sacred Nuns, that contrary to the
Apostle, the wife has not power of her own body, but her husband, 1. Cor.
7.4. refused to perform the duties of marriage, and chose rather to be a
Bishops virgin, Fabian^.
then a Kings wife? Alfritha wife to K. Edgar, was she, that caused Edward the
bastard son of Edgar being King to be murdered, for which fact, she built
two Nunries, and became herself a Nun: This is another of his sacred Nuns.
He tells us beside of one Kineswida, or Kineswina: one of that name there was
wife to K. Offa, by whose counsel and persuasion he caused Ethelbert K. of
East Angles a learned and virtuous Prince to be slain: Ex historia Malmesbur.
Let her go also for another of his sacred Nuns. Are not our Ladies of
England now much beholding to this Nunnes-Nouice, to propound unto them such
examples to follow, and I am out of doubt (says he) no Protestant Lady of
England, will, or dares to compare her self with the meanest, etc. What not to
compare themselves with whores and murderers, such as some of these were? you
are like soon to persuade with such sweet motions.

Untruth 205.
4. But more fearful examples of the principal popish Ladies of England might
be showed, then any can be produced of Protestant Ladies: for the further
evidence hereof, I refer the reader to the 33. year of Henry the 8. And yet
this is a simple argument, to condemn the religion of Protestants because of
afflictions: for by this reason neither Moses law in the desert, nor Christ's
Gospel in the time of Herod, when nothing but tentations, troubles, and
afflictions waited upon Gods Church, should find allowance.

5 But it is yet a more absurd argument, Of Italian and Spanish fashions in
apparel.
to move our Protestant Ladies to embrace the Italian or Spanish religion,
because they follow their guise in apparel: Is it not enough for them to trip,
but you would have the^ stumble and fall? If a man chance to drink a cup too
much, shall he not give over, till he be stark drunk? because he is over the
shoes, must he be needs over the boots? They are not to be commended for the
one, but they might well be condemned for the other. Indeed the Israelites
first followed the East manners, Isay. 2.6. and then also received their errors:
The land was full of Idols, v. 8. But I trust that English religion shall
sooner devour Roman and Italian manners, then these shall corrupt the other.
And it ought much to move our English Ladies, that they should not disguise
themselves in the outward man after their fashions, whom they are unlike in
their inward conditions, not to imitate their conversation, seeing they abhor
their religion: as Hierome well says, Aut loquendum nobis est, vt vestiti
sumus; aut vestiendum, vt loquimur: Ad Furian.
quid aliud pollicemur, and aliud ostendimus? Let us profess, as our apparel
is, or be apparelled as our profession is, why do we promise one thing, and
practice another? with Italian and Romish religion, let us shake and cast off
all other Italian toys and fashions.

6 And what if many honors and dignities have bin confirmed by Popes,
Emperors, etc. does that bind us to be of their faith? them must we also be
Paganes, for many Castles, Cities, towns, honors, privileges, were founded
and erected by them, which Christians now enjoy: If, from whom we receive
temporal benefits, we should imitate in things spiritual, neither should
Josias have reformed religion, coming of idolatrous parents, both father and
grandfather, nor yet the Apostles have embraced Christ's doctrine, being borne
of parents obedient to the Pharisaicall traditions, nor yet K. Lucius in
England descended of so many Pagane predecessors, would have received the
Christian faith, nor yet Constantine succeeding in the Empire, so many
vnchristned Emperors.

Untruth 206.
7 Though Protestants make not Matrimony a sacrament, yet it is more honorable
among Protestants, then Papists. Marriage more honorable among Protestants then
Papists.
Some of them call Marriage a profanation of orders, they forbid marriage to be
solemnized at certain festival times in the year, as not fit for such holy
seasons: they hold Marriage between Infidels not to be firm, but that the
marriage knot is dissolved, if either of the parties become a Christian: in
these and diverse other such points they show, that they have no great reverent
opinion of Marriage. Sclaunder 207.
It is also a sclaunder, that among Protestants Matrimony is at the pleasure
of the husband, or diuorcements at their wills. We only allow divorce for
fornication, according to Christ's rule, not as the Church of Rome, that allow
separation between man and wife for the love of Monastical life, sometime with
consent, sometime without, as Etheldred did forsake her husbands company, and
became a Nun, as was touched before. They allow also separation of marriage
for other causes, as for infidelity, heresy: the Protestants then allowing
but one exception of fornication, are freer from this accusation, then the
Papists are. As for concubines and bastards, though all Protestants in outward
profession can not be excused, yet they were both more usual in the popish
Church. Many of the Kings had their concubines, Ethelbald his Judith: Edgar had
his Elfleda: Henry the 2. his Rosamund: Edward the 3. his Alicia: Edward the 4.
Jane Shore. And he might with shame enough have concealed bastardie, so much
magnified in Popery: The Papal Bishops set up Edward, Fox. page 157.
Edgars base son, and for that time put by Egelredus the lawful heir. How
many of their unholy fathers the Popes have been infamous for their concubines
and bastards? Sergius the 3. had a concubine called Marozia: Popes concubines.

Luitprand. Platina. Sleidan. lib. 21. Guicciardine. Agrippa de vanitat scient.
cap. de. lenocinio.

Sa^seuinus. Luitprand. Marullus Volaterr. geograph.


John the 10. Theodora: Gregor. 7. Matilda: Alexander the 6. had Iulia
Farnesia: Leo 10. Magdalena: Paulus 3. Laura: Sixtus the 4. did erect stews
for both sexes: Paulus the third had 30. thousand harlots in Rome in a
catalogue, of whom was gathered to their ghostly fathers use a monthly rent.
And as for bastards, they abounded in that holy See: John the 10. was bastard
son to Pope Landus. John the 11. the son of Sergius the 3. by the famous
strumpet Marozia: Innocentius the 8. had 16. bastards, whom he openly
acknowledged for his children, whereas before they used to call the^ their
nephews: Alexander the 6. had also diverse basely begotten, as Caesar Borgia,
Guicciard. Bastardie not rare in popery.
another Duke of Candie, and Iuffredus: Paulus the 3. had a wicked son like
the father, Petrus Aloisius: Bloody Bonner here in England had diverse base
children, to whom he gave in farm diverse of the lands belonging to his See. An
hundred such examples might be showed of popish Prelates, that kept their
concubines, and filled the Church with bastardie. But would any man think,
that this Ignatian Friar, so much misliking concubines, would not therein
clear his own order, and discharge themselves of that crime whereof they
accuse others? yet let us hear what one of their fellow Mass Priests
reports: Have you not beard I pray you, how not long since a Jesuit here in
London erected a kind of family of love, Manifestat. fol. 97. page 2.
lecturing by night three or four nights together, to his auditors all of
women, and those fair ones for the most part? Have you not heard of the night
meeting for fear, at leastwise I am sure you have heard of many, and do know
some, who missing their wives the while, have scratched their heads where it
itched not, and bit their lips. Therefore this objection I return, and cast it
as his own dirt upon the libellers face: We may say unto him, as S. Paul to
the Jews, Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self: And that
old saying is verified upon him, (...).
He takes upon him to be a phisician of others, and is diseased himself.
Hierome well said, Hieron. Ocean.
Perdit authoritatem docendi, cuius sermo opere destruitur, He loses the
authority of teaching, whose speech is overthrown by his own doing. And
Menander could have told him: (...).
That not the words, but the manners of the speaker persuade.

THE ANSWER TO THE TENTH Section of the Authors defense to all inferior
subjects.
The Apology.
THe sum of the Epistlers defense here is this, to persuade the inferior sort
to embrace Popery, Because all their ancestors were of the same religion,
they lived by pensions, farms, annuities, alms of religious houses: no fines
or enhanced rents, etc. no forfeitures, turning out of farms, destruction of
woods, etc. no wife to provide for ioynture, no daughter to endowe, etc. no
elder son to enrich with new inheritance* not so many iarres and quarrels in
law.

The Antilogie.
THis Popes Peddler opens his pack to every one, and is odious in obtruding
the same wares: for like a tired hackney, he keeps his old tract, and still
treads in the same steps: He has said nothing in this Section, which is not
alleged before: he broacheth the same stale stuff, wearying his reader with
his vain repetitions, and long periodes: that I may say to him, as Hierome
against Iouinian, Quotiescum que ^um legero, vbicunque me defecerat spiritus,
ibi est distinctio: totum incipit, totum pe^det ex altero, totus sermo omni
materiae conuenit, quia nulli conuenit: As often as I read him, I find no
distinction, till I want breath: every sentence begins, and yet hangs upon
another: whatsoever he says, is fit for every matter, because it fitteth
indeed none. But to answer this babbler and Battist: although not all, yet
most of our Ancestors were popish, what then? So were their Ancestors
Paganes. Few of the Apostles Ancestors were of their faith. If this
Achitophels counsel had taken place, neither the Apostles should have received
Christ, and refused the Elders traditions, nor England have embraced the
Christian faith at their first conversion from Paganism. Indeed Stephens
obstinate hearers did well follow this popish counsel, Ye have always
resisted the holy ghost, as your fathers did, so do you, Act. 7.51. Thus this
Popeling would persuade the people of England, to resist the truth, because
their forefathers did so.

2. They had pensions, farms from Abbeies, without fines or forfeitures: a
great matter: whereas they were before farmers and pensioners, now they are
owners and possessors of Abbey lands. They gave alms to maintain idle
vagabond and lewd persons: and made a great rabble of impudent beggars, besides
their mendicant friars: And was it so great a matter for Abbeies to do all
this, when they possessed the third part of this land? Concerning raising of
fines, enhauncing of rents, destruction of woods, Of raising of fines, cutting
down of woods, etc.
these are no fruits of the Gospel: they which profess it in sincerity, are
as far off from these oppressions as any Papist: and is it so charitable a
work to preserve woods, and destroy and dispeople towns, as some of your
friends in Northamptonshire and other places have done? Is more compassion to
be showed to trees then men? to woods then towns? And it is no marvel, if
many took no great care, to provide iointures for their wives, dowers for
their daughters, inheritance for their children: for the Monks had enough to
advance their own kindred: and because they were so kind and loving to men's
wives and daughters, it had been an unnatural part to neglect their children.

3. What has he alleged here for Popery, which the Pagane Idolaters might
not pretend for themselves? thus the superstitious women reasoned in Ieremies
time, When we burnt incense to the Queen of heaven, etc. then had we plenty
of victuals, and were well and felt none evil: But since we left off to burn
incence, etc. we have had scarcenes of all things, and have been consumed with
the sword and famine, Jeremy. 44.17.18. Thus Symmachus reasoned for the
Paganes, Secuta est factum fames publica, quando in vsum hominum concussae
quercus, quando vulsae herbarum radices: Public famine followed the fact (when
the Idols were destroyed) when was it heard of before that men did shake down
acornes, and pull up roots for food? Thus many simple people were wont to
say, Plenty and abundance no good argument of religion.
it was a merry world when we might have 20. eggs for a penie, a bushel of
corn for six pence. All this while they considered not, that while they had
abundance of earthly things, they were pined for want of spiritual: though
they sat by their fleshpots, and had bread their bellies full, as the
unthankful Israelites murmured Exodus 16.3. yet they considered not, that all
this time they were held in the spiritual bondage of Egypt.

Therefore we frankelie profess, though the Gospel should bring scarcity,
trouble, war, penury with it (and yet it has flourished with all temporal
blessings, with peace, abundance, plenty) yet had we rather with Moses suffer
affliction with Gods people, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin; to possess
all the pleasures and riches of the world with an evil conscience and corrupt
religion: And we say with the Prophet David, Thou have given me more joy of
heart, then when their wheat and wine increased, Psalm. 4.7. We rejoice more in
the truth of religion, then all prosperity and abundance whatsoever: and as
Hierome well says, Nudam crucem nudus sequar, nec lucra seculi in Christi
quaeras militia, I will follow Christ's naked cross my self naked: the worlds
gain must not be sought in Christ's service. It is memorable which is reported
of Agesilaus, who when the Thasians, as he passed by with his army, brought
him meal, fat geese, fine cakes, with other iunkets, he refused them all, the
meal only excepted, giving this answer, That those things which delighted
servile minds, (...).
free men abhorred: So these things whereby Papists measured religion, as
riches, prosperity, external glory; Protestants, whom the Gospel of Christ
has freed from popish superstition, do hold them too light waights, to weigh
against the truth.

THE ANSWER TO THE ELEVENTH Section of his defense to the Ministry of
England.
The first Inuectiue.
1 LAstly to come to the Protestant Ministry of England, whose displeasure as
I esteem it least, so I name them last, page 113.

2 I defend the doctrine of all godly and learned professors of Divinity, of
all Popes, Fathers, Doctors, Councels, Untruth 208.
Universities, Colleges, etc. since the time of Christ to Martin Luther, where
so many millions of miraculouslie approved Saints have lived and died, page 113.

3 I impugn a new, poor, lewd, licentious, and unlearned company of
Ministers, etc. ignorant, wicked, deceitful, Vntr. 208. the Iudasites are all
these, and not Ministers.
heretical, heretics, seducers, reprobate persons, that learned their
religion of the Devil, etc. those that died without repentance condemned in
hell.

4 I impugn a private religion of one nation, Untruth 209.
in one only time, etc. page 114.

The Defensatiue.
1 THis Iudasite Friar is now become the Popes Martial, to place every man in
his rank and order: But his authority reaches only to martial his fellow
friars: And if the worst are always in the last place, how comes it to
pass, that the Ignatian friars (if they have their right) have the last place
in public processions, as being the youngest order of the rest: I think this
frierlie companion would hold great scorn, that his order should be thought
therefore to be worst, as it is in deed, but not for that cause. Well it has
pleased his Mastship to talk with Ministers in the last place: The place
makes not the man.
that is no disgrace to them, but to him, that gave them not their due place.
And here Agesilaus answer may serve, who being yet a child in the beholding of
certain plays, being set in the meanest place, said: It is well, I must show,
that the place does not commend the man, but the man the place. (...).


2 Most of the ancient professors of Divinity, Doctors, Councels, general,
particular, Universities, Colleges, which were and lived and flourished in the
purer ages of the Church, do condemn popish religion, as it is now professed
and practiced, Answer to the third and fifth section.
as has been declared before: These are but facing words and bragging
speeches: As though Bish. Jewel, that reverent father has not long since made
this challenge, that he will prove the principal articles of the Protestants
faith, by the testimonies of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church,
that lived within 500. year after Christ. Bish. Cranmer also avouches, that
the real presence (as the Church of Rome holds) cannot be proved by any
Doctor above 1000. years after Christ. Fox page 1874.
If this benchwhistler be ignorant of these challenges, let him understand it
now, and put up his pipes: if he knew it before, it is great impudency in him
to make these brags, till they be answered. But as for your millions of Saints,
I have told you often, that those Saints, whom you challenge, if they be right
Saints, they were not yours, as being ignorant of the grossest points of
popery. If they were wholly yours, they were no Saints: for I am sure, that
heretics and Idolaters make but course Saints, unless you will have the
Devil to bear the cross. And seeing Saints do abound in the popish Church,
Multitude of popish Saints to be suspected.
and it is so easy a thing to be Sainted there, their Saintships may be
worthilier doubted of, that grow to so many millions; whereas Christ's flock is
but a little flock, Luke 12.32. and few there are, which find the narrow way
that leads unto life, Math. 7.14. That saying therefore of Agesilaus may fit
them, who when as the confederates murmured that they supplied more soldiers
then the Lacedaemonians, commanded the crier to bid all the artificers, as
potters, brasiers, smiths, carpenters, to depart; and there were few left but
the Lacedaemonians, who are not permitted by their law to follow any base
handicraft: then he smiling, said, see how many more soldiers we have sent
out, then you. As there is great difference between cobblers, (...).
tinkers, potters, and other base artisanes and right soldiers; so popish
Saints differ from true Saints, and though they have more in muster and number,
yet the Protestants, I doubt not, have more in right account and true value.

3. But who are the licentious, unlearned company, wicked, ignorant,
deceitful, heretical, their fellow Priests shall testify, who thus witness
of the Iudasites; who^ they call proud Nemrods boystrous hunters, Jesuitical
humorists, Macheuillian practisers, furious spirits, men without conscience,
Manifest. fol. 25.6. fol. 26. a.
cousining and conspiring companions, ambitious hypocrites, the more knave the
better luck: and one of them they term, an Italianated companion, a Devil
incarnate: Ibid.
an other, a devilish politician: Fol. 25 a.
the whole order they name the society of the Devil, the school of
Macheuilisme: an other they call a most diabolical, Manifest. 107. a. Reply.
fol. 102.a. fol. 105. a. Manifest. fol. 108. a. fol. 112.a. Manifest. fol. 97.6.
unnatural and wicked fellow: the rest they affirm to be led with the spirit
of Satan, damned for heretics: Bathamans blasphemous wretches, proud
Pharisees, the infernal Consistory. They object unto them, their night
lectures, and their auditors of women, and those fair ones for the most part,
whiles their husbands missing their wives, scratched their heads.

Now sir take your Popish liuerie of deceiptfull, heretical, taught of the
Devil, and such like to your self, which your fellow Mass priests have
shaped you* being best acquainted with your manners. As for us the Ministers of
the Gospel, we esteem of these blasphemous words, as of Rabsakeh his railing:
who though he uttered many shameful words against the city of God, yet they
were not able to cast one stone against it, to hurt it: no more shall this
railing Rabsakeh, notwithstanding his wicked terms, fasten one true word upon
Christ's Ministers.

4. Our Religion, the faith of the Protestants, the Gospel of Christ, neither
is in England only professed, but in Scotland, the Low countries, Heluetia,
Geneua, in many cities and kingdoms beside; in some peaceably, in some with
trouble and persecution. Neither has the Gospel only flourished in these
times, but every age has had some witnesses of it: as learned Illyricus has
sufficiently proved in a large Treatise of that argument. Therefore we cannot
judge this pratler otherwise, then a vain fellow, that, till he be answered,
is bold untruly to affirm, that the Religion of Protestants should be in one
only nation, and in one only time.

Indeed, they which die among Protestants, without repentance toward God for
their sins cannot be saved: but their faith and calling are not to be
repented of. It is to be feared rather, that they which die in the popish
communion, without repentance of their idolatry cannot be saved: 1. Cor. 6.
For no idolaters can inherit the kingdom of God: and he that is under the
kingdom of Antichrist cannot be under the kingdom of Christ. Ye promise
salvation to your Disciples, as the Pharisees did to their proselites, Math. 23.
making them twofold more the children of hell: and your Masses afford like
help to the comers to it, as the Priests Corban did to the suitors to the
Altar. We know, that out of Gods Church there is no salvation. Hieron sermon. de
resurrect.
Duae portae sunt; porta paradisi, and porta Ecclesiae; per portam Ecclesiae
intramus portam paradisi: There are two gates; one of paradise, another of the
Church; by the gate of the Church we enter the gate of Paradise: this gate of
the Church the Gospel only opens, which teaches justification by faith
alone in Christ, who is the door and the way.

Neither is it like that the Ignatian seducers can promise salvation to others,
wherein they fail themselves: as their own fellows have censured them:
Manifest. fo. 105. a.
All Jesuits, except they amend their manners and reform their order, are
damned for heretics, and thrust out of Gods Church as* Apostataes, (...).
Atheists, etc. to whom their credulous simple scholars might say, as
Agesilaus to the Thasians that offered to make him of the number of the Gods:
First, says he, make your selves Gods, and then I will believe ye can make me
one too.

The second Inuectiue.
HE would show that it is more reasonable to give credit to so many preceding
Archbishops of Canterbury, then to the three protestant Archbishops, Cranmer,
Parker, Grindall: these he does first extenuate, and then extol and magnify
the other.

1. For the first, he says, Vntr. 210.
they were of three diverse religions in substantial points: yea of seven or
eight diverse religions.

2. None of them burned for protestancy, Vntr. 211.
quartered for denying the supremacy, a Saint for life, renowned for learning.

3. Cranmer condemned of high treason, Vntr. 212.
proved publicly perjured, and to have counterfeit the hands and consents of
fifty Clergy men: recanted his error, Vntr. 213.
was in the case for relapse, Vntr. 214.
for ignorance was hissed out of the common schools of Oxford. p. 215. Vntr.
215.


4. The Archbishops, their prodecessors, S. Augustine, S. Laurence, Mellitus,
Iustus, Honorius, etc. and others, Vntr. 216.
68 in number, many most holy and learned men, miraculously approved of God. p.
126. Therefore it is more equal to credit these then the other.

The Defensatiue.
1. WE depend not for our faith upon any Archbishops, whether Papal or
Protestants: we receive not our faith of men, neither are pinned upon their
sleeves for our judgment in Religion: the Apostle has taught us, that we
should not have the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of
persons: Iam. 2.1. Yet the three Protestant Bishops rehearsed, proving their
faith by the Scriptures, are more to be credited, then all their predecessors,
grounding their belief upon humane traditions: Neither did they vary, as is
surmised, in the substantial and fundamental points of religion, or were
therein of three diverse, much less of seven or eight sundry religions.

2. Though to be quartered for denying the supremacy, and maintaining the
foreign jurisdiction of the Pope, be a condign punishment for traiterous
Papists* and proper unto such rebellious and disloyal persons, as the
Iudasites and Baals Priests have been found to be: yet it is certain that
blessed Cranmer was burned for Protestancie, as were learned Ridley, godly
Latimer, zealous Hooper, constant Ferrar; all Protestant Bishops. Cranmers
godly life and Episcopal virtues, his soberness, gentleness, charity,
humility, soundness of doctrine, diligence in his calling, are at large set
forth by the grave pen of that faithful servant of God master Fox; Fox p.
1865.
such as in few of his predecessors are to be found, neither his adversaries
are ever able to confound. His learning also was well known, as appears by
his learned books: as that of the Sacrament: Fox p. 1874.
which as he himself testified, was set forth seven years ago then, and no
man has brought any authors against it.

3. He was acquitted and pardoned of high treason, and not thereof condemned,
Fox p. 1418. col. 1.
as he untruly reports, and stood only in the case of doctrine: he was not
perjured, having taken an oath to the Pope only under protestation, as he
himself confesses. And if he had sworn obedience simply to the Pope, it was
an unjust oath: like unto Herod's, and not to be kept. The law says, Illicitum
iuramentum non valet: an unlawful oath is of no force. And their own Canons
say: Iuramentum contra bonos mores non ligat: an oath against good manners
binds not. So is the oath made to the Pope: it is unjust to Princes, to whom
due obedience is denied; and against good manners, in that disloyalty to the
Prince is thereby maintained. The Popish Bishops rather were perjured, that
being sworn to the King first, took afterward a contrary oath to the Pope,
as Bishop Cranmer obiecteth to Bishop Brook; Fox p. 1575. col. 1.
whereas their first oath was lawful and just, and therefore firmly to be
holden. Those fifty Clergy men's hands were not counterfeited by Cranmer, but
subscribed by themselves, for the abrogation of the Papal jurisdiction: Indeed
Fisher charged Archbishop Warrham with counterfeiting of his hand in the
sitting at Blacke-friers about the business of the kings marriage. Stow.


He recanted his error, and executed just revenge upon his right hand, that
was the instrument of his rash subscription; first consuming the same in the
flames of the fire. This is no more disgrace unto him then Peter's tears and
repentance for denying of his Master: neither was he by their law in case of
relapse, when he was adjudged to the fire, having not as yet showed his remorse
of conscience, and repentance for his unadvised act of subscription. He was
hissed indeed of the young headie scholars: but that argues their temerity,
not that reverend fathers simplicity. The Donatists served the Catholic
Bishops after the same manner, making such a noise, Augustine. breuiat.
collation. 3.
that they could not go on in their defense: say also, that Augustine and the
other Catholics were therefore disgraced and put to silence.

4. Concerning the Popish Archbishops: 1. if number might prevail, the high
priests by a greater proportion exceeded our Savior Christ and his Apostles,
and the pagan sacrificers the Christian Bishops and preachers. 2. Many of them
were not very holy men: whereof some were disloyal to their princes, Fox. p.
395. A^n. 21. Ric. 2. titul. 16.
as Thomas Becket to Henry the second, Robert Winchelsey to Edward the first,
Thomas Arundell to Richard the second, who was by Parliament adjudged a
traitor. Diverse of them were busy, malicious, uncharitable, contentious, as
Baldwine, Stephen Laughton: Richardus Magnus had great strife with the Monks
of Canterbury: Boniface, Kilwaruy with the Archbishops of York, for bearing up
of their Mass in London and Kent: John Peccham with Thomas Bishop of Hereford:
Fox. p. 394. p. 395.
such was the holiness and meekness of these proud papal Archbishops. 3. For
their miracles, they were mere forgeries: such as are reported of Dunstane,
that he caused an Harp to sing and play alone hanging on the wall, Fox. p.
156. col. 2.
how he held the devil by the nose with a pair of tongues, tempting him with
women: such were the fained miracles of Thomas Becket, which were condemned by
the great men of the land as fables: Magnates interdixerunt, ne quis martyrem
Thoma^ nominaret, ne quis miracula eius praedicaret: the great men forbad, that
no man should call Thomas a martyr, or speak of his miracles.

4. Neither were many of them such learned Clerks: Ex Hector. Crikeladens.
though some of them, I confess, had more learning then true piety or
honesty, as Lanfranke, Anselme; yet for the rest, what were they? Was not
Augustine the founder of that Sea, a great Divine, that must needs send to
Gregory for resolution in these profound questions: Whether a woman great with
child may be baptized: Fox p. 117.
after how many days the infant ought to be received to baptizme, and such
like? And it should seem that learning in their Archbishops was not greatly
requisite: when Robert Burnell Bishop of Bath, and Thomas Cobham, two reverend
and learned men being elected were refused; and Peccham a gray Friar, and
Reinald Bishop of Winchester, an ambitious man, Fox. p. 395.
better acquainted with suites of law (being Chancellor) then questions of
Divinity, were appointed in their stead.

5. But as I hold Bishop Cranmer in true learning and sound Divinity, to be
equal to any his prodecessours; so in godly constancy to go before them: for
he was the first and only Martyr of that Sea, that died for the truth.
Elphegus the 26. Archbishop was stoned to death for denying tribute to the
Danes: Fox. p. 120.
Simon Sudbury was beheaded of the rebels, Stow in Richard. 2.
because he gave counsel that the king should not come at them to hear their
complaints: But neither of these died in the cause of religion.

6. Neither did the truth want witnesses from among these ancient Archbishops:
Will. Malmesbury de viti^. lib. 1.
Cuthbertus the 11. Archbishop, forbad all funeral exequies to be made for him
after he was dead: Elfricus the 26. did write certain Sermons against
transubstantiation, Fox. p. 1139.
the authenticals thereof are yet extant in the libraries of Exceter and
Worcester: Simon Islip forbad upon pain of excommunication, Fo. 396. col. 1.
that no man should abstain from bodily labors upon certain Saints days.
Act. 14.17.
Therefore even amongst them, the Lord left not himself altogether (...),
without witness, as the Apostle says. Wherefore he has gained nothing, by
this mustering of his Popish Archbishops: of who^ we may say, as our Savior of
the Pharisees, They are blind leaders of the blind: Math. 13.14. Hierome says
well of such: Quod me damnant episcopi, no^ est ratio, sed conspiratio; quorum
authoritas me opprimere potest, docere non potest: In that the Bishops condemn
us, it is no reason, but treason; their authority may impeach me, but not teach
me. Metellus, because he was blind, Senec. declamat. 2.
was forbidden among the Romans to exercise his Priesthood: and they had a
law, that no Augurs, (...), having any soar or disease, Plutarch. quaest. Romans
q. 73. (...).
should execute their office: As little regard is to be had to these blind
prelates, lame and diseased in judgment; as in the same place it is expounded:
that it is not fit for them that are corrupted and diseased in their souls, to
handle Divine things.

The third Inuectiue.
1. IN the laws of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth, I will
overthrow them. Vntr. 117.


2. If they allege Universities, they are ouer-matched: Vntr. 118.
Oxford has had in Catholic times thirty thousand students, all ever of the
same mind with us.

3. For other Clergy men, we have had an hundred thousand more, Synodes two to
one, in number two hundred to one. p. 116.

4. If they urge Scriptures, by resorting to the Original tongues, the Greek
and Hebrew, etc. the victory is ours. Vntr. 119.
We use more Scriptures for numbers of books, more for diversity of tongues.
Our expositors of Scripture, professed students in Divinity, etc. excellent
linguists, many natural borne Greeks and Hebrews. Their expositors of
Scripture never were to be compared to those: Vntr. 120.
In the Parliament where their religion was decreed, there was no person
present, that understood either Greek or Hebrew. p. 117.

The Defensatiue.
1. THis is as like to be so, as if I should say, that by the Popes laws now
in force at Rome, the faith of Protestants is maintained: (and yet I will show
twenty Canons amongst them, that give testimony to our faith, to one decree
that he can allege amongst us, making for them: this I have already performed
in Synopsis throughout.) Wherefore in this so shameless and unreasonable
assertion, I will vouchsafe him no other answer, but say with Augustine: Crat*
petilian. lib. 2.38.
Non inuenio quomodo te refellerem, nisi vt aut iocantem irriderem, aut
insanientem dolerem: I know not how else to answer you, then either as a iester
to scorn you, or as a mad man to pity you.

2. The most famous Universities in the world, as of Herdelberge, Tigur,
Argentine.
Magdobing, Wittenberge, Basile, Geneua, Vtricke, Lepden, Cambridge, Oxford,
with many more are with the Protestants. King Henry for his divorce, had the
consent of the most famous universities in Europe. Oxford was not wholly yours,
no not in the grossest times of popery: Fox. p. 448.
for they cleared under their common seal John Wickliffe and his doctrine of
the suspicion of heresy.

3. We confess Papists have been and yet are more in number: so did the Pagans
in multitude exceed the Christians: but the Scripture has taught us, not to
follow a multitude to do evil: Eccles. 23.2. Synodes both general and
provincial Protestants have more on their side then Papists: I refer the
Reader for the truth hereof to Synopsis.

4. If you would, as ye say, be tried by the original Scriptures, the
controversy would soon be at end: but your sayings and doings agree not. Why
should ye be afraid to prefer the Hebrew and Greek text before the vulgar
Latin: making this only authentike in Sermons, readings, Tidentin. sess. 4.
decr. 2.
disputations, as it was concluded in the Tridentine Chapter? why did they not
amend their vulgar Latin according to the original? reading still Genes.
3.15. She shall break thine head for, he, or it: Genes. 8.4. for seventeen,
seven and twenty: Psalm. 68.13. for live among the pots, sleep between the
lots: and in diverse hundred such places they swerve from the original. Ye use
indeed more Scriptures, for number (as all the Apocryphal works* which were
never recorded of the Church of God under the law, neither written by Prophets,
or approved by Christ and his Apostles:) but not for diversity of tongues. For
the Canonical Scriptures are extant in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, the
Apocripha, some in the Greek and Latin, some in the Latin only. You have
little cause to brag of your popish expositors, such as Vigilius; De primat.
Romans eccles. tom. 1. Council.
that because Peter is called Cephas, which signifies a stone, infers that
he was Cephas, that is, caput, the head of the Church, deriuing one from
another because of the similitude of the letters: such a proper interpreter was
Pope Innocent, that applied that saying of Saint Paul [They that are in the
flesh, cannot please God,] against marying. Distinct. 82.2.


Your best Linguists and most learned Interpreters, as Paguinus, Arius Montanus
approve not the vulgar Latin, and do differ in judgment therein from the
Church of Rome* Protestants are not inferior for the knowledge of tongues,
excellent linguists, and learned interpreters, but do far exceed the Romish
Church. Witness hereunto Tremellius a borne Hebrew, Iunius, Mercerus, Calvin,
Beza, Stephanus with others: whose fit translations, apt expositions, and most
learned Commentaries do obscure all their popish scholasticall Tractates, silly
allegories, and sophistical disputes.

What knowledge in the Hebrew and Greek the parliament men had, as it is
uncertain to guess, so neither is it necessary to know: sure I am, that they
received direction from most learned men, Whitehead, Elmer, Horn, Jewel, with
others; with whom none of the contrary side in the knowledge of the tongues
and study of Divinity, were to be compared.

Thus we see, what are the chief grounds of popish religion; The multitude of
professors, general consent of Universities, schools, synodes: these are but
weak grounds: a few professing the truth should be heard before a multitude in
error. Joshua does not so reason: though all the people beside should have
forsaken God, Joshua. 24. v. 15
yet I and my house (which were but a small company to the rest) will serve the
Lord* Epiphanius writing to Hierome, says: quasi multitudo peccantium scelus
minuit; and non numerositate lignoru^ mayor gehennae ignis succrescat: as
though the number of sinners does lessen the sin; the more the wood is, the
greater is the fire of hell. Seneca well says: Ne pecorum ritu antecedentium
sequamur gregem, Let us not be like to sheep, still to follow those which go
before. Argumentum pessimi turba est; quaeramus quid optime factum, (...).
non quid vsitatissimum: The multitude is an argument of the worst part; let us
enquire what is best done, not what is most in use. Titus Flaminius said well
to Philopoemenes the Captain of the Achaians, that was furnished with a great
number of soldiers, but wanted money: That he had arms and legs, but no
belly. So our adversaries contending with multitude, but bringing no truth, do
show us legs and arms enough; but the substance of truth, which is as the
belly and bowels of religion, they have not.

He breaks off here his bitter inuectiues, and comes after his Ignatian
humor, by cunning persuasions to insinuate himself.

The fourth Article: his Insinuation.
HEre the Epistler seems thus to reason: If Catholics be in error, then
either they wilfully or ignorantly err. 1. But neither the first: vntr. 221.
seeing we undergo many penalties and punishments for our profession: p. 218.
We follow a profession so austere and rigorous. vntr. 222.
p. 220. Their Religion is pleasant, and by professing it they live in honors
and delights, which have enticed Protestants* vntr. 223.
to be Mahometanes, etc. 2. Not the second: We have all authorities, times and
places for our defense, etc. we have traveled all countries, vntr* 224.
studied in all Universities: we want wives, riches, honors, the impediments of
true Divinity and study. If Religion can be found in this world, we have
sought and found out all means: they none. p. 218.

The Repulse.
1. THey suffer not punishment for their profession, but for their practicing;
not for religion, but their rebellion. Which of them has been put to death for
his opinion, in holding transubstantiation, adoration of images, invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, or any such like popish error? but because they submit
themselves to the papal jurisdiction, and are sent hither by his authority to
corrupt and seduce the subjects. We may say then unto them, as Augustine to the
Donatists: Tribunus no^ est persecutor vester, sed persecutor persecutoris
vestri, id est, erroris vestri: The magistrate does not persecute you, but that
which persecuteth you, which is, your error.

2. Neither is popery such an austere and rigorous life, nor their
imprisonment so hard, as they complain; seeing their leisure suffered them in
Wisbich prison to contend for superiority and highest place^ at the table:
they one accused another of dicing, carding, drunkenness, Manifest. fol. 4.
l^b.
fornication even in prison: these are not the fruits of an austere and
rigorous life. The Priests tell Friar Parsons, Repl. f. 72. ^
that if laughing will serve their turn, they can laugh as fast as he. They
have reported of the Ignatians, that some of them ride in coaches, have their
stables of change of geldings, do spend after five hundred pounds a year, go
richly apparelled: this seems to be no such rigorous and penitential life.

3. The honors and riches of protestants are not to be compared to the glory
of the Cardinals in Rome, Bishops of Spain, Abbots in France: but for the
most part of the Protestant Ministry, I think they in their imprisonment and
affliction (as they call it) have lived in greater fullness and plenty, and
more at hearts ease. That some Papists are turned Protestants for honor and
pleasure sake, I do easily believe: but that Protestants have become
Mahometanes, he cannot show, unless they be such temporizers, and corrupt
conuerts, as he speaks of. Popery is a fitter stock to graffe an Atheist
and Mahometane in, then protestancie: according to the common byword, An
English Italianate, a devil incarnate.

4. Neither is austeritie of life a sufficient argument of the truth. The
Pharisees were more given to fasting then Christ's disciples: among the
Mahometanes there are Hermites, and barefooted Friars: the Donatistes were
very desperate, and would cast themselves down from the hills and rocks, and
break their necks; As Augustine says: I would know, who first of your side
did cast himself down headlong: Crat. Petilian. 2.89.
Valde illud granum fertile fuit, vnde tanta seges praecipitatorum cadauerum
pullulavit: sure it was a very fruitful grain, from whence have budded forth
so many precipitated carkases.

Wherefore notwithstanding any thing yet said, they may be guilty of wilful
error, although they did (which may be done with an obstinate and perverse
mind) suffer and endure much for their profession.

5 And this lastly ^erueth (if it prove any thing) to clear the Protestants
from suspicion of wilfulness, who have endured more by imprisonment,
famishment, whipping, racking, tormenting, burning, and many more torments, by
an hundred fold at Papists hands only for their conscience, then the other
have felt for their offense against the State.

1. Wives being chosen in the fear of God are no impediment to study: they
are helpers rather, and a means to ease the mind of Ministers from worldly
business, that they may be more fit for meditation. There was no place more apt
for heavenly meditation, then Paradise; yet God thought good to make woman
there. No persons more given to meditation then the Apostles, yet they had
their wives following of them to minister to their necessities* 1. Cor. 9.5.
Nay rather vagrant and unsettled lust, such as reigns in popery, is a
distracting of the mind. And they are like to be good Divinity Lectures, which
the Iudasites use to read in the nights to the auditories of fair women,
Manifest. p. 97.2.
while their husbands missing of them, scratch their heads where it itcheth
not; as the Masse-priestes report.

2 It is not the traveling abroad, or studying beyond the sea, and seeking
means a far off, that can bring a man certainly to true knowledge. Which of
the Christian professors can compare with Solon, Lycurgus, Thales, Plato,
Pythagoras, for long travail, visiting of strange countries, seeing the
behavior of many nations? yet this could not bring them to the knowledge of
Christ. The Pharisees did compass sea and land, they were greater travelers
then Christ or his Apostles were at the first: it did nothing help them to the
finding out of the truth. Every Church and country having the word of God may
find at home which is the truth, as well as by searching abroad, as Moses says:
Neither is it yet beyond the sea, Deuteronomy. c. 30.13 14.
that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us and bring it us? but
the word is near unto thee. Hierome says* Des^^t notus tantum in Iudaea esse
Deus, in omnem terram exiuit sonus Apostolorum: God has left to be known
only in Judea, the sound of the Apostles is gone forth into all the earth.
Divinity is as well studied at Cambridge as at Rome, at Oxford as at Paris,
and for soundness of judgment and integrity of truth much better without
comparison. Seneca says: Proprium agri est, nihil di^ pati, Lib. 1. de
Tranquil. vitae
and mutationibus vt remedijs vti* It is the property of sick persons, to
endure nothing long, and to use often chaunges as remedies* So this shifting of
places and changing of countries argues the sickness of the mind. Plutarch
very well compares such to hens* that when they have heaps of corn before
them, yet do seek in corners, and pick out of the dirt, (...) etc. Plutar. de
curiosit.
and scrape with their feet: So the sicke-braind students having much better
doctrine at home, and more plenty of true knowledge, do go further and speed
worse.

Now in the last place, this Epistler (belike) failing of other proofs,
betaketh himself to his protestation.

The fifth point: his Protestation.
IF they will appeal to the Scriptures, I the poor author hereof have studied
them all, and more then Protestants use. Then after the profession of his
reading of the Fathers of the Church, historians, Councels, schoolmen, he
concludes with this protestation: I take God and the whole Court of heaven to
witness, before whom I must render an account of this protestation, etc. that
the same faith and religion which I defend, is taught and confirmed by those
holy Hebrewe and Greek Scriptures, Historians, Pope^, Decrees, Scholies,
Expositions, Councels, Schools and Fathers: and the profession of Protestants,
condemned. p. 221.

That I should not be able to judge, what makes for us, what against us* I
hope no man will challenge me of so great ignorance. That I would willingly err
to follow a profession so austere, etc. I hope no Reader can be so partial to
judge, etc. p. 222.

The Concertation.
THis Ignatian professor (as it seems) dwelled by evil neighbors, when he
is forced to commend himself: he boasts much of his reading and knowledge,
as though he only were conversant in authors. I doubt not but that there may
be found some hundreds of ministers, and this poor author among the rest, that
can truly say as much of themselves, as this bragger professes. At this time
therefore I shall need to make no further answer, the^ to set a modest
contestation against his proud protestation. At this time I shall have use of
that saying of the wise man: Answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest
he be wise in his own conceit. Ad Saluinum.
Prou. 26.5. And though I fear (as Hierome says: Vereor ne officium putetur
ambitio) lest that which is but officious, should be held to be ambitious; that
whereunto I am driven of necessity, should be deemed vanity: yet I say with
the Apostle, Wherein any man is bold, I speak as a fool, I am bold also: 2.
Cor. 11.21. Like as Pericles being depressed and depraved of his enemies, was
urged modestly to commend himself: (...).
Are ye angry (says he) with me, which think my self inferior to none,
neither in the understanding of things, nor in uttering what I understand. So
to make answer to this vain challenger in his own words, I hope it may be
excused, because he has first thereunto by his importunity provoked: If he
will appeal to the Scriptures, I have studied them all, and more then Papists
use: if they contend to credit the Hebrew text in the old Testament, and the
Greek in the new, I have studied them in those languages, and the ancient
glosses and scholiaes Latin and some Greek for their exposition: if they will
stand to the report of the ancient historians, Eusebius, Ruffinus, Socrates,
Sozomen, S. Hierome, S. Bernard, and others, I have perused them: if they will
be judged by the decrees of the first Popes, I have often with diligence
considered the decrees, both all that were before the Council of Nice and
after. If they will be arbitrated by the present schools and scholasticall
reasons, I have read some of them* If they adm^t the first four general
Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chelcedone, I have seen and read
them all from the first of Nice to the last of Trent; as all approved
particular and provincial Councels, which be extant and ordinarily used. If
they think there were ever true religion among Christians, and that it was
exercised in the first six hundred years, I have carefully read over all the
works of Origene, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, ^ugustine, Chrysostom, Damascene,
Pamphilus, Eusebius, Theodoret, Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomenus, Euagrius,
Bernard, the Imperial constitutions, with other authors, old and new; and with
greater diligence then Ignatian Friars commonly use to do, having (I thank
God) of mine own writing and collations out of the foresaid Fathers and
Writers, not much less then two reames of paper.

Yet I take God to witness, before whom I must render an account of this my
protestation, that the same faith and religion which I defend, is taught and
confirmed by those holy Hebrews and Greek Scriptures; and in the more
substantial points, by those Historians, Councels, Fathers that lived within
5. or 6. hundred years after Christ; and in many points, by them that followed
after: and the profession of Papists by the same condemned.

I have examined, and with diligent advise read over many books and writings
of the best learned Protestants: and not any that ever came to my hands,
contains any argument or reason, in my judgment, worthy or able to withdraw
a reasonable and indifferent mind, not blinded with pleasure, or seduced by
affection, from embracing the Catholic faith of the Gospel, which I defend.

That I should not be able to judge, what makes for us* what against us: I
hope no man will challenge me of so great ignorance.

Thus have I answered him in his own words; and I am persuaded much more
truly: for to his protestation these exceptions may be taken:

1. What if this Ignatian nouice be not of such great reading, as here he
makes show of? (as we cannot find by his writings) his protestation will then
help him little, according to the law: Cod. lib. 4. tit. 1. leg. 13.
Nemini ex delicto sibi lucrum afferre permittitur: No man is suffered to gain
by a false testimony.

2. It may also be thought, that for want of better proofs he falls to
protesting: Cod. lib. 4. tit. 1. l. 3. Diocletian.
as it is provided in the law: Inopia probationum res decidi potest per
iusiurandum: where other proofs fail, the matter may be decided by oath.

3. He is convinced of manifest falsehood, in that he dares avouch, that all
the Fathers confirm his faith, and condemn the profession of the Protestants:
whereas it is most notoriously evident, that for the grossest points of popery,
as Transubstantiation, the sacrifice of the Mass, worshipping of images,
justification by works, the supremacy of the Pope, prohibition of marriage, and
such other, they have no show at all of any evidence from the Fathers within
500. years after Christ. And in many substantial points they do apparently
testify for Protestants: as Cyprian for the equality of Bishops, Hierome for
the Canonical Hebrew Scriptures, Origene against the carnal presence,
Augustine against free will, and election upon the foresight of our works,
Ambrose for justification by faith. And these and many other such natural
points, these Fathers with others do give such clear testimony to the truth,
that it is impudency to deny it: and yet this brazen face would bear us
down, that they do speak only for papistrie which they never knew; and
condemned the Evangelical or protestants faith, which they professed. Wherefore
this protestation having no probability of truth, but being devised for his
own advantage, and coined to serve his turn, is of no great credit. They have
a rule in their law, that witnesses should not praemeditatu^ afferre
testimoniu^, Cause. 4. qu. 3. c. 3.
premeditate their testimony before* to be resolved, whatsoever other evidence
there is, to testify according to their own resolution: so plays this
fellow, as it is in the Psalm: He has conceived a mischief, and brings
forth a lie, Psa. 7.14. Look as he has premeditate and devised with himself,
so he utters, how soever the matter stands.

4. And he is too confident to imagine, that no man will think, but that in
reading he is able to know, what makes for them, what against the^. For a^ his
preiudicate affection is, so is his reading: his bleare eyes take the strait
for crooked: like to him that sailing upon the waters, thinks the trees and
banks to go with him; so he imagines in his hasty reading, that all runs
along with him. As the Jewish Rabbines read the Scriptures, as Celsus, and
profane the writings of Christians; so seems he to have read the Fathers,
wresting them to serve his own turn. I may therefore say unto him with
Seneca: Multo satius erat te paucis authoribus tradere, Lib. 1. de tranquillit.
vitae.
quam errare per multos: It had been better for you to have studied a few
Authors well, then to have erred in so many.

5. Lastly, it had bin far more seemly, if another man had made report of his
great readings, and not himself, according to the saying of the wise man: Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger and not thine
own lips, Prou. 27.2. He is herein much like to Grunnius in Hierome: Hieron.
ad Rusticum.
Cum mensa apposita librorum exposuisset struem, adducto supercilio, contractis
naribus, rugata front, duobus digitulis concrepabat; hoc sign^ ad audie^du^
discipulis prouocans, tum nugas meras fundere, etc. When the table was laid,
and heaps of books brought forth, casting up his eyes, snor^ling with his
nose, knitting his brows, knacking with his fingers, to move attention, he
pours forth mere toys. I say of him with Seneca: Puto multos potuisse ad
sapientiam peruenire, nisi putassent se peruenisse: I think that many might
have attained to wisdom, if they had not thought they had obtained it
already: So it is likely, that this resolute champion might have received grace
to acknowledge the truth, if he had not falsely persuaded himself, that he had
found it already, remaining in error. (...): Lib. de sui laud.


And to conclude, he has gained very little by this his ostentation. But as
Plutarch well says: That another man's dispraise follows a man's own praise,
and the end of vain glory is no glory: so the more this boaster commends
himself, the less his credit and reputation will be with wise men.

THE ANSWER TO THE TWELFT SECTION: THAT IT IS neither dishonorable, nor
unreasonable to persist in Protestancy; nor honorable to grant a reformation,
or rather deformation of Popery.
The first Inducement.
FIrst he urges and preaseth certain defalked and maimed sentences of Luther:
No man, I trust, will so much condemn himself in obstinacy to be of Luthers
mind: Vntr. 225.
and if he be not, he cannot be a Protestant, etc. p. 123. the words of that
graceless Luther are these: How often has my heart panted, reprehended me,
and objected against me, What, art thou only wise? can it be credible that all
others have erred so long a time? I had never a greater or more grievous
tentation, then for my preaching, because I thought with my self, Thou have
stirred up all this tumult: in which tentation I have been oftentimes drowned
even to hell it self. p. 124. Because I have entered into this cause, now I
must look unto it, and of necessity say it is just: if you ask a reason,
Doctor Martin Luther will have it so, etc. I Doctor Martin Luther do say, that
this article, Faith alone without works does justify before God; the
Emperor, the Pope, the Cardinals, etc. shall suffer it to stand, and they
shall have hell fire for their labor. p. 125.

The Advertisement.
1. PRotestants do not bind themselves to all Luthers opinions, neither take
upon them to justify all his rash speeches, and whatsoever hastily dropped
from his pen. Popish professors do not tie themselves to any private Doctors
opinion among them. Luther was an excellent instrument in his time, yet had his
errors. We are no Lutherans, and it is not necessary for Protestants to
follow Luthers judgment in all things. Protestants justify not whatsoever
Luther has written.
We receive not our faith from Luther: but from whence Luther received
instruction, namely from the Scriptures, from thence also is our faith derived.
We honor the memory of so worthy a man, yet his erring footesteps we will not
trace him in; but say with Hierome: Non consueui eorum insultare erroribus,
quorum miror ingenia: Whose wit I commend, their errors will I not defend.

2. What if Luther be untruly alleged? whereof there is just suspicion,
because the Citer follows not the addition at Wittemberge of Luthers works,
but another at Ieane: wherein it is like the adversary has played the part of
a corrector, and made Luther speak according to their own sense. For some of
those books which he cites (as colloquium mensal.) I do not find extant in
the addition at Wittemberge, where it is most like the authentike copies of
Luthers works are kept. Therefore it is not unlike but they have used Luther,
as Gregory complained in his time: Alij tractatus nostros calumniantes, ea
sentire nos criminantur, Hom. 25. in Luc.
quae nunquam sensisse nos nouimus: Others cauilling at our tractates, do
accuse us to think that which we know, we never thought.

3. Those speeches wherein Luther is traduced, if they be interpreted with
favor, though the sound seem to be somewhat harsh, the sense is not hard. In
the two first he shows what temptations he had, Luthers tentations.
how he was troubled with many doubtful cogitations, and sometime even with
grief as it were plunged in hell; that he wished in his heart, that he had
never begun that trouble in the Church, and that his works were burned. As
though such tentations are not incident to the faithful servants of God: David
was sometime so perplexed, that he doubted of Gods promises, and thought that
all men were liars, Psalm. 116 11. that even the Prophets of God deceived him.
Saint Paul also had fightings without, and terrors within: 2. Cor. 7.5. It
should seem then to be a rare thing for popish professors to feel such
conflicts in their soul, seeing this fresh water soldier, that never entered
into the lists of these spiritual combats, finds fault with Luther herein.

In the third sentence objected, Luther does nothing else but show his constant
resolution of the truth, Luthers constancy.
which shall stand in despite of Emperor, Turk, Pope, Cardinals and all
adversaries. His peremptory profession thereof might have been better qualified
in terms, which I will not every where justify. But his meaning is good, that
the truth shall prevail, and have the upper hand: for, as Hierome well says,
Dialog. 1. aduers. pelagian.
Veritas laborare potest, vinci non potest: The truth may be blamed, but not
shamed. But as for your graceless term of [ Graceless Luther] I doubt not
but that he has least grace, that goes about to disgrace him whom God with
many excellent gifts had graced. These railing speeches are but like unto
Shemei his casting of stones at David, 2. Sam. 16.6.
wherewith in the end he hurt himself. And as Seneca well says, Lib. 2. ad
Serenum.
Ignominias and probra velut clamorem hostium ferat, and saxa sine vulnere
circa galeas trepidantia: These opprobrious words are like the cry of the
enemy a far off, and as stones that do fall down about our ears without
any hurt: So while this railing Rabsakeh uses no better weapons, we are well
enough; we hear him, but feel him not: he wounds his own credit, he
hurts not our cause. And we say to him, as a certain Rhodian to an
unshamefast man, that made great outcries; (...).
I regard not what you say, but that another keeps silence: We more respect
other men's reverent silence of Luther, then his rash loquacitie.

The second Inducement.
1. PRide, wine and women, are the originals of Apostacy: so was it in Luther.
If pride had not been, they had kept their vow of obedience: Vntr. 226.
if wine and riches had not been, they had kept the vow of poverty: if women
and wantonness had not been* they had kept the vow of chastity: But truth is
stronger then all, etc. p. 126.

2. The whole Christian world twenty times gathered together in general
Council, has given sentence with us: Vntr. 227.
many thousands of provincial Councels: all Kings, etc. all Popes, Fathers,
Schools, Universities, etc. all former heretics have approved it.

3. We have offered them all trials; Vntr. 228.
as great security and safe conduct, as Popes, Emperors and Kings could give,
to come to disputation. p. 127.

4. Their own scholars condemned them: Cranmer and Latimer exploded with
hissing and clapping of hands in Oxford. Vntr. 229.
We never had so much as a piece of promise for equality of disputation, etc.
The disputation in the first Parliament to their little glory: that in the
Tower, no man is ignorant how much it did disgrace them. p. 127.

The Advertisement.
1. THese three indeed are the pillars of popery. If pride were not, the Pope
would not have sought to lift up himself above Emperors and Kings, to tread
upon their necks, cause them to hold their stirrope, to kiss his foot: the
papal hierarchy would not refuse to submit it self to the civil authority.
If the desire of riches were not, the Pope would not so have pilled and polled
all Christian nations, with intolerable taxes of First fruits, annates,
tenthes, provisions, The Popes intolerable exactions. A florence is 4.
shillings 6. pence* Legatio Adriani 6. excus. Wittemberg. 1538.
Archbishops palles, Peter pence, and such like. The first fruits of
Bishoprikes in England amounted to the sum of 80000. florenes, that is almost
20000. pounds: and the value of the first fruits through Europe did arise to
the sum of 2460843. florenes, that is 553189. pounds or there about. If the
love of women and carnal desires had not bin, the popish crew would never have
condemned lawful marriage, to live in adultery, incest, fornication, openly to
maintain courtesans and strumpets, as is notoriously evident and practiced in
Rome: their Mass priests would not have corrupted virgins, detained wives and
daughters from their husbands and fathers, Fox. p. 860.
as the States of Germany complained in the Council of Norimberge.

These three then are the pillars of popery indeed (with the which Luther and
the Protestants are untruly slaundered) yet has the truth prevailed, according
the posie of Darius nobles. And whereas he would have this conclusion put under
the pillow of the Prince, and be awaked out of her dream, lest she should
sleep too long, etc. the truth is that Queen Elizabeth both awake and
asleep, while she lived was resolved of this conclusion for the truth, and
well perceived Popery to be grounded upon a sandy foundation; that outward
glory, commodity, pleasure and vanity were the chief pillars of that
religion. In this faith she lived, in this faith she now sleeps and rests
in the Lord, and shall be awaked in the last resurrection to receive the
endless reward of the same. And though Queen Elizabeth now sleeps, yet God
has raised up and awaked our gracious Sovereign to stand up in her place, and
to maintain the same truth. You may well put your conclusions under his pillow
when he sleeps: but when he awaketh, he will soon descrie, that your Popish
instructers are but night birds; your best reasons, dreams; and your religion,
darkness; and with Darius give sentence with the truth.

But of all other, this objection of pride, riches, wine and women was
unfittest to proceed from this Ignatian Friars mouth. For does he with his
fellows think to dance in a net? have we not been certified from their
companions and copesmates the Mass priests, that some of the Jesuits use to
read Lectures by night to the auditories of women, while their husbands
scratch their heads at home. They tell us of their rich apparel, Jesuits
fasting and chastity.
their riding in coaches, their stables of geldings, their expenses after 500.
pounds by the year: as has bin before showed more the^ once. Is not this now
a pretty vow of poverty and chastity, which these new vpstart Friars are entered
into? I say therefore with Hierome, Ignominia est Ihesum esurientem fartis
praedicare corporibus, Hieron. regul. monachor.
and ieiuniorum doctrinam per rubentes buccas, tumentiaque ora proferre: It is
a shame to preach of Christ's fasting with a pampred body, and to commend
abstinence with red cheeks and swollen face. Of all other of the Popish
profession it may be worst said of them, (...).
which Thucydides uttered of the Corinthians: That they were worthy to reprove
others.

2. Neither can he show us twenty general Councels in all: ( Bellarmine can
find but eighteen, and some of them not extant) neither is he able to produce
a thousand provincial Councels, nor half so many: Lib. 1. de Council. c. 5.
and both general and provincial Synodes are more against them, then with
them, as I have else where declared. Synops. pap. s.
Popes we yield them and heretics: the one their fathers, the other their
brethren. The ancient Fathers that lived within six hundredth years after
Christ, are against them. All schools and Universities never approved their
doctrine. The University of Oxford cleared Wickliffe of heresy: The
University of Prage favored John Husse: The most famous Academies in Europe
gave sentence with king Henry concerning his marriage, against the Pope. And at
this time Protestants neither in number, nor in fame of schools of learning
will give place to the Romanists.

3. What safe conduct you use to grant to the learned Protestants to come to
disputation, is evident by the example of John Husse and Hierome of Prage: the
first, notwithstanding his safe conduct granted by the Emperor Sigismund, was
unjustly put to death at the Council of Constance; the other could get none at
all.

4. True it is that Bishop Cranmer was entertained by the young students very
rudely, Popish manner of disputation.
with hissing and clapping of hands: but that showed their impudency, rather
then his impotency. That he deserved not to be hissed, his learned writings to
this day do sufficiently declare. But they disputed with him, as the high
Priests and Scribes did with Stephen; they gave a shout and stopped their
ears: Act. 7.5^. Act. 17.18.32. Augustine. breuit. and collation. collat. 3.
diei.
and as the Stoikes and Epicures disputed with Paul at Athens, railing upon
him, and mocking him. Thus the Donatists conferred with Augustine and other
Catholic Bishops: they with their outcries and exclamations made such a noise,
that the other could not proceed. And no other course do the Jesuits take at
this day in their disputations, seeking by their turbulent behauior and
Stouterlike voice to countenance their cause: as this last year Anno 1602.
appeared in a colloquie at Ratisbone between Hunnius with other ministers, Ex
Egidio Hunnio.
and Tannerus with other Jesuits. So that we may say of such disputers, as
Cicero of Orators: (...).
That they which use to exclaim, do betake them to clamorous outcries for want
of skill, as a lame man to his horse: even so hissing and clapping of hands in
a disputor, bewrays want of matter.

4. Our Chronicles indeed will tell, how little that disputation in the time of
the first Parliament, was to the glory of the popish sort, how perverse and
forward they were, and contemptuous to authority; that being appointed to
dispute in English, they would have it in Latin; and whereas they were to
begin, they utterly refused: and so through their wilfulnes the disputation
brake off. The conference in the Tower, to whose disgrace it tended, the report
thereof in print will sufficiently testify. They say it is good beating of a
proud man: but to dispute with a froward spirit, that will never yield nor
confess himself overcome, is a wearisome labor. Popish vain brags of their
disputations.
Thus these bragging Friars, if we will believe them, are always conquerours:
whereas, poor souls, they have been put to unreasonable and shameful foiles;
but that they set a good face upon it* as Thucydides said of Pericles; when he
was asked of Archidamus king of the Spartanes, which of them wrastled best: A
man, says he, can hardly tell: (...). Hieron. Occano.
for when I cast him down, he by saying he had no fall, persuades the
beholders, and so overcomes. Such Hierome speaks of: Nihil impudentius
arrogantia rusticorum, qui garrulitatem authoritatem putant, and in subiectum
sibi gregem tumidis sermonibus tonant: Nothing is more impudent then certain
arrogant Rustikes, which by brabling strive to have great authority, and
thunder out swelling words among their disciples and flock. And thus do these
bragging Friars boast of their disputations in corners, among their simple and
credulous scholars.

The third Inducement.
1. I Will plead by time, as Daniel did, it is the seuentieth year of our
desolation, since king Henry the eight began to impose this heavy burden upon
us. The year of Iubile is begun, when all exiles are to return, etc. p. 129.

2. Your Honors know what a general amity Pope Clement the eight has
concluded, etc. that which makes peace and unity with God and man is true
religion, that binds them together. vntr. 230.
p. 130. there is no religion wherein England can agree with any, because the
religion thereof is different from all: neither can any two protestant nations
have this peace together, because no two of them be of one religion. p. 131.

3. If we will agree in this point with Catholic nations, we shall agree with
God, vntr. 231.
with Angels (for the same is approved by them) with all glorious souls in
heaven, with patient Christians in Purgatory, we shall have peace with our
selves: We shall disagree with none but devils and damned spirits. p. 131.

4. If it be in your power to procure this atonement, and perform it, you
shall effect the most honorable thing this age has seen, etc. If you can
perform it and neglect it, though ye be no formal persecutors, yet because
you suffer others to do it, etc. except you will recall your minds, you are
like to taste of the same vengeance, etc. What is to be done, your Honors know:
what you will do, I commit to your honorable and prudent considerations; and
crave leave to give my lawful charge upon those impious and irreligious
enemies of Christ, and rebellious traitors to the holy Catholic Church, etc.

The Advertisement.
1. YOu must have Daniels cause, before you can have assurance of Daniels
deliverance. And you are somewhat too forward in your account: for the Papists
had no great captivity in Henry the eights time, while the Mass the very
marrow of Popery continued, and the whole body of the Roman doctrine, the
opinion of the supremacy excepted. And ye had beside, a breathing time in
Queen Mary's reign, such as that of Saul, who breathed out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. Act. 10.1. such a breathing, as I
trust ye shall never have again in England. I hope this was no time of your
captivity. And again you are somewhat too forward, to look for the reviving
of the papal kingdom so soon after 70. years: The long captivity of
Protestants in time past.
stay till you be equal to the captivity of protestants, that 7. times 70.
years endured the tyranny of your terrene god the Pope; as long as Israel
soiourned in Canaan and Egypt, 430. years, Exodus 12.40. and much longer: and
then after that time expired, lift up your heads if you can. But because you
plead prescription of 70. years, you shall have your mind: yet they shall not
be the seventy years determined for Iudaes deliverance: but the 65. years
(which want not many of seventy) which were limited for Ephraims destruction:
Within five and threescore years Ephraim shall be destroyed from being a
people. Isa. 7.8. And we trust in God that the proud idolatrous Ephramites of
Rome, according to this time, taking beginning from the first reformation in
England, shall have Ephraims portion, and their kingdom come to desolation.
Concerning your Popes Iubile, enjoy you the benefit thereof, get you packing
to Rome, and solace your selves there: England cares not for Iubile pardons,
nor for such paltrie pardoners, as ye are. Protestants have enjoyed through
Gods mercy, a full Iubile under the Gospel in King Edward and Queen
Elizabeth's happy reigns: The Protestants Iubile.
and now we trust begins another joyful Iubile under our noble King: and so
our hope is, that the Church of God under his M. and his royal posterity,
shall enjoy the profession of the truth, from Iubile to Iubile, till we all
come to celebrate an everlasting Iubile in heaven. The Pope has lately
solemnized his Iubile like as the Jews kept their Iubile, when Christ was put
to death, who brought deliverance to his Church, but destruction to the Jews
before the next Iubile came: So this Popes Iubile, The Popes ^^bile.
wherein they have confederate to persecute Christ and his members, is like to
be ominous to that blodie generation, and prosperous we hope to the church of
God. This Romish Iubile lately celebrated in new Babylon, may fall out to be
like Balthasars feast which he made in old Babylon; Dan. 5.
the destruction of the city followed the same night: to who^ fitly agrees
that verse of the Poet: Virgilius.
Namque vt supremam falsa inter gaudia noctem
Egerimus, nosti:
It was our last and only night,
That we thus spent in false delight.
So may this happily be the last popish Iubile: and this great solemnity may
end with a Sardonian laughter; (...).
according to the saying of the wise man: Pride goes before destruction, and
an high mind before the fall. Prou. 16.18.

2. If religion be the bond of peace, then can there be no sound peace between
the Church of God and the synagogue of Rome, which is declined and fallen away
from the true religion and service of God. The Popes peace we desire not, as we
fear not his curse: if he love quietness, protestants will not offend him; if
he seek trouble, they can requite him. But if Scotland be comprehended in this
league and amity (as among other nations, this Popes muster-maister has
numbered it) I hope England shall have a share, that is now one with Scotland.

It is untrue, that England can agree with none in religion: it accords with
Scotland, Geneua, Heluetia, Belgia, with the protestants of France: some
diversity in external right makes no difference in religion. And as untrue it
is, that no two protestant Princes can have this peace together: seeing it is
most manifest, that for 45. years there was a firm peace between England and
Scotland, being united in religion; such as for so long a time was not known
for five hundred years, while both these kingdoms professed popery. And
indeed it is a rare thing to see one protestant Prince offend another with
war: but it is very common for Princes and States addicted to the popish
profession, to wage battle one with another: France, Spain, Division and
enmity among popish Princes and kingdoms.
Naples, Millaine, the Venetians, Geanes, Florentines, Romans, have often one
with fierce war assaulted another. As we shall read among the Paganes, how in
Graecia the Spartans, Athenians, Corinthians, Thebanes, Argiues, Megarensians,
with other cities, did with cruel war one afflict another: 2. Chron. 15.5
so that as the Scripture says: In that time, there was no peace to him that
did go out and go in, but great troubles were to all the inhabitants of the
earth. Such is the peace among the Romanists, neither sound and in truth, nor
of any long continuance: but like unto Judas kiss, so is the Popes peace and
amity, as Ambrose says: Amoris pignore scelus implet, Lib. 3. de spir. cap.
18.
pacis instrumento odia serit: By a token of love he works mischief, and by
an instrument of peace sows hatred. So his unholy Fatherhood faineth peace if
it be for his advantage, and breaks it at his pleasure, if it may serve his
turn better: as Eugenius the fourth caused Ladislaus to break the truce made
with Amurathes the great Turk, Fox. p 736. cap. 1.
to the great loss and disadvantage of all Christendom. Wherein the Pope very
well resembles Cleomenes the Spartane King, who having made truce with the
Argiues for certain days, set upon them the third night after and slew them:
alleging for himself, that he had made truce for days, (...).
not for nights.

3. Popish religion can neither make us at peace with God, whom it robs of
his due honor, making other Mediators, inuocating Saints, worshipping idols:
nor with Angels, Popish religion reconcileth not to God, nor to the Saints.
who refuse to be worshipped, Reu. 22.8: nor with Saints, who while they lived,
refused that adoration which is now ascribed unto them in popery, as Peter
would not suffer Cornelius to worship him. Act. 10.26. To the souls imagined to
be in purgatory, it offers wrong; keeping them in torment, that by the
Scriptures are to rest from their labors. Reu. 14.13. Neither can popish
professors have peace in themselves, seeing they deny justification only by
faith, by which we are at peace with God. Romans 5.1.

That religion agrees with none but devils: for it maintains lying wonders,
which are by the working of Satan. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. It forbids to marie, and
to abstain from meats, which are the doctrine of devils: 1. Tim. 4.1.3. It
persecuteth and casts into prison the servants of Christ, which is the work
of Satan. Reu. 2.10. Popery therefore which derogateth so much from God,
cannot reconcile us, or make us agree with God: superstition does not draw us
nearer to God, but makes us further off. Dialog. 2. aduers. Pelagian.
Hierome well says: hoc nobis praestat Dei timor, vt omnes alios contemnamus
timores: The fear of God does make us to contemn all other fears. But in
popery, beside the fear of God they teach to be afraid of Saint Peter, Saint
Paul, Saint Mary, of purgatory; and they do accumulate and heap together a
thousand fears beside. Seneca well says: Superstitio insanus timor: amandos
timet; quos colit, violat: quid interest, vtrum Deos neges, vel infames?
Superstition is a mad error: it fears those that are to be loved; whom it
worshippeth, it violateth: and what difference I pray you, to deny or to
defame God? Thus in popery God is violated and defamed, when other Mediators
are assigned, as though God of himself were not both willing and able to hear
us. Xenophanes wittily derided the Egyptians that howled and cried in their
temples: If they be Gods, (...).
why do you lament them? if men, why do ye sacrifice unto them? This
Philosopher would have condemned popish superstition, which prescribes the
spiritual sacrifice of prayers to be made to men and women departed.

4. Their honors are ready to procure atonement, if you will be reconciled to
the Church of God: but if you would have peace made with the Antichristian
synagogue, it is impossible: Nulla pax impijs: There is no peace with the
wicked, says the Lord, Isa. 48.22. I may say unto them with Hierome: Nihil
grande est pacem voce praetendere, Hierom. ad* Theophil.
and opere destruere: It is no great matter to pretend peace in word, and to
destroy it in deed: so these fellows call for peace and atonement, and yet be
the only enemies thereto. Archidamus being made an vmpire between two,
brought the^ to the Church, and charged the^ not to go thence till they were
made friends, and the strife ended. So, (...).
if they will have this controversy at an end, the only way is for the^ to
resort to the Church, and submit themselves to the true worship and service of
God: and herein to follow the example of that honorable person, who having
first reconciled himself to the religion, does now enjoy the favor of his
Prince.

But if ye Ignatians and seditious Seminaries still proceed in your factions
and disloyal courses, his Majesty and their Honors restraining your stirring
spirits, are no persecutors of you, but prosecutors of justice against you.
Augustine well says to the Donatistes that likewise complained of persecution:
Tribunus non est persecutor vester, sed persecutor persecutoris vestri, id est,
erroris vestri: the magistrate is not your persecutour, but a persecutor of
your persecutor, that is, of your error. Your vain threatenings of tasting of
the same vengeance, are like to fall upon your own head: as he that rolleth a
stone, it shall return upon him. Pr. 26.27. like as railing Rabsakehs threats
against Hesekiah did first light upon himself. As protestants are not fond of
your love, so neither do they fear your threats. This is popish Divinity to
threaten Magistrates, whereas they are to be prayed for, not to be prated upon;
to be blessed, not cursed. Ambrose well says: Coactus repugnare non noui,
potero flere, Orat. in Auxent.
potero gemere: etc. Though I be forced I will not resist; I can weep, I can
mourn: he says not, he will curse, or threaten.

Their Honors as they are wise, do know what is to be done; and as they are
godly and just, will do as they have done, maintain truth, and seek to root
out superstition. Cyrus was wont to say: That no man was fit to rule, if he
were not better then they which are ruled. (...).
Their Honors as they are in authority and rule above others, so in piety and
zeal I trust will seek to go before them.

But more impious and irreligious to Christ, and rebellious traitors to Church
and Commonwealth did never any land bear, then this mischievous Ignatian
generation of vipers and cockatrice brood, as England and France have had
sufficient experience. Let him give his charge when he will, (...).
we have a discharge for him, and will charge him afresh again. As Scipio said
to a young man, showing a goodly shield: That it became a Roman, to trust
more to his right hand, then to his left: that is, to know how to offend as
well as defend, to fight as to fence: so shall they find that English
protestants are not only ready with Paul to shake off the venomous viper,
but with Aarons rod also to devour the counterfeiters rods: not to keep off
their force only, but to force them again: not to repel, but to reply; not
to ward only but to wound. And so I end with that saying of Hierome: Si pacem
desideras, arma depone; blandienti acquiescere possum, non timeo comminantem;
sit inter nos vna fides, pax illico sequetur: If you desire peace, lay aside
your armor: I can yield to entreating, but I fear not threatening: let there
be one faith between us, and peace will soon follow: But otherwise, as he
again says: Si ista est causa discordiae, mori possum, tacere non possum: but
if difference of faith be cause of discord, I may dye sooner then hold my peace.

(...).

Errata.
In the title page read Romanists: latin epist. p. 3. l. 3. in the margin.
r. epist. lib* 6. l. 21. r. (...).

In the pref. p. 2. l. 11. r. Hiero. l. 24 r. Leontius. p. 6. l. 7. in marg. r.
(...). p. 7. l. 27. put out (...). p. 9. l. 23. r. Herodicus. p. 10. l. 5. r.
Herodicus. p. 14. l. 2. (...). p. 15. l. 15. r. Higinus. In the 2. preface p.
3. l. 32. r. known.

In the Book. P. 14. l. 1. r. Kettistes not many, pretenders etc. p. 40. l.
10. r. nor. p. 41. l. 25. r. be. p. 45. l. 34. r. 1439. p. 63. l. 8. r. more.
p. 77. l. 8. r. 10. thousand. p. 85. l. 13. r. tales. p. 121. l. 27. marg. r.
(...). p. 125. l. 4. r. treason. p. 157. l. 1. r. an 150. p. 165. l. 19. r.
Attilas. l. 37. r. menacing. p. 173. l. 10. r. Sanctius. p. 203. l. 32. r.
badger. p. 212. l. 25. r. Epicurus. p. 249. l. 13* r. blasphemers. p. 256. l.
1. r. Magdeburge. l. 9. Leiden. l. 35. r. received p. 258. l. 4. marg. r*
(...). p. 162. l. 5. r. contestation. p. 263. l. 29. r. Papists. p. 265. l. 12.
r. Porphirie. p. 267. l. 12. and 17. r. edition* p. 272. l. 3. r. Stentorlike.


