A TRVE RELATION OF THOSE SAD AND LAMENTABLE Accidents, which happened in and
about the Parish Church of Withycombe in the Dartmoores, in Devonshire, on
Sunday the 21. of October last, 1638.

PSALM. 46. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has
made in the earth.

ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of George Miller (1601-46) depicting an anchor
held by a pair of hands from the clouds

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for R: Harford, and are to be sold at his shop in
Queenes-head-alley in Paternoster Row at the guilt Bible, 1638.

A TRVE RELATION OF those most strange and lamentable Accidents, happening in
the Parish Church of Withycombe in Devonshire on Sunday the 21. of October.
1638.
Christian Readers,
GODS visible Judgments, and terrible remonstrances (which every morning are
brought to light) coming unto our knowledge, should be our observation and
admonition, that thereby the inhabitants of the earth may learn
Righteousness, Ephesians. 3. 5.
for to let them pass by us (as water runs by our doors) unobserved; argues
too much regardlesnesse of GOD in the way of his Judgments: Isa. 26. 9, 11.
not to suffer them to sink into our affections, and to prove as so many
terrible warning pieces, which are shot off from a watch Tower, to give notice
of an enemies approach, to awaken and affright us; are but a means to harden
our hearts against the Lord, and to awaken his Justice to punish us yet more:
But to hear and fear and to Paena paucoru^ terror omnium.
do wickedly no more; to search our hearts and amend our ways is the best use
that can be made of any of GODS remarkable terrors manifested among us. When
GOD is angry with us, it ought to be our wisdom to meet him, and make peace
with him: And where we see legible Characters of his power and wrath; to
learn to spell out his meaning touching our selves; to leave off all busy,
malicious, causlesse, and unchristianly censuring of others, and to turn in
upon our selves, remembering, Vel paenitendum, vel pereundum, Except we repent,
Luke 13. 5.
we shall likewise perish. Certain it is that we do in vain expect
immunity from GODS Judgments by sleighting, or contemning them, or increasing
in our sinnings against him. If Pharaoh by the terror of thundering and
lightning was so affrighted that he says to Moses, Entreat the Lord (for it
is enough) that there be no more Exo 9 28.
mighty thundrings and Hail. And if Caligula, out of the fear of thunder,
would run under his bed to hide himself: How much more should we Christians
learn to fear and tremble before the most mighty GOD, whose voice only can
shake the mountains and rend the rocks, and divide the flames of Psalm. 29.
fire; rends Churches, amazeth, and strikes dead at his pleasure the sons of
men? as the Prophet David says, He does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and
Earth, He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, and makes
lightnings for the rain, and brings the wind out of the treasures of the
earth, so unsearchable is his Wisdom, and his ways past finding out. I say,
this should awe and humble our hearts before the LORD, rising up unto more
perfection in godliness, doing unto our GOD, more and better service then ever
hitherto we have done, reverencing and sanctifying his dreadful Name in our
hearts: especially when his Judgments break in upon men, even in his own
house, mingling their blood with their sacrifices, and that in a most terrible
manner smiting, and wounding, and killing, as in this ensuing Relation may
appear: which for the suddenness and strangeness, and in a manner
miraculous, considering the circumstances thereof, I believe few Ages can
parallel, or produce the like. The Lord teach thee to profit thereby, that it
may be as a Sermon preached to thee from Heaven by the Lord himself.

Upon Sunday the 21. of October last, In the Parish Church of Withycombe in the
Dartmoores in Devonshire, there fell in time of Divine Service a strange
darkness, increasing more and more, so that the people there assembled could
not see to read in any book, and suddenly in a fearful and lamentable
manner, a mighty thundering was heard, the rattling whereof did answer much like
unto the sound and report of many great Cannons, and terrible strange
lightening therewith, greatly amazing those that heard and saw it, the
darkness increasing yet more, till they could not (in the interim) see one
another; the extraordinary lightening came into the Church so flaming, that
the whole Church was presently filled with fire and smoke, the smell whereof
was very loathsome, much like unto the sent of brimstone, some said they saw at
first a great fiery ball come in at the window and pass thorough the Church,
which so affrighted the whole Congregation that the most part of them fell
down into their seats, and some upon their knees, some on their faces, and
some one upon another, with a great cry of burning and scalding, they all
giving up themselves for dead, supposing the last Judgment day was come, and
that they had been in the very flames of Hell.

The Minister of the Parish, Master George Lyde, being in the Pulpit or seat
where prayers are read, however he might be much astonished hereat, yet
through GODS mercy had no other harm at all in his body, but to his much
grief and amazement heard, and afterward beheld the lamentable accidents; and
although himself was not touched, yet the lightening seized upon his poor
Wife, fired her ruff and linen next to her body, and her clothes; to the
burning of many parts of her body in a very pitiful manner. And one Mistress
Ditford sitting in the pew with the Ministers wife, was also much scalded, but
the maid and child sitting at the pew door had no harm. Beside, another woman
adventuring to run out of the Church, had her clothes set on fire, and was not
only strangely burnt and scorched, but had her flesh torn about her back
almost to the very bones. Another woeman had her flesh so torn and her body so
grievously burnt, that she died the same night.

Also one Master Hill a Gentleman of good account in the Parish, sitting in his
seat by the Chancell, had his head suddenly smitten against the wall, through
the violence whereof he died that night, no other hurt being found about his
body; but his son sitting in the same seat had no harm. There was also one
man more, at the same instant, of whom it is particularly related, who was
Warriner unto Sir Richard Reynolds, his head was cloven, his skull rent into
three pieces, and his brains thrown upon the ground whole, and the hair of
his head, through the violence of the blow at first given him, did stick fast
unto the pillar or wall of the Church, and in the place a deep bruise into the
wall as if it were shot against with a Cannon bullet.

Some other persons were then blasted and burnt, and so grievously scalded and
wounded, that since that time they have died thereof; and many other not like to
recover, notwithstanding all the means that can be procured to help them.
Some had their clothes burnt and their bodies had no hurt, and some on the
contrary, had their bodies burnt, and their clothes not touched, and some
their stockings and legs burnt and scalded, and their outward buskings not one
thread singed. But it pleased GOD yet in the midst of judgment to remember
mercy, sparing some and not destroying all, yet very many were sorely scalded
in diverse parts of their bodies, and as all this hurt was done upon the bodies
of men and women, so the hurt also that was then done unto the Church was
remarkable.

There were some Seats in the Body of the Church turned upside down, and yet
they which sat in them had little or no hurt; also a Boy sitting on a seat
had his hat on, and near the one halse thereof was cut off, and he had no
hurt, And one man going out at the Chancell door, his Dog running out before
him, was whirled about toward the door and fell down stark dead: at the
sight whereof his Master stepped back within the door, and GOD preserved him
alive. Also the Church it self was much torn and defaced by the thunder and
lightning; and thereby also a beam was burst in the midst, and fell down
between the Minister and Clarke and hurt neither; and a weighty great stone,
near the Foundation of the Church is torn out and remooved, and the steeple
it self is much rent, and there where the Church was most rent, there was
least hurt done to the people, and not any one was hurt either with the wood or
stone, but a maid of Manaton, which came thither that afternoon to see some
friends, whom Master Frynd the Coroner by circumstances, supposed she was killed
with a stone, considering of her mortal wound, and a great stone lying by her.
There were also stones thrown from the Tower and carried about a great
distance from the Church, as thick as if a hundred men had been there
throwing, and a number of them of such weight and bigness, that a very strong
man could hardly lift them. Also one Pinnacle of the Tower was torn down and
broke through into the Church.

Moreover the Pillar against which the Pulpit stands, being but newly whited,
is now by this means turned black and sulphry. Furthermore, one man that stood
in the Chancell, with his face toward the Bellfrey, observed as it were the
rising of dust or lime, in the lower end of the Church, which suddenly (as with
a puff of wind) was whirled up and cast into his eyes, so that he could not
see in twelve hours after; but now his sight is restored, and he has no
other hurt. The terrible lightening being past, all the people being in a
wonderful maze, so that they spoke not one word, by and by one Master Raph
Rouse, Vintener in the Town, stood up, saying these words, Neighbors, in the
name of God shall we venture out of the Church, to which M. Lyde answering,
said, it is best to make an end of prayers, for it were better to die here then
in another place, but they looking about them, and seeing the Church so
terribly rent and torn over their heads, durst not proceed in their public
devotions, but went forth of the Church.

And as all this was done within the Church, and unto the Church; so there were
other accidents without the Church; of which I will give you a touch. There was
a Bowling-alley near unto the Churchyard, which was turned up into pits and
heaps, in manner almost as if it had been plowed. At the same time also at
Brixston near Plymmouth, there fell such store of Hail, and such
Haile-stones, that for quantity they were judged to be as big as ordinary
Turkies eggs; some of them were of five, some of six, and others of seven
ounces weight.

We are also certainly informed that at the same time, as near as it can be
guessed, there fell out the like accident unto the Church at Norton in
Somersetshire, but as yet we hear of no persons hurt therein: Also it is
related by a Gentleman who traveled in those parts at that time, he being
since come to London, that where he was the lightening was so terrible, fiery
and flaming, that they thought their houses at every flash were set on fire, in
so much that their horses in the stable were so affrighted that they could not
rule them.

All which most sad and lamentable Spectacles were done (as it were) in a
moment of time.

This is the Sum of those dismal ^ccidents and terrible examples happen^^g
in the place aforesaid, as it has been carefully extracted out of the letters
of Ministers and other men of quality and good account and credit living not
only in the Parish of Withicombe, but in the adjoining Parishes and places,
and by those that had the full relation from Master Lyde his own mouth. And the
maine drift in the publication of this great ludgement, is for thy humiliation
and edification, not only to acquaint thee with the great and mighty works of
Gods Power and lustice, who in a moment can do mighty things to us, and arm
the creatures against us at his own pleasure, but also to moove pity and
compassion in us toward our Brethren who were patients therein. Which relation
you can difficultly read without sighs, nor understand without tears. I know
it is the fashion of too too many to question and talk, and make things of
this nature, but a nine days wonder: But let us not deceive our selves any
longer, but consider, we have been lookers on a great while, and others have
been made our examples, and felt the smart at home and abroad, whilst we have
gone free; but we know not how soon our turns and changes may come; these
accidents might as well have happened to us as them; the LORD therefore in much
mercy fit us both for the worst of times and the best of Ends. I end all with
that prayer in our Letany, commending thee and this to the blessing of the
Almighty.

From lightening and tempest, from Plague, Pestilence and Famine, from Battle
and murder, and from sudden death. Good LORD deliver us. FINIS.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES. R. P. Ep. Land. Cap. Domest.


