THE DELIGHTS of the Saints. A most comfortable Treatise, of grace and peace,
and many other excellent points. Whereby men may live like Saints on earth, and
become true Saints in heaven. First delivered in a Sermon preached at Paul's
Cross the second day of December, being the second Sunday of the Parliament.
And in other Sermons within the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, London. By
GRYFFITH WILLIAMS, Doctor of Divinity, and Parson of Lhan-Lhechyd. The Contents
are set down after the Epistle to the Reader.

Jehouae liberatori.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at the sign of the
pide Bull near Saint Austins gate. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Lincoln; Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, grace and peace.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
TO Edify, has been ever the height of my ambition: hic scripto, ille voce
praedicat, says Clemens Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom.
Alexandrinus; a man may edify as well by writing as by preaching. I have ever
affected both; and both mine, I acknowledge, are like my self, who God
knows, and I confess, am full of imperfections, quia animarum susceperim
curam, qui meam non sufficerem custodire, and factum est, vt docere inciperem
prius quam discere, as S. Bern. speaks. Yet I presumed to present this little
Treatise of grace and peace unto your Honors view: (not to seek for any
shelter, for what is good herein, it will defend it self, and what sauoreth of
mine infirmity, I desire it may be pardoned of all, and not patronized by any)
but only to testify my humble thankfulness, for those manifold favors which
I have received from your Lordship, who may justly claim the same interest in
me, as Saint Paul did in Philemon, thou owe unto me, even thy self: for you
preferred me to my Tutor in the University, you furthered my entrance into the
Ministry, and after I had labored, not one night with the Apostles, but many
days and nights, and got nothing but afflictions and puritannicall hatred in
every place; your Lordship was my chiefest comfort, the means to help me to
all that little means I have. And your last most honorable and comfortable
words and promise to continue your love unto me (together with my thrice
honorable, and ever truly loved Lord and Master and Mistress, the Earl of
Montgomerie, and his most truly religious Ladies loving respect unto me) have
revived my dejected spirits, and given life again unto my fainting studies: In
regard of which, and many others, your great favors unto me, I thought my self
obliged, not only by my daily private prayers unto God for your Lordship, but
also by some public testimony, to declare my most humble thankfulness, and
dutiful affection unto your Honor. I confess this is unworthy of your
acceptance, but seeing it is the best my mean condition can afford, I hope
your wonted love to me, and my ever ready service and dutiful affection unto
you, will excuse my boldness, and assure your Honor, that I am one of those
many, which will ever heartily pray, that God, the great rewarder, who has
most graciously blessed you, and made you great, would still preserve and keep
you in the favor of himself, and of your King, to the glory of Gods great
name, the further increase of your own honor, and the good of all godly men.
And so most humbly craving pardon for my boldness, and taking leave, I rest

Your Honors most truly affected in all duty and service, GR. WILLIAMS.

TO THE THRICE Honored Sr. JOHN WIN, Knight and Baronet, to his Right
Worshipful Son, Sir RICHARD WIN, attendant in Ordinary upon the Prince his
Grace, and one of the Gentlemen of his Privy Chamber, and to his two Sons in
Law, those worthy Knights, Sir Roger Mostynne, and Sir John Bodvell, grace be
unto you, and peace, etc.
HONORED SIR,
THose many, great, daily favors of your Worship unto me, ever since I came
from my Honorable Lord and Master, the Earl of Montgomeries service, unto
your parts (which I profess have been my chiefest encouragement of continuing
like Naboth at Ahabs gate) and the pious practice of your Worship in all your
actions; such daily, private, and public prayers in your house, that meals
are not more frequent then prayers, such care, not only to provide spiritual
food, the preaching of Gods word, to those hungry and thirsting Christians
(that do gape and long for the same, as the dry ground does for rain in the
time of drought) in your Parish Church, and Market town of Lhan Rwste, every
second market day, but also by your own continual example, of coming, and
never missing to come, your self, (while your health permits you) and calling
others, to hearken unto that divine exercise, for the furtherance of the same.
And then such kind and loving entertainment of us Prophets and the Prophets
children at your table, where we have conuiuium theologicum: and are most
commonly able to make a Jury of Ministers upon any controuersiall point of
Divinity, so as I am sure in Wales none, in England I think few have the like:
and such a desire to have all the poor ignorant people of that country
instructed in the Catechism and principles of Christian religion, and many
more such like fruits of grace. And likewise the worthy service unto your
King, and the great good that you do unto your country, by the reconciling of
many variances, the punishing of lewd offenders, maintaining the public peace
and tranquillity of all, and especially the releeuing of so many poor as you
do, both at your doors, and by your purse, for which you have so many prayers
and intercessors: and impossible est multorum preces non exaudiri (as S.
Chrysostom speaks.)

I say these things, and many like fruits of grace and peace, that I might
justly speak of, would prove me to be unthankful, and unworthy of your love,
and indeed unmindful of my duty to God and his Church, if I did not
acknowledge those many kindnesses, that I have received from your Worship, and
likewise set down some of those fruits of piety, and good works, that you do
both in Church and Commonwealth, to be a pattern unto your brethren, to be
imitated herein, and especially to those three worthy Knights, your son and
sons in law, and all the rest of your children and posterity, which God has
blessed, and blessed them all (I doubt not but for your sake, and your most
mild and virtuous Lady, who brought a blessing unto your house) equal in
grace, in virtue, and in all fair carriage, to the best man's children that I
do know; that when they see not you, when you do see the face of God in
glory, they may ever see the true records of your piety and practice, for
their honor and pattern for imitation: for howsoever I, dust and ashes, am
nothing, of none account, and shall return to nothing, yet I hope I may say of
this my poor labors of verity, as the Poet said of his labors of vanity,
that -- nec Iouis ira, nec ignis, Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.

And therefore I presumed out of my unfeigned love, to insert your honored name
in the frontispice of this tract. Accept it as the token of a thankful heart;
for though you may have many greater friends, yet will I ever rest in the
number of your truest and faithfullest friends,

At your service, wholly to be commanded, GR. WILLIAMS.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Gentle and Christian Reader,
Must confess this little Treatise, though it was not in a short time
composed, (for I preached it all in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, in my
ordinary lectures there) yet came it in haste to be printed; for after I had
preached the chief heads of most part of it at Paul's Cross, it was requested
for the Press, and I had not time lambere foetum, to ouersee it again as I
would: and because my books and all my notes (save only a few scattering
papers that I brought with me) were far from me, almost two hundred miles
from London, I was feign to let it pass without any diligent search for the
quotations either of the Scripture places, or of Fathers, save only what I bore
in memory, and what were in my notes I brought with me. And by reason of my
absence from the Press. I find many faults committed in the printing, I
gathered some of them together, and I pray thee (sweet Christian brother) take
thy pen and mend them, and where thou find any other, do the like, and I
will take it kindly at thy hands, and my prayers shall be ever ready for thee.
I hope the matter will prove profitable, and that is my greatest desire. For I
take God to witness, who is fidelissimus testis, the most faithful witness,
that my aim has been always non scire vt scirem, nec scientiam vendere, not
for any gain, either of credit or of profit, but for the gain of souls,
which is vberrimus quaestus, the greatest gain in the world, to study and
preach, and to do all that lies in me, to discharge my duty; and therefore I
ever affected verum magis quam verba, soundness of matter rather then
niceness of words. If any man say I did but collect the same out of other men's
works: I say so too. And I wish, he that says so, would do so too: quia
facilis est obliuio boni. I gathered my stones out of many quarries, but I
composed my frame my self. And I rejoice in this, that I deliver what I
learned, and not what I invented, as Lyrinensis speaks. To the censures of
maleuolent minds, I do expose my self. Let them go on; say what they will:
Ego sic viuam vt illis fides non habeatur, I hope God will give me grace; to
fear him, and not them: and I hope the godly Reader of this little Tract of
mine, will find some profit by it; for the most necessary, and the most
frequent points of Divinity, that do meet us almost in every passage of the
Scripture, are here fully handled. Scarce any Text of the New Testament can be
found, but some part of this Treatise will afford some matter fit for some
part thereof What profit it will bring, I leave it to the event: If none, I
hope God will esteem my labors non ex euentu, sed ex affectu, not according
to what it did, but according to what I desire it should do: so praying to my
good God for thee, and for all men, and desiring thee and all Saints to pray
for me, I rest,

Thy true brother in Jesus Christ, GR. WILLIAMS.

The chief Contents.
Controuersiall points.
1 OF the will of God. 2 Of universal grace. 3 Of the certainty of our
estate. 4 Of the perseverance of the Saints. 5 Of our justification freely by
grace. 6 Of the Author of sin, and punishments. 7 Of intercession for us. 8
Of praying unto Saints.
Moral points.
1 OF the afflicted estate of the Saints. 2 Of the love of God, and the extent
of it. 3 Of a twofold calling. 4 Of the true Saints in a threefold respect. 5
Of holiness of life. 6 Of the necessity and excellency of grace. 7 Of each
kind of peace, and how had: and of each kind of war, handled at large. 8 Of
the Author of all goodness. 9 Of the misery and infirmity of man. 10 Of the
word, God, and the four things it signifies. 11 Of Father, and the manifold
comforts thereof. 12 Of Lord, and his fourfold properties. 13 Of Jesus, and
how he does save us. 14 Of Christ: and how, King, Priest, and Prophet. 15 Of
five Christian Sacrifices. And many other points.
Good Reader, by reason of my absence from the Press, many faults escaped in
the printing: I pray thee mend these with thy pen, and the rest where thou
meetest them.
PAge 50. line 22. read (...). p. 56. l. 5. r. fraudaberis a victoria. p. 92.
l. 1. r (...), p. 221. l. 9. r. Hubertus. p. 244. blot out the 15. and 16.
lines. page 247. lin. 25. r. peacetakers p. 248. l. 8. r. effect p. 248. l. 20.
r. extumuit. p. 254. l. 27. read Drances. p. 262. l. 5. r. Therons. p. 264. l.
18. r. silice. p. 334. l. 8. read goodness. p. 343. l. 3. r. scori^. p. 345.
l. 4. r. vermium. p. 367. l. 9. r. and not equality. p. 420. l. 11. read
impossible.

THE DELIGHTS OF THE SAINTS.
ROMANS 1. 7. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, called, Saints; grace be to
you, and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IN this verse is set down unto us the Desires and Delights of the Saints; the
desire of S. Paul, and delight of Christians: and therefore as Titus Vespasian
was called deliciae generis humani, the delight of humane kind; so the
contents of this my text may be more fitly termed Solatia Sanctorum, The joy
and solace of Saints. Jupiter ambrosia satur est, est nectare plenus, says
Persius: but neither the Poets ambrosia, nor Homers Moly, nor Plinies
Centauriae, that preserve men (as they say) from all lustful enchantments, can
be so delightful to the sons of men, as grace and peace are to the Saints of
God: for as he that finds the stone of Thracia is never after troubled; so he
that finds grace and peace can never after be discontented. What therefore the
Apostle wished unto all them, I wish the same unto all you: i. grace and peace
from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherein I observe two things.
1. The Saints described to whom the Apostle wishes these blessings. 2. The
blessings themselves wherewith the Saints are delighted, are here expressed.
First, the Saints are described three ways.

1. From the number which the Apostle means, all Saints. 2. From the place
where the Saints inhabit, in Rome. 3. From their proper differences whereby
they are distinguished. And they are 3. viz: 1. Their dilection. 2. Their
vocation. 3. Their sanctification.

Secondly, the desire of the Apostle, and the delights of the Saints are
expressed:

1. From the number of blessings requested, and they be two, 1. Grace. 2. Peace.
2. From the fountain from whence they flow: i. From God the Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ.
Of these, by the assistance of God, in order.

First, touching the number to whom the Apostle wishes these blessings, two
things are to be observed;

1. Declaratio amoris: the manifestation of the Apostles love. How Ministers
should love their people.
2. Restrictio gratiae: the restriction of the grace of God.
1. In that he writes to all, and wishes grace and peace to all Saints, he
shows how largely his love extended it self to the Romans, quod effuso animo
eos omnes complectitur, says Bucer. in hunc locum.
Bucer, he loved all, remembered all, and excepted none of all: a special point
required in Gods Ministers.

S. Augustine tells us Aug. de Doct. Christ. li. 3. ca. 10.
that nihil praecipit Deus nisi charitatem, nihil culpat nisi cupiditatem; God
commands nothing but charity, and forbids nothing but cupiditie. It is
therefore necessary in all, especially in us: for if we could speak with the
tongues of men and Angels, i. so many languages as men use to speak, more then
Mithridates could, that had 22. languages, as Volateran Volateran. li. 17.
says; and so divinely and truly as the Angels of God, more mellifluously then
Origin, cuius ex ore non tam verba quam mella fluere videntur, out of whose
mouth the honey did seem to flow, as the Magdeburgenses out of Vincentius
Magd. cent. 3. col. 269.
do report; yet would our preaching be no better then sounding brass, or
tinckling cymbals: for when our auditors are not persuaded we teach them out of
charity, we can never persuade them to believe the verity: but as Theocritus
says, (...): Theocrit. (...).
Quae minime sunt pulchra, en pulchra videntur amanti, every thing comes well
from him to whom we are well affected. And therefore what S. Augustine says of
every Christian, I may truly say of every Preacher: Vniuersa inutiliter habet,
qui vnum illud quo vniuersis vtatur non habet, He has all things in vain that
has not charity whereby he may rightly use all things. I wish therefore with
all my heart, that all we Preachers would study what lies in us, to lay aside
all maliciousness, all suits and contentions, whereby our Ministry is made
unfruitful, and live in love and peace with all men; whereby, I assure my
self, we should purchase more spiritual gain by love, then all the wealth
of the world would be unto us, that we should get by Law.

2. In that he writes to all beloved The restriction of saving grace. Gorram
in hunc locum.
of God, called Saints: it shows the restriction of grace: fidelibus tantum
and non alijs, to the faithful only, and to none else, says Gorram: Non Romae
simpliciter manentibus, sed Deo duntaxat dilectis; Not to all the inhabitants
of Rome, but to all the Saints that were in Rome, says Theophylact; and so
Theoph in hunc locum.
S. Chrysostom. also, and all the rest of the Fathers (qui dictorum
intelligentiam expectant ex verbis potius quam imponunt, (as S. Hillarie says
in another case) Hilar. de Trin. l. 1.
which rather seek the true meaning of Gods Spirit from the words, then impose
a false gloss upon the text to corrupt the truth) do from hence collect a
restriction of grace: to the Saints of God, and not to the sons of Belial.

Even so the Prophet Esaias, calling Esaias 55. 1.
every one that thirsted to come to the waters, means none but those that
thirsted: And our Savior inuiting all that were weary and heavy laden, to
come unto Matthew. 11. vlt.
him to be eased, means none but those that were weary: and the like we find
almost in every passage of the Scriptures.

This restriction therefore of Gods grace does sufficiently confute Pelagius,
Hemingius, Huberus, and all the rest of the Arminian brood touching the
doctrine of universal grace; who say that God would have all men to be saved,
and therefore gave his Son to die for all, and so offers saving grace unto
all: that all men might be saved if they would them selves believe in Christ,
and persevere in faith according to the condition of the Evangelical promises:
and do further understand these Evangelical promises to be so offered and
indefinitely left in the power of man, as that he may either of his own will
receive them and be saved, or reject them and be condemned.

But for the fuller understanding of this one point, I will examine these two
points:

1. Whether God by his absolute will would have all men to be saved. 2. Whether
he gave Christ Jesus to die for all men that they might be saved.
To the First, I answer negatiuely.

To the Second, affirmatively.

Of the first I say then, it is not the absolute Whether God would have all men
saved.
will of God that all men should be saved, or have saving grace given unto
them: for if it were, I demand the reason why they are not saved? for,
Voluntati eius quis restitit? Who has Romans 9.
ever resisted his will?

If they say, that the cause hereof is not in the will of God that offers
grace, but in the frowardness of man's will that refuses grace: I answer with
S. Augustine, that Sic velle and nolle, in Aug. de corrept. and gratia, cap. 7.
cap. 14.
volentis and nolentis est potestate, vt diuinam voluntatem non impediat, and
diuinam potestatem non superet. So to will or nill, is in the power of him that
wills or nilleth, as that it neither hinders the divine will of God, nor
especially surmount the power of God.

For otherwise, it were to make the will of God depend upon the will of man,
and to subordinate the first cause unto the second, which is contrary to the
laws of Nature. And (as S. Aug. speaks) it were to make the weak and the
peevish will of man, of more power and might then the omnipotent will of God,
whereof S. Ambrose says, Voluntas S. Ambros. in 5. Luc.
eius, potestas eius: his will and his power are both a like; because he can
do whatsoever he will do: for if God would have men to be saved, and men by
their nilling or refusing, will not be saved, then certainly, Dei voluntas
superata S. Aug. in Euchrid. ad Laurent. ca. 97.
est hominum voluntate, and infirmissimis nolendo impedientibus, non potest
facere potentissimus quod vult, The will of God and his desire is overcome by
the will and denial of man, so that by the nilling of the most base and
impotent creature, the will of the most omnipotent is frustrated.

And therefore as Tertullian said of Tertul. in Apologet. ea. 5.
the heathenish Romans (because they had a law that their Emperor might not
deifie any man to be a God, unless he were approved by the Senate) that so the
deity depended upon man's favor, vt si Deus homini non placuerit, Deus non
erit, if God pleased not men, he should not be a God: homo iam Deo propitius
esse debebit, man had that power to show such favor unto God, as either to
make him or mar him; to give him his deity, or deny his esse.

Even so deal these men with the will of God, de saluandis hominibus, touching
the saving of men, it must stand to the courtesy and liking of men: If men like
to believe, and will receive grace, then Gods will shall stand, that he shall
have men saved, and so his desire effected; but if men will not yield unto his
desire, but refuse grace to be saved, then his desire shall be void, and his
will of none effect: and so by this means, if men will not, God shall have no
man saved.

But the word of God, and the learned S. Aug. de bono pers.
Fathers teach us otherwise; that touching those he will have saved, Iubet
credere, and facit vt credant, he bids them to believe, and works faith
and belief in them. And so S. Gregory says, Superna gratia prius Greg. Mor.
l. 16. c. 10.
agit in nobis aliquid sine nobis, The heavenly grace does first work in us
without us, before we can work with it. So another says, Deus obsignauit
pactum in cordibus electorum per internam regenerationem, quam ille ipse
operatus est in ipsis: God seals his covenant in the Abbas de ver. great.
Christi.
hearts of his chosen by an inward regeneration, which regeneration he himself
works in them.

As therefore he works grace, faith, hope, and charity, and all other
spiritual graces in all those that are saved, so would he work the same in
all, if he would have all to be saved.

But against this it may be objected, S. Peter says: that he would have 2 Pet.
3. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his will. And therefore
either there are diverse and contrary wills in God, or it is his will, that all
should be saved, but yet are not, because they will not believe. The will of
God is not diverse. Damasc. l. 2. c. 46.


I answer: That the will of God is diversely distinguished by the Doctors,

As Damascen, into an 1. Antecedent will 2. Consequent will
will.

Lombard and the Schoolmen, Lib. I. c. 45.


Into his 1. Signified will. 2. Well-pleasing will.


Tertullian, into his 1. Efficient Lib. Exhort. ad castitatem.
will. 2. Permissiue will.


Whereof he calls the first voluntas pura, and the other voluntas
indulgentiae.

S. Augustine, into his 1. Effectual working, and omnipotent will. Enchirid.
cap. 102. and 103.
2. Not working, or not efficient will.


Others into his Absolute will Conditional will


Others into his Secret will Revealed will


All which, and all such like distinctions of Gods will, if they be diligently
observed and well understood, do fall into the same end, and do no ways
prove either diverse wills to be in God, or any contradiction to be in the will
of God. For it is most certain, that as the essence of God is most simple,
without composition or division, so the will of God, which is nothing else but
his eternal decree concerning all things, is one and the self same immutable
and irresistable: in so much that the wicked, who as much as in them lies, do
resist the will of God revealed and commanded unto us in his word, yet
notwithstanding will they nill they, they fulfill the will of God decreed in
himself from all eternity; as you may see most plainly in the example of
Pilate, Herod, and the wicked Jews, who in crucifying Christ, rebelled and
resisted the will of God revealed in his word, yet herein they did perform the
secret will of God, which before all worlds he had determined should be done,
as S. Peter shows: Acts 2. 23. Aug. in Enchirid. cap. 98.
Et sic in hoc ipso quod contra voluntatem Dei fecerunt, de ipsis facta est
voluntas eius: And so in this very thing wherein they did against Gods will,
God effected his own will. Et de his qui faciunt Idem de cor. and gratia.
quod non vult, facit ipse, quae vult: And touching these men which do against
his will, he does whatsoever he will.

Quia voluntas Dei Alia, quam fieri vult a nobis. Alia, de nobis,says Zanchie.
Zanch. cap. 3. de Not. Dei.



The will of God is either that which he would have done of us, or that which
he means to do concerning us.

And if this seem to be diverse and contrary, that he should command one thing
and do another; as to command Abraham to sacrifice his son, and yet to hinder
it; to command Pharaoh to let Israel go, and yet to harden his heart, that he
could not let them go; to command the wicked to keep his laws, and yet to
deliver them to vile affections; to say, he wills all to be saved, and yet to
decree their reprobation, etc.

I answer: That herein indeed it may seem to be diverse and contrary, but that
is not in respect of his will simply considered; but

1. Partly, in respect of the diverse things which God wills.

2. Partly, in respect of the diverse manners, wherewith he seems to will the
things that he wills.

For he wills 1. Good. 2. Evil.


Sed alio atque alio modo: But not after the same manner. For he wills good
simply of it self, and for it own sake. He wills evil, sed propter bonum,
for to effect a further good, as he willed the death of Christ, but for the
salvation of all the Elect. And therefore the first is called voluntas placens,
his well-pleasing will: and the second is called voluntas permissiua, his
permissiue will: and sometimes he wills things simply, and this is always
performed, and therefore this is only the will of God properly spoken; and
sometimes he wills things conditionally, as when he wills all to be saved, if
they believe; and this is not always fulfilled: and therefore properly cannot
be said to be the will of God, because his will properly taken, is always
absolute and most certainly accomplished.

And so in all the Commandments Zanch. quo supra.
of God, we must understand the will of God to be either 1. Declarans. 2.
Efficiens.


The first is that which shows what should be done, and so the Law is called
doctrina, a rule which shows us what pleases or displeases God.

The second is that which causes us to do what is pleasing to him, and so the
Law is called mandatum, when he makes the Elect to walk in his paths, Ezech.
11. 20.
or works faith in their hearts to believe in Christ. The 1. may be broken by
the wicked. The 2. cannot: for my counsel shall stand, and my will Esaias 46.
shall be done, says the Lord.

But then it may be objected: that

I answer: That sin is not defined to be the transgressing of the secret will
of God which cannot be broken, but of his declared and revealed will, Zanch.
lib. 3. cap. 4. de Not. Dei.
which only shows what is pleasing or displeasing to him.

Hereby then you see the will of God is only one, immutable and unchangeable,
and that although he gives his Law unto all, yea, both legem operandi, and
lege^ credendi, to show what should be done, and what should be believed; yet
it is not his absolute will that all men should either do or believe the same,
that they might be saved. For if it were, who could resist it? Romans 9. 19.
God therefore does not so confusedly give his saving grace, as to leave it in
the will and power of man, either to receive it, or to refuse it, but has
determined the set number of them that shall receive it, as you may see most
plainly Acts 2. 47.
, that so many did believe which were preordained of God to believe.

But then you will say again, Why does God bid us to do, or to believe, when
as it is impossible for us, of our selves, to do the same?

I answer: That he does it,

In respect of The Wicked. The Godly.


1. To restrain the impiety of the Why God commands the things we cannot do.
wicked, or if notwithstanding Gods admonitions, they grow worse and worse,
then shall they be inexcusable in the day of wrath, and God shall be justified
in his sayings, and clear when they are judged.

2. That the godly might hereby see what they might have done in Adam, and what
they may do in Christ, and therefore to pray for grace from him to perform
duties required: for, Vt praecipit Deus quod vult, ita dat August.
gratiam implere quod praecipit, As God shows them what he would have done,
so he gives them grace to do it.

But yet it may be, the wicked will

I answer; to show what is his will, That God deludeth no man.
i. wel-pleasing to him, to promise life if they do, or punishment if they do
it not, is no delusion, though he gives them no power to do the same; and this
our Savior shows in the parable of them that were bidden to the wedding: the
first were bidden, and came not; the second bidden, and compelled. Did he
delude the first, because he did not compel them? No ways, for he bade them;
a sufficient token of his love; and they refused, a sufficient contempt to
deserve exclusion: and yet the absolute will of the King was not the same in
both: for he did but barely bid the first, to show what he liked, voluntate
declaratiua, but he compelled the second to show his absolute will, that he
would have them come.

Even so, when God shows the wicked what is pleasing to him, and the duty of
them, and thereupon promises a reward if they do it, or punishment if they
do it not; he does no way delude them, though he does not give them power to
perform this duty of theirs.

When therefore he bids the wicked to come unto him, and they refuse to
come, if ever after they be excluded, then surely, culpa non est vocantis sed
renuentis, the fault is in him that refuses, and not in him that calls: and
therefore merito peri^t aegrotus qui non medicum vocat, sed vltro venientem
respuit, The languishing soul does worthily perish, which not only seeks no
Physician, but also refuses the heavenly Physic offered unto him, says S.
Augustine.

But if we look further, and see God compelling the one, by working grace and
repentance in his heart to do his will, and to believe in Christ, this is his
mercy, for he has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and if he does not
compel the other, that is his justice, for there are vessels of wrath,
prepared for Romans 9. 22.
destruction; and so as S. Augustine says, huic fit misericordia, tibi non fit
iniuria: he shows mercy unto the one, and he does no wrong unto the other.

All this S. Aug. shows by this comparison, Aug. de Benedict. Jacob and Esau.
sicut pluit dominus super segetes and super spinas, sed segeti pluit ad
horreu^, spinis ad ignem, and tamen vna est pluuia: As the Lord raineth upon
the good corn, and upon the briers and thistles; upon the corn, to ripen it
for the barn; upon the thorns and briars, to fit them for the fire, and yet
the self same rain does both: even so the will of God, i. voluntas
declaratiua, the word of God is preached both to the good and bad; to the good,
for their conversion, and to the bad for their further confusion, because they
are made hereby without excuse: and of this firmissime tene (says S.
Augustine) Aug. de fide ad Petrum, ca. 35.
eos quos vasa misericordiae fecit, perire non posse: nec quemquam eorum quos
non praedestinauit ad vitam, vlla ratione posse saluari: Be sure that none of
the vessels of mercy can perish, nor of those whom he has not predestined
can any ways be saved.

And he shows the reason hereof Idem ad Syxt. Presb. Ep. 105.
elsewhere, saying: Si omnes liberarentur, lateret, quid peccato per iustitiam
debeatur; si nemo, quid gratia largiretur: If all Why all men are not saved.
should be saved, what in justice was due for sin should not have been
known; if none, the goodness of grace had not been seen; therefore he
gives grace to some to show the riches of his mercy, and he denies it to
others to show the equity of his justice, to punish man for sin.

For the decree of reprobation, non ponit necessitatem damnationis nisi
interveniente peccato, and quidem cons^quntiue, Idem ibid.
non causaliter est a reprobatione damnatio: for the decree of reprobation,
being nothing else but decretum non miserendi, a decree of not having mercy,
does not impose a necessity of damnation but in respect of sin that goes
between: for which sin iustissime or dinauit eos ad poenas, he most justly
decreed their damnation.

And therefore, qui liberatur habet vnde gratias agat, qui damnatur non habet
quod reprehendat: He that is delivered has that for which he should be
thankful, and he that is condemned, has naught but his own sins, that he
can reprehend; for si in remittendo Idem de bono perseueran^.
debitum bonitas, in exigendo, aequitas, tum nusquam apud Deum inuenitur
iniquitas: If in remitting debt we show piety, in demanding, equity, then no
way with God can we find iniquity.

Hereby then you see, that although in respect of the merits of Christ's
Passion, the worthiness of his Person, and the power of his will, one drop of
his blood were of sufficient worth to expiate the sins of the whole world, as
S. Clement says, Modicam guttam sanguinis Christi propter vnionem (...) pro
redemptione totius humani generis suffecisse: the least drop of his blood by
reason of his hypostatical union with the Deity, were a sufficient pay and
satisfaction for the sins of all men, yet that it is not the absolute will of
God to give that grace unto all.

And therefore our Savior Christ himself excepteth those whom he means not
to bestow his grace upon, from his society, I came not to call the righteous:
he excludes from his Matt 9. 13.
prayer, non pro mundo rogo, I pray not John 17. 9.
for the world, i. pro impijs, says S. Jerome, or for those that wholly addict
themselves to the world, says S. Bernard, or qui sequuntur concupiscentiam
carnis, which follow the lust of the flesh, says S. Augustine; and he
forbids us to give them the holy pledges of salvation: Give not that which
is holy unto dogs. S. Paul here does not so much as wish them any grace, and
the Prophet David does absolutely pray against all grace to be given them,
saying: Let their table be made a snare, ever Psa. 69. 22.
bow down there backs, and let that which was for their wealth be unto them
an occasion of falling.

And therefore S. Augustine says, si Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 21. ca. 24.
certa esset Ecclesia, vel si certi essent illi qui praedestinati sunt in ignem
aeternum ire cum diabolo, tum nec pro ijs oraret Ecclesia plus quam pro ipso
diabolo: inde autem oramus and pro salute omnium operam damus, quia de omnibus
been speramus. If the Church were certain, or if we knew them that are
predestined to everlasting fire with the devil and his Angels, then would we
pray no more for them then we do for the devil: but we do therefore pray for
all, because propter ignorantiam, we know them not that are reprobates; sed
iuxta iudicium charitatis, but according to the judgment of charity, do hope
well of all, to be elected.

To the faithful therefore, we wish (...); grace and peace; but to the wicked,
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, woes and curses, this is their portion
for ever.

And the reason of this denial of grace unto the wicked (for though Zanch.
ibid. de not. Dei
there is no precedent cause of Gods will, yet there is always a just reason
of his will (as Zanchie says) in respect of themselves (besides many other)
may be said to be threefold.

1. Because Satan as a prince of this world, rules in the hearts of these
children of disobedience, and they give themselves wholly to follow his wicked
suggestions: for as the godly vtuntur mundo Why saving grace is denied to the
wicked.
vt fruantur Deo, so the wicked vtuntur Deo, vt fruantur mundo, do use the
world that they may enjoy God: so the wicked do only make use of God that they
may enjoy the World. And therefore what reason have they to expect any grace
from Christ that give themselves wholly to the service of Antichrist?

2. Because that although the Son of God did sweat the drops and clots of
blood in his agony, and that in such quantity, that it trickled down to the
ground to bless the earth that was accursed for the sin of man.

Sanguis erant Lachrymae, quaecunque foramina Lucan.
nouit
Humor ab his largus manat cruor: ora redundant
Et patulae nares, sudor rubet, omnia plenis,
Membra fluunt venis, totum est pro vulnere corpus.
His tears were blood, his heart was full of sorrow, non vllus dolor sicut
dolor suus. Lament.
As Niobe says, Nec similis toto moeror in orb fuit, no grief in all the
world like unto his grief, his whole life being but a map of sorrow, and his
whole body wholly wounded; so that the remembrance hereof is so powerful and
effectual to the godly, that nihil adeo grave, quod non aequanimiter toleratur
si Greg. in Moral.
Christi passio in memoriam reuocetur: they think nothing too much to do, nor
any thing too great to suffer for his sake, that suffered so much for them.

Yet this cursed and wretched world, these generations of vipers do tread
under seet the Son of God, and count the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing, and despise the spirit of grace; and therefore* the blessed Apostle
tells the Church of Philippi, weeping, that They are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, Philip. 3. 18. 19.
whose glory is their shame, whose end is fearful damnation: and this very
reason S. John touches when he says, that Christ came into the world, and the
world received him not, but did unto him what pleased them. John 1. 11.


3. Because that although the Saints and servants of God have done them no
hurt; for Iustus quid fecit? What has the righteous done? yet they despise
them, and trample them under feet, as the clay in the streets; dementia
insanabilis, their rage is implacable, and faciunt vnitatem contra vnitatem:
they conspire together against the godly, and especially against the Ministers
of Christ, whose preachings are accounted but as Cassandraes prophesies, and
themselves deemed worse then Justinians orators. And our Savior obiecteth
these three reasons against the Jews:

1. Ye are of your father the devil, John 8. 44.
and the will of your father ye do.

2. How often would I have gathered you, and ye would not? here is contempt
against himself.

3. Thou killest the Prophets, and stonest Luke 13. 34.
them that are sent unto you, here is cruelty against his Ministers, and
therefore as they regard not to know God, so Romans 1. 28.
God regards not them, but gives them over unto three fearful traditions:

1. To the lust of a wicked heart. 2. To most vile and base affections.
And 3. To a reprobate sense to do those things that are not convenient:
whereby it comes to pass, that all of them impie viuendo, ficte sperando,
just desperando, misere pereunt: by living most wickedly, and yet hope for
pardon all their life, but despair of pardon at their death, they miserably
perish to everlasting death: where (as S. Augustine speaks) nec tortores
deficiant, nec torti miseri moriantur, sed per millia Aug. ser. 55.
millia annorum cruciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi, neither tormentors
are wanting, nor the miserably tormented any ways eased, but for thousand
thousands of years plagued, and yet never to be delivered: and there shall be
(says Isidorus) semper velle quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle quod nunquam
non Isido. tom. 1. de summo (...).
erit, a will never satisfied, and a nill nener gratified, never inioying the
ease they would, and always suffering the pains they would not.

Oh then (beloved Brethren) let this one point of Doctrine teach us a double
instruction.

1. To terrify the wicked from their sinful ways: for they may assure
themselves, that so long as they remain wicked, they have no promise of grace,
but a most fearful expectation of eternal destruction.

Si durus est hic sermo: If this be a hard saying, it is quia cor durius,
because their hearts are harder; for if they return unto the Lord, the Lord
will soon receive them: but if God offers grace and they refuse the same,
then the heavens may wonder and the earth may tremble: if we tremble not at the
consideration of this doctrine.

For if the Sun did stand still at the prayer of Joshua, if it retired 10.
degrees in the dial of Ahaz, at the word of Esayas, and was darkened at the
Passion of our Savior, then no marvel if it stood still and never moved, if
it retired to the uttermost parts of the world and never returned, or be
utterly darkened and never enlightened for very shame and wonder, that light
should come into the world, and yet men should love darkness more then light,
that the grace of God should be offered, and yet that grace should be refused.

And if mount Sinai trembled at the giving of the Law, or the walls of Jericho
fell down when the Priests founded their trumpets, and the earth quaked at the
passion of our Savior (as fainting under such a hideous burden, that the most
accursed sons of mortal men should put to death the most blessed Son of the
immortal God) then no marvel if the whole world trembled, to see the wicked
making no account of this Law: or if the fabric of heaven should fall, when
the Priests and Preachers of Gods word do sound the trumpets of vengeance
against the transgressors of this Law? or if heaven and earth should be
dissolved into their ancient Chaos, when truth it self shall threaten
vengeance to the refusers of his grace, and assure woes and curses to the
enemies of his cross, and despisers of his Spirit; and yet for all this, that
they should still continue fearelesse and careless in their most vile and
abominable courses.

But indeed the heavens and the earth are reserved for that great and terrible
day which is to come, and are now sustained for the good of the Saints, and the
further condemnation of the wicked, which will hastily come upon them, if they
do not speedily repent.

2. This should persuade the good and godly Saints, to have nothing to do with
the stool of wickedness, but to separate themselves from the society of
wicked men, as the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Ephesians. 5. 7. That Christ
died for all men.


De 2. Whether Christ Jesus came into the world to die for all men, that all
men might be saved, if they would receive him and believe in his name: I
answer, that he did: for so the Apostle teaches, that he gave himself a
ransom 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9.
for all men, that he tasted death for all men, and S. John says, that he is
the propitiation, not only for our sins, whereby he means the elected Saints,
but also for the sins of the whole world: i. of all 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
the men in the world.

But to these and all other such places, it is answered: 1. That either all is
put for many, as he healed all that were oppressed of the Devil Acts 10. 38.
: i. very many, or all that came unto him, or all that besought him: and so it
is said, that all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, went unto John the
Baptist, and were all baptized of him Mar. 1. 5.
, i. abundance of people, whole multitudes went unto him, and not every
particular man whatsoever.

2. Or else, that all is put, pro singulis generum, non pro generibus
singulorum, for all of one kind: as where Christ is said to have healed all
sicknesses and Matt. 4. 23.
diseases. The meaning is, that he healed all kind of diseases, or diseases of
all kind, leprosy, palsy, feauers, etc. and not that he healed every
particular man that was diseased. The like phrase is used, Acts 10. 12. etc.

For it cannot be denied, but that by all is understood,

1. Sometimes the elect only, as Ioh. 12. 32. and that if I were lift up from
the earth, (i), upon the cross, will draw all unto me, (i.) all the elect, and
so it is understood in many other places of the Scriptures. As a, Esaias 54. 13.
Jer. 31. 34.


2. Sometimes the reprobate only, as Philip. 2. 21. All seek their own, and
not that which is the Lord Jesus, (i.) all the reprobates and wicked men do
only seek for their own profit and pleasure, and not the glory of the Lord
Jesus. And so it is said, that no man received the testimony of Christ, (i.)
none of all the reprobates and worldly men received the testimony of Christ.

3. Sometimes the elect and reprobates, Ioh. 3. 32.
as Romans 3. 23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God.

And therefore they say, that where Christ is said to have died for all men,
and to be the reconciliation for the sins of all men, or for the sins of
the whole world, it must be understood of many, as Matthew. 26. 28. This is my
blood Mat. 26. 28.
of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: or
else it must be understood of all the faithful only, and none else.

But to this fair seeming gloss of these men, I answer, that although this
distinction or restriction of all in many places may hold good, for many, or
for all of one kind: yet in this case, where Christ is said to have died for
all, all must not be restrained to the elect only: for so S. John says, that
he is not the reconciliation for our sins only, i. for the elect only, but
also for the sins 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
of the whole world. And where it is said, that God gave his Son to die for
the Ioh. 3. 16.
world; and Christ says, that he came to save the world, we must not restrain
and Cap. 12. 47.
the world unto the elect only, but rather for all the men of the world: for
where it is said, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life;
if we should say, that by the world here is understood the elect, the whole
sentence of Christ would prove to be full of absurdities.

For that were a strange saying: God so loved the elect, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever of the elect should believe in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

And therefore it must be understood of all men in general, that God gave his
Son for them all, that whosoever of them all should believe in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And so Prosper, Fulgentius, and diverse
others, after S. Augustine, do auerre that God gave his Son to die pro toto
genere humano, for all mankind, and that Christ offered himself a sacrifice
for the sins of the whole world; and therefore commands us to preach the
Gospel of faith and repentance unto Matthew. 28. vlt.
all men.

And so the Apostle shows, that some shall deny the Lord that bought 2 Pet.
2.
them. And S. Paul bids us, not to Romans 14. 15.
destroy him with our meat, for whom Christ died: and in many other places it
appears most manifestly, that God gave his Son to die for all men. Heb. 10.
29. Why Christ died for all men.


And the reason hereof may be said to be twofold.

1. That all men might have a remedy and a Savior, if they themselves would
receive grace, and lay hold on the same.

2. That God might be justified in his saying, and clear when they are judged,
which otherwise could not be. For how could he lay it as a sin unto their
charge, to refuse the grace of Christ, if Christ were never sent nor intended
to be sent for them? and therefore God sent his Son to die for all, that all
might be saved, if they should receive him; or be justly condemned, if they did
neglect him: for seeing God gave the means to help them, and they neglected
this means, then are they without excuse, they have not a word to speak.

But against this it is objected, that to give his life a ransom for many,
Mat. 20. 28.
Matt. 20. 28. Esaias 53. 11. therefore not for all: for his sheep, Ioh. 10. 15.
therefore not for the goats: for his friends, Ioh. 15. 14. for his Church, Ephesians.
5. 25. for them that believe, Romans 3. 22. and for them that obey, Heb. 5. 9.
therefore not for his foes, not for alients, not for infidels, not for the
disobedient, and such like.

I answer: that for the understanding of these, and all such like places, we
must remember that the intention and purpose of God, in sending his Son into
the world, is twofold.

1. General, that all men might have a sufficient remedy given and offered
unto them, to save them, if they accepted the remedy, or to make them without
excuse, if they refused or neglected the same.

2. Special, that (seeing God did foresee the maliciousness of man would not
of it self regard it) by the assistance of his more especial grace working in
the hearts of his chosen, they should yield to accept and apply the grace of
Christ for their salvation.

And so God gave his Son to die for all, but not with a purpose to work the
application of his death in all, for the salvation of all; but only (as I said
before) to show his love in giving him, and to make them without excuse for
neglecting him. And he gave him for his sheep, for his friends, etc. with a
special intent to help their imbecillitie, to work grace in their hearts, to
make them to lay hold and apply the benefits of his death for their eternal
salvation.

And now by this one distinction, I may easily answer to all objections: for,

1. In that they say, for whom Christ died, for them he intercedeth and
prays, and for whom he prays not, for them he died not; for none would
offer the sacrifice of his body for them, for whom he would not offer the
sacrifice of his lips: but for the wicked and reprobates he prays not, I pray
not for the world, Ioh. 17. 9. therefore for the wicked reprobates he died not.

I answer: that for whom he died with a special intent to work the
effectual application of his death, thereby to save them, for them he prayed,
that so his death might be effectual for them, and econtra for whom he prayed
not, I confess he died not with an intent to work the effectual application
of his death, thereby to save them, but only to procure them a sufficient
remedy to be saved, if they would, thereby to show his love, in giving this
remedy, and to make them without excuse for neglecting the same.

2. In that they say, Christ died for those only in whom he has attained the
end of his death, for that whatsoever attaineth not unto his end is done in
vain, and argues want of wisdom or power in the agent. But the end of Christ
his death, i. salvation, is attained unto only in the elect, Matthew. 16. 16.
Ioh. 3. 36. and therefore his death was only for the elect.

I answer to the minor proposition, that the end of Christ's death is twofold.

1. The salvation of the elect, by applying his death unto them, through the
special working of his grace.

2. The manifesting of his love, and making the wicked without excuse, for not
receiving his grace: he only dying for these, and not working in them the
special application of his death. And so the end of Christ's death is indeed
attained unto, both in the elect and in the reprobate.

3. In that they say: For whom Christ died, for them he made full satisfaction
for their sins, as the Apostle shows, in whom we have redemption Ephesians. 1.
7.
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his
grace: but Christ made not any satisfaction Coloss. 1. 14.
for the sins of the reprobate, for if he had, then God in justice could not
punish them for those sins for which Christ had fully satisfied: therefore it
cannot be that Christ died for the reprobates.

I answer: that Christ made sufficient The wicked condemned for not applying
the merits of Christ.
satisfaction for the sins of the reprobates, and yet God in justice may
punish them, for want of application of the merits of Christ: for as the
patient may well perish though the physic be made for him, if he does not
receive and apply the same unto himself: as S. Augustine shows, that we were
all sick of sin, and the heavenly Physician descended unto us, and brought
us heavenly physic, imo pharmaca benedicta, even most blessed medicines: yet,
merito perijt aegrotus, the sick man may well perish, if he does not receive
and apply this heavenly physic unto himself: even so though Christ died for
them, and made satisfaction for their sins, yet may they be most justly
condemned, for not receiving and applying the same unto themselves, but to
suffer (...), this great price, to be ineffectual unto them.

And this our Savior shows; This Ioh. 3. 19.
is condemnation, that light is come unto the world, and men love darkness
more than light: for this is spoken of the reprobate, and not of the godly; for
they love light more than darkness; and therefore this is the condemnation of
the wicked, that light, i. Christ Jesus is come unto them, and yet they refuse
to accept him, or to apply his benefits unto themselves, and do love darkness
more than light, because their works are evil.

And therefore in a word to determine this question, I say, that the exhibition,
or giving of Christ, was for all men, the manifestation of him, by the
preaching of the word, unto many, and the special application of him by a
lively and saving faith unto few, according to that saying of our Savior
Christ, Many are called, but few are chosen.

And so you see in what sense Christ may be said to have died for all men, and
to procure grace for all men, and in what sense he may be said to die only for
his elect, and to procure grace only unto the elected Saints.

And from hence we may behold with joy, and consider with admiration the
exuberancie, and the exceeding superabundancie of Gods love unto his elected
Saints and chosen people above all other men in the world: for being all in the
same mass of corruption, cui nihil nisi supplicium debebatur, to all which was
nothing due but destruction, we could deserve nothing at the hands of God no
more then the wickedest men in the world.

And yet he does not only give his Son for us, (as he did for all men else)
and offer his grace unto us, (as he does unto many others) but also he
extends his love further toward us then he does unto any other; for he
pittieth our unaptness to receive, and unableness to retain his grace, and
therefore he helps our imbecillitie, and works grace in our hearts to
accept his grace, to apply that grace unto our selves, and to retain that
grace unto our lives end.

And so, not of our selves, but by the special and effectual working of Gods
grace, we only that are elected, do accept, apply, and retain the grace of
God, and all the benefits of Jesus Christ unto our selves, whereby we are
justified and sanctified here, and shall be glorified hereafter.

O that we would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and show the
wonders that he does, and the exceeding superabundant kindness that he
shows for us, poor children of men.

And thus much for the restriction of saving grace, as it is effectual and
beneficial only to the Saints, though the same be done for all, and offered as
sufficient unto many, yet not effectually wrought in any, but only in the
Saints and chosen people of God.

2. Touching the place where the How the godly dwell always among the wicked.
Saints inhabit, it is said to be Rome; concerning which, if we do observe

The antiquity The iniquity
of the same, we shall easily find subject for large discourses.

1. Some think that the Pelasgians ouerflowing the Country of Greece, came
into Italy, and builded the City of Rome, and called it Roma by reason (...),
id est, Impetus.
of the great strength and power thereof which Roma in Greek does signify.
Others think that the Troyans, reliquias Virgil. Aeneid.
Danau^ atque immitis Achillis, being tossed to and fro and wearied, with their
wives and children landing in Italy, their wives (by the advice of a noble
Lady, called Roma) did burn up their ships that they might sail no further,
and therefore they were constrained to tarry and to build a City, which they
called Roma in remembrance of that noble Lady: and sic alij atque alij aliud
atque Plut. in vit. Romuli.
aliud opinati sunt, every several man had his several judgment, as S. Aug.
speaks in the like case, and Plutarch shows in this case.

But the common received opinion is, that Romulus and Remus being departed from
Alba, did build the same, and erect a sanctuary of refuge, that what
malefactor soever did fly unto the same, he should be safe from all revenge;
whereby, in a short time, it grew so populous, so strong and so great a City,
that it excelled all others, and at last became the Empress, and Metropolitan
city of the whole world, quae inter alias caput extulit vrbes, quantu^ Virgil.
Eglog. 1.
lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.

2. For the iniquity of it, it began in blood, when Cain-like Romulus did
unnaturally murder his natural brother Remus: and as Belus king of Niniuie
erected a golden statue, bearing the image of his father Beel, and warranted
all malefactors free that fled unto the same; whereby at last, the wicked Beda
in Luc. ca. 11.
fugitives adored the same for a god, and so committed horrible idolatry: even
so by their wicked asylum did the Romans multiply in such multitudes, that they
exceeded all others.

And because they gave tolerations for all Religions, there was no hinderance
of their increase; because all men are ever readier to yield their allegiance,
Vale^. Max.
then their conscience unto their enemies: and so by these means they grew to
the height of all impiety toward God, and of all savage cruelty toward men:
as we read of L. Sylla, who strove to be called foelix for his cruelty: yet
C. Marius justified him, and Caligula went beyond them both, but Nero was born
to justify Caligula, says Suetonius; and so of the rest: repleti om^^
^^iustitia, they were full of all unrighteousness, says the Apostle. Romans 1.
vlt.


Yet here among these wicked people in hac famosa ciui^ate, in this city
famous for her infamy, did these beloved Saints inhabit: whereby we see, The
care of the Saints.


1. Their care and circumspection. 2. Their state and condition.
It is natural in man to desire society, Arles li. 1. ca. 2. de Repub.
says Arist. yet there is nothing so dangerous as the society of wicked men,
says Isidorus: for though that ship was Isidor. lib. 2. sol.
not troubled that carried Peter, yet that was greatly tossed that carried
Judas, like that which carried Jonas; and therefore all the godly that were
with him, licet suis meritis firmi, yet turbebantur alienis, says S. Ambrose:
though Ambros. l. 4. super Luc.
they were firm in respect of their own deserts, yet were they hazarded for
the wickeds sake.

And therefore these Christians living among the wicked, in the midst of
impiety, were very circumspect of their society, else could they never have
preserved their sanctity; even so should we do: though we live among the
wicked, yet to choose the society of the godly: for good men will make thee
better, but evil men will make thee worse.

For such is the nature of men, says S. Gregory, Vt quoties bonus malo
coniungitur, non ex bono malus melioretur, sed ex Greg. ho. 9. super Ezech.
malo bonus contaminetur; as often as the good is joined with the bad, the bad
will sooner corrupt the good, then the good can convert the bad.

S. Bernard therefore writing upon Bern. in Cant. ser. 48.
those words of the Canticles, as the lilly among the thorns, so is my love
among the daughters, says, vide quomodo caute ambules inter spinas, be sure
therefore to walk warily, and then as Joseph in king Pharaohs court, Daniel in
Nebuchadnezzars palace, Mordocai in Ahashuerus house, and these holy Christians
among the wicked Romans did live holily and undefiled, so may the servants of
Christ live godly in the kingdom of Antichrist.

For as S. Ambrose speaks: non vtique Ambros. ep. ad Irenaeum.
transire in Egyptum criminosum est, sed transire in mores Egyptiorum, it was
no fault to pass into Egypt, but to follow the manners and sins of the
Egyptians was reprouable. Moses went to Egypt, but he used not the Egyptian
manners. So may we live in the world, but we must not fashion our selves like
unto the world, but as the children of Israel ambulauerunt per siccum in medio
Greg. lib. 6. ep. 23.
maris, did walk upon dry ground in the midst of the sea, so should we
ambulare sancte in medio mundi, live holily in the midst of the world, says S.
Gregory: and indeed, non est perfect bonus, nisi qui inter malos est bonus,
he is not perfectly good that is not good among the bad: for no thanks to them
that live holy in heaven, where there is no provocation to evil, but we must
live holily with devils, if we would live blessedly with Angels.

This therefore condemns all the pestilent brood of Donatists, the Brownists
and Barrowests of our time, who leave our Churches as profane multitudes, and
run away to lawless places.

For as the brightest day has his clouds, and the purest gold has his
dross; so the best Churches have their imperfections, and therefore the spouse
Aug. de vera Relig. c. 5. and l. 2. c. 22. co^tra Cresc.
of Christ confesses her self to be black though comely: and the Church of
God is compared to a corn-field, wherein there are tares as well as wheat; and
to a threshing floor, wherein there is chafe as well as corn, quia intus and
foris Idem in l. De vnitate Ecclesia.
mali tolerandi sunt ne pacis compago soluatur: and therefore within and
without the wicked must be suffered, that the peace of the Church be not
disturbed: and licet zizania in Ecclesia esse cernimus, Idem l. 2. ca. 28.
retract. ex Cypriane.
de Ecclesia tamen recedere non debemus, and though we see the tares in the
Church, yet must we not therefore leave the Church, says the same S. Aug.

For if these beloved of God did not run out of Rome that was nothing but
tares, but heathenish, why should Why the Saints dwell among the wicked.
we forsake the Church upon pretense of some imperfections?

And in very deed there be two especial reasons, says S. Augustine, why the
godly Christians should live with the ungodly Atheists.

1. That the evil may be converted. August. in Psalm. 54.
for

2. That the good may be exercised. for

1. If all the godly should forsake the wicked, how could the wicked be
converted? S. Peter was an apostata, S. Matthew was a publicane, Zacheus an
oppressor, Paul a persecutor, Iustine Martyr a Gentile, S. Augustine a
Manichee, Leo Affricanus a Mahumetane, Luther a Monk, Tremellius a Jew, and so
many others, but by conuersing with good men, they were converted unto
godliness.

2. Oportet esse haereses, there must be heresies among you, says S. Paul,
that they which are approved among you may be known: for if Arrius had not
been borne, qui posuit Trinitatem Thom. 1. p. q. 31. ar. 2.
substantiarum cum Trinitate personarum, which maintained a Trinity of
substances, or of Gods with the Trinity of persons, as Aquinas says; and
Sabellius on the contrary, qui posuit vnitatem personae cum vnitate essentiae,
which held the unity of person with the unity of essence; the truth of those
questions about the blessed Trinity, had never been so sufficiently
determined by those great Doctors of the Church, The afflicted estate of the
Saints among the wicked.
Athanasius, S. Augustine, Hilarie. And if the wicked lived not among the
godly, their patience should not be exercised, their care and circumspection
could not be seen, their sanctity not so excellent, nor their victory so
glorious.

De 2. We may see hereby the estate of Gods Church, inter impios and tyrannos,
among wicked ungodly men. Terra salutiferas herbas eademque nocentes Ovid. li.
1. de remed.


Nutrit, and vrticae proxima saepe rosa est.

The same ground bears wheat, and tares, and briars grow round about the
roses: and many times, as Christ was crucified betwixt two thieves, so John 19.
may a godly man dwell betwixt wicked neighbors, and what is worse then that?
for

(...) Hesiod. li. 1. (...).
(...).

A bad neighbor is hurtful, but he that has got a good neighbor, has
purchased an honorable commodity, says Hesiod. And yet the godly must need,
dwell among the wicked: Lot among the Sodomites, Abraham among the Canaanites,
Moses among the Egyptians, and all the Ministers of Christ are sent forth as
Lambs among Wolves: what then can they look for at the hands of such
neighbors, but vexations and afflictions, this is the lot of Deuteronomy. 4.
the righteous: ask of the days of old, as Moses says, and you shall see
that from her beginning the Church of God wanted not oppression; and Christ
himself tells us, that to her ending she shall not be void of affliction.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine coepit,
Sanguine succreuit, sanguine finis erit.
No age vnafflicted, no Church unassaulted, no Saint unattempted, no time but
too bad, yet none so bad as this: for S. Bernard tells us that the afflictions
of Bern. in parab. Christi and Ecclesiae.
the Church heretofore were like the waves of the sea, that came one after
another.

1. Persecution, when as alij flammi^ Eusebius. Eccl. hist. li. 8. c. 11. and 12.
exusti, alij ferro perempti, alij patibulo cruciati: Some were stoned, as
Steven; some crucified, as Peter; some beheaded, as Paul; some burned, as
Laurentius; others banished, and all persecuted.

2. Division. For terra Ecclesiae sanguine martyrum impinguata, the ground of
the Church being fatted and manured with the blood of Saints, which is the seed
of the Church, as S. Aug. speaks, it brought forth fruit the more abundantly,
and made many heathens by the beholding of their constancy, to become
Christians, as Sozomene writes. Therefore the devil changed his course, and
knowing that nullus pe^or quam domesticus inimicus, none can be worse then the
homebred foe, he stirred up swarms of heretics, that within the bosom of the
Church, did seek the ruin of the Church: for while the Church was at peace
within it self, it flourished, and nulla potuit inuidia Eusebius. lib. 8. ca. 1.
prohibere, Satan with all his malice, the world with all his cunning, and
tyrants with all their cruelty, could never hinder the prosperous increase of
the Church: but when they whetted their tongues, and blunted their pens
against themselves,

Hic primum ex alto delubri culmine telis Virgil. li. 2.
Nostrorum obruimur, oriturque miserrima caedes.

Then did the Lord darken the glory of the daughter of Sion, and the Church of
Christ was most grievously molested.

3. Ambition, for as the cruelty of tyrants superata erat in patientia
Martyrum, was overcome by the patience of the Martyrs, so the subtlety of
heretics depulsa est in sapientia doctorum, was discovered by the wisdom of
the Saints: and therefore Satan sent the spirit of pride and ambition, whereby
the Priests themselves came to be rather Crassiani then Christiani, more
secular then spiritual, as Budaeus speaks, aiming Budaeus l. 5.
at honors, and seeking for promotions, and not that which was the Lord Jesus.

4. Dissimulation and hypocrisy, as a cloak and mantle of their impiety, and
so the afflictions of the Primitive Church came one after another. But Our
estate now, worse then the state of the Saints in Rome.
now all of these and more then these, vt morbus cumulatus, are heaped together
one upon another to oppress the Church: our souls are among Lions, our
divisions and distractions have rent the Church like Ieroboams garment; our
ambition carries us with Phaeton beyond the moon, and our hypocrisy, if it
may be said to be hypocrisy, quae iam latere prae abundantia non valet, and
prae impudentia non quaerit, which by reason of the abundance thereof may not,
and by reason of its impudency, seeks not to be concealed, is grown to the
height to fill up the measure of our iniquity: Every man has Christum in Aug.
l. de spiritu and anima ca. 62.
codice, but non in cord, as S. Augustine speaks; or as S. Bernard says, we
give linguam Christo, our profession unto Christ, but animam diabolo, our
conversation unto the devil.

We read of the Turks, that dum voluntesse and Iudae^ and Christian^ nec
Iudaei sunt nec Christiani, while they would be both Jews and Christians, they
are neither Jews nor Christians: so we have a Christian show, but a Jewish
life, being full of all unrighteousness: what What the Saints should do in
afflictions. Heb. 11. 37.
therefore shall the poor Christians do among such unchristian people?

1. Let them look unto the author and finisher of their peace, and unto all
precedent Saints that ever dwelt in the 1. Look upon the example of the Saints.
Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei, l. 5. ca. 11.
midst of such wicked people, and were destituted, afflicted and tormented; and
yet nullo praemio nec poena huius mundi ab aeternae illius patriae societate
seducti: neither the allurements nor the punishments of this world could
withdraw them from their most holy profession: but were like the palm tree,
which though it has never so much weight on the top, and never so many snakes
at the root, yet still says nec premor nec perimor, neither am I pressed by the
one, nor oppressed by the other.

For as the knife may scrape the adamant, yet cannot pierce it; as the flames
may compass the Salamander, yet cannot burn it, and as the waves may beat
upon the rocks, yet cannot shake them; even so the wicked may vex the godly,
but they cannot hurt them, capitis poena nos afficere possunt, nocere non
Justinius Martyr. Apoc. 2.
possunt, they can take away our life, but they cannot hinder us to eternal
life.

And therefore march valiantly o my soul: and let us be like the Cypress
tree, quae etiam hyeme viriditatem suam non amittit, which keeps her viriditie
and freshness in the midst of winter. So let nothing daunt us or dismay us in
the course of Christianity, nam vere tuta est cum Christo and pro Christo
pugna in qua nec vulneratus, nec occisus trucidaberis victoria, for in this
fight with Christ and for Christ, though we be wounded, though we be slain,
yet are we sure of victory, says S. Bernard: and therefore as the old
Proverb is,

Quisquis benigno nauigabit numine:
Is vel saligno nauigabit vimine:
If God be with us, we need not care who be against us.

2. Let them lift up their eyes unto God 2. To call upon God.
and pray unto him, that he would be their helper and defender, nam cu^ mundus
plenus est spinis, in terra sunt, in aere sunt, Bern. super Cant. ser. 48.
in carne tua sunt; for seeing the world is full of thorns, full of wicked
men, versari in his and minime laedi divinae potentiae est, and non virtutis
humanae, to dwell among them and not to be corrupted by them, is from the grace
of God, and not by any power of man, and therefore we should pray to God who
Symplic. in Arles phis. lib. 1.
is (...), Deus in opportunitatibus, a God in the needful time of trouble, as
Simplicius calls him, that he would send unto us auxilium diuinum quando
desit auxilium humanum, his divine help from above, when we have no help in
our selves.

We should hereby learn patience, 3. To learn patience and circumspection.
and especially circumspection (as I said before) for as these Christians
living in Rome, must needs be wary; so, while Rome lives amongst us, we have
as great need to do the like; and as there are more motes in the house then
are seen in the Sun: so there may be more adversaries about us, more
schismatics, more ravening wolves then we imagine: therefore I say we should
watch, and I say no more but watch. And so much for the place where the Saints
inhabited.

3. Touching the proper differences whereby the Saints are distinguished, we
must take them as they lie in order.

1. Of their dilection, Beloved of God:

Touching which, I will observe these two points, 1. Whom in these words the
Apostle means. 2. What things hereby the Apostle teaches.


De 1. The Latins have no word that Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 4.
does express the etymology and full meaning of love. And therefore some say,
that amor, love, is derived of an Hebrew word which signifies to burn, in
respect of the vehement affection of it, and so the Poets resembled it, est
mollis flamma medullis and caeco carpitur igni, Cant. 8. 6. 7.
and the Scripture it self compares it unto fire. And yet the Latins do
affirm, plus esse amare quam diligere, that it is more to love, then to wish
well; but here the Apostle uses a word which signifies more then to love,
(...), Phauorinus.
Beloved of God; for the Greek word (...), signifies the same thing, as
Cicero turns, to be contented, or that wherein we do rest our selves
satisfied. As the father said of the son, hic est filius meus (...), this is
Mat. 3. vlt.
my beloved Son, in quo acquiesco, in whom I rest my self contented. So that
herein we find three things.

1. An inclination to the thing chosen 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
to set our liking on, for love does include, Et iudicium eligentis, and
actionem S^aliger de subtilitate exercit. 317.. 3.
seiungentis rem electam ab alijs, says Scaliger, The judgment of the chuser,
and his action to separate the thing chosen from all other things.

2. A desire to be united to it, as we may see in Matt. 23. 34. Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

3. A joyful contentment in it: as this is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell, for Ps. 132. 4.
I have a delight therein.

And therefore, though the love of God signifies no affection or passion, as
it does in man, yet we find therein

1. (...), a good will, or a decree of having mercy.

2. (...), an actual beneficence, or doing good to them, creating them,
sustaining them, and guiding them.

3. (...), a delighting in them. And this love of God extends it self, The
large extent of Gods love.


1. And in the highest degree toward himself. 2. Toward all things that be.
1. In respect of the will and unity of essence, the three persons love each
other with an inconceivable essential love. And therefore God made all things
for his own sake, and so the Scripture shows the love of each person unto
the other: as the father loves the son, and has given all things into his
hands, and that you may know that I love the father, and as the Father gave me
a commandment, so I do, and the Holy Ghost is said to be the love of the
Father and the Son, In quantum est nexus Patris and Filij, and ineffabilis
complexus, as S. Augustine speaks, ingenti Johan. de Combis. l. 1. c. 8.
largitate perfundens omnes creaturas pro captu earum. The bond of both the
Father and the Son, and the suauitie and delight of both filling all creatures
with goodness, according to each ones capacity.

2. He loves all things that are, and Sap. 11. 24. Genesis
hates nothing of the things that he has made. For when he had made all
things, he beheld them, and lo they were exceeding good, and in this sense all
creatures are beloved of God.

But you will say, God hates all that Psalm. 4.

I answer: that in every sinful man there are two things to be considered:

1. His nature, which is the work of God, and this he loves.

2. His iniquity, which is the work of man, and for this he hates him, or
this in him. And so you see that God loves all things that are.

But you must understand, that although Thom. 2. p. q. 20. art. 3.
in respect of the act of loving, he does not love one thing more then another,
(because he loves all things with one simple act of his will, as Aquinas
speaks) yet in respect of things loved, there is an order in his love; for it
is most certain, that of all creatures that he has made he loved mankind
best.

1. For that when he made all things, he only made man according to his own
image and likeness: and therefore David in admiration of this love of God to
mankind, breaks forth into such exclamations, O God what is man that thou
art mindful of him, etc. thou made him lower then the Angels, to crown him
with glory and honor: lower it may be in regard of his substance, Zanch. de
natura Dei.
but higher in respect of Gods Image, which is that glory and honor wherewith
he was crowned.

2. For that although he loved the That God loved mankind ^boue all other
creatures.
Angels with an exceeding great love, yet do we never read that he was
called (...), aut (...), a Spirit-louer, as he vouchsafed to be called as by a
proper name, (...), a Man-louer as we see, Tit. 3. 4. cum apparuit (...)
seruatoris nostri, when the bountifulness and love of God toward man appeared.

Thirdly, for that after the fall of man he left an exceeding great liberty,
and bestowed many blessings and benefits, as witnesses of his love to man, even
in that relapsed estate and time of disobedience, (as S. Paul does most
excellently ^ct 17.
declare unto the Athenians) which he has not done to the relapsed Angels, who
presently upon their fall were deprived of all tokens of Gods love.

4 For that he sent his dearest son to take our nature upon him, and to be
made man like unto us, and not to take the nature of Angels upon him, as the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does most divinely observe, when he
says, that non assumpsit Angelos, sed semen Abrahae, he assumed not the
nature of Angels, but he took upon him the seed of Abraham, and quid tam
pietatis plenum, quam quod filius Dei pro nobis factus est foenum: What can be
a more sign of love, or more full of piety, then that God should give his only
son to be made grass for us? (for, all flesh is grass) says S. Bernard.
Esaias.


5. For that he did not only give his son, to take our nature upon him, and
so to become of no reputation, as the Apostle speaks, but also to be made a
Philip. 2.
curse for us, to suffer for us, to be wounded for our sins, to be broken
for our transgressions, and to be crucified for our iniquities where he
suffered.

1. Opprobrium quo nullum vilius, the greatest reproach and shame that could
be, quia morte turpissima condemnemus eum, for the death of the Cross Sap. 2.
was accounted the most shameful, and most disgraceful death that was, for,
cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree, says the Scripture.

2. Supplicium quo nullum maius, the greatest pain and torment that could be.

1. In his body in all his senses.

1. In his feeling the sharpness of the nails. 2. In his hearing their mocks
and scorns. 3. In his smell, their stinking spittles. 4. In his taste, the
bitterness of gall. 5. In his sight, the effusion of tears, his friends
bewayling, his foes exulting, and all forsaking him.
2. In his mind such thoughts and sorrows, as cannot be conceived, much
less by men any ways expressed, and all this was done for us, and for our
sake, vt iniusta mors iustam vinceret mortem, that he being unjustly put to
death, as iniustus cum iniustis, and ex iniustis causis, by the unjust, with
the unjust, and for unjust causes, he might justly deliver us from that just
death which we deserved.

And therefore if we behold this man of sorrow and say,

Quae sunt hae plagae, quae sunt haec vulnera Christ?

What stripes or wounds be these, O blessed Christ, he will answer,

Et plagae, and sunt haec vulnera quaeque tua.

All these are only thine, tibi natus, tibi passus, tibi mortuus; for, I was
borne for thee, to suffer for thee, and to dye for thee; and if thou would
know the impulsive cause hereof, and say, Si mea cur tua diripiunt tua viscera
Christ^? He will answer, Love is the only cause hereof.

O amor his plagis membra cruent at amor: his love to man is the cause of all
these things.

And all these things are sufficient arguments to show the superabundancie of
his love to man above all other creatures whatsoever, and therefore in many
places this great love of God is showed with notes of incomprehensiblenesse,
as, so God loved the world, so as it cannot be expressed: and again, behold
what manner of love the father has showed unto us, that we should be called
the sons of God.

And yet here we must understand that this love of God to mankind is twofold,
1. common, to the just and unjust, Bern. Sermon. 14. de coena domini.
2. special, to the Elect only, in whom the love of God does more manifestly
appear, and upon whom he bestows all the benefits of his love.


And of these also he loves some The holier we are the dearer God loves us.
better then others, for there be three sorts of Elects.

1. Some whom God has decreed to justify, but as yet are not regenerate, as
Paul while he was a Persecutor.

2. Others, in whom regeneration is inchoated, and the relics of sin
remaining, as the Saints in earth.

3. Others, in whom perfect obedience is effected, and their sanctification
fully accomplished, as the Saints in heaven. He loves the first well, the
second better, but the third best of al; for the holier we be, and the nearer
unto his image, the dearer we are beloved of him, and therefore he says,
diligentes me diligo, I love them that love me, and I will show mercy on them
that keep my commandments: as if he should say, I love all men well, but I
love them especially above all men that love me and keep my commandments. And
this S. Augustine shows most excellently, Aug. tom. 9. in Ioh.
saying, Omnia diligit Deus quae fecit, and inter ea magis diligit creaturas
rationabiles, and de illis eas amplius quae sunt membra vnigeniti sui, and
multo magis vnigenitum. God loves all that he made, and among them he
chiefly loves his reasonable creatures, that is, men, and of all men the
members of his son, and his son himself above them all.

Now these things being thus made manifest, what the love of God is, how far
it extends, and how he loves all creatures, it is easy enough to know whom
the Apostle means by the beloved of God, not those that he loved best, for
they were in heaven, and not in Rome, nor those that he loved least, because
they lived in their sins; but those that were regenerated and sanctified in
some measure, as the next words do declare, called to be Saints.

De 2. The Apostle in these few What lessons we may learn from this doctrine
of the love of God.
words does give us to learn many things, but especially,

1. A confutation of heretics. 2. A consolation for Christians. 3. A manifold
instruction for all men in their lives and conuersations.
1. Seeing the Apostle does not call them diligentes Deum, the Lovers of God,
or those that love God (though they did so too) but dilectos Dei, beloved of
God, or those whom God did love, he shows hereby that the love The love of
God to us is the cause of all our goodness.
of God is the primary and efficient cause of our sanctity and goodness, and
not our goodness the cause of his love; and therefore this confuteth the
Doctrine of humane merit, and the foggie mist of the Pelagian heresy, fayning
and fancying certain causes without God, (as the Schoolmen speak) that is,
not subsisting in God himself, but externally moving the will of God to
determine and dispose of sundry things. As if the works of men foreseen of
God, and not the love of God to men were the cause why he elected and called
them unto sanctity, and that not his love and grace to us, but our good using
of his grace should be the cause why he bestows his grace upon us.

A doctrine clean contrary to the order of this Scripture, and indeed
contrary to all truth: for our Savior tells his disciples, you have not
chosen Ioh. 15.
me, but I have chosen you, and ordained that you should bring forth fruit,
and that your fruit should remain. Whereupon S. Augustine most excellently,
hic vacat vana illorum ratiocinatio, S. Aug. Tract. 86. in Johan.
qui praescientiam Dei defendunt, contra gratiam Dei: this confuteth their
vain babbling which defend the prescience of God to the derogation and
prejudice of the grace of God. For if God did therefore choose us, because he
did foresee and know we would be good, then he did not choose us to make us
good, but rather we choose him in purposing to be good: but our Savior says,
you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: and the Apostle shows that
Ephesians. 1. 4.
God did not choose us because he foresaw we would be holy, but he chose us
to the end we might be holy, and that he did not predestinate us upon the
foresight of the good use of our free will, but according to the good pleasure
of his own will, quae omnium quae sunt ipsa est causa.

And therefore nullum eligit dignum S. Aug. contra Iul. pelag. li. 5. c. 3.
sed aligendo efficit dignu^, God did choose none because he was worthy, but
God makes him worthy because he chooses him: neither does he love any of us
because we love him first: but therefore 1 John 4. 19.
we love him, because he loved us first: for if he had never loved us, we could
never have loved him: his love therefore to us is the cause of our love to him,
and of all other our goodness, and not our love and goodness the cause of his
love to us.

And therefore the Apostle here makes the love of God to be the maine ground
and cause of our vocation and sanctification: and S. John puts it as the
only cause of our redemption, saying, Christ has loved us, and washed us from
our sins.

2. Here is sufficient consolation, that God loves us; and therefore if any
man would rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he is beloved of God: for
(...) Homer. Iliad. 9. 2. That God loves us, is the greatest comfort we can
imagine. Ambros. li. 1. c. 6. de vita beata.


(...): that man is in stead of many people whom God shall love. I care not
then for the love of the world, so I may have the love of God, I fear not my
sins, so I may have the love of my Savior: for I do not rejoice quia iustus
sum, sed quia redemptus sum, non quia vacuus sum peccato, sed quia remissa sunt
peccata; that I am just, but that I am justified; not that I have no sins,
but because my sins are forgiven; not because I am beloved of the world, but
because I hope I am beloved of God.

3. From this doctrine of the love of God, we may learn many lessons of
instructions.

1. Seeing God loves all his creatures, we should neither wastfully abuse them
with that profane glutton, but gather up the very crummes that nothing be
lost, lest God should call us to an account for wasting his goods; nor yet show
our selves cruel toward the basest creatures: for the Lord loves them: and
therefore commands, that they should take their rest upon the Sabbath, that
we should not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, that we
should not take the damme that sits and cherishes her young brood, etc. to
teach us that we should not use any cruelty or unmercifulness toward these
filly creatures; for a merciful and a tender hearted man will be pitiful
unto his beasts, as knowing these creatures were made for the use of man; and
not that any man should abuse these creatures.

2. Seeing the Lord loves the reasonable creatures better then the bruit
beasts; it teaches us to love men better then our dogs, and Christians
better then worldly trash.

3. Seeing of all men, God loves the Saints best, it teaches us to follow the
counsel of S. Paul, To do good unto all men, but especially to those that are
of the household of faith.

4. Seeing we our selves (as we hope) are beloved of God, it teaches us two
especial things.

1. To study how to retain and to increase Gods love. 2. To learn what we
shall render unto God for his love.
De 1. I confess that at the beginning there is nothing in us, or that can be
done by us, which can move God to love us; yet I say that after God has given
us his Spirit, and bettered us by his grace, then may we do those things that
Anton. p. 4. t. 6.. 10.
may retain and increase his love toward us: for quamuis Deus prior dilexit
nos, tamen exercendo nos in actu dilectionis augetur dilectio eius, though God
loves us first, yet by exercising ourselves in loving God, we shall increase
his love toward us, says Antoninus.

To the end therefore that we may How we may retain and increase Gods love
toward us.
retain and increase Gods love unto us, there are many things to be done,
whereof I will only name these three:

1. Contempt of vanity. 2. True humility. 3. Perfect obedience.
1. Seneca says, that nemo dignus est Deo nisi qui opes contempserit, no man
is worthy of Gods love, but he that has cast away the love of worldly wealth:
and S. Gregory says, that tanto a diuino Greg. distinct. 47. bonorum.
amore disiungimur, quanto infernis delectamur, so much the further we are from
Gods love, by how much the nearer we are to the worlds love. And S. John says,
that the love of the world is enmity with God: and therefore whosoever would
retain the love of God, must abstain from the love of the world.

2. Humility is the only virtue that God loves, melius est vitium cum
humilitate quam virtus cum superbia: God loves an humble Publican better then
a proud Pharisie; superbos sequitur vltor a tergo Deus: for He beholds the
proud afar off, but he gives grace unto the lowly.

3. Whosoever will keep my Commandments, John 14. 21.
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him says Christ himself: and so you see things that both retain and increase
the love of God toward us.

De 2. What shall we render unto God for this his great love unto us?

I answer, that dilectionis nulla mayor Leo ser. 7. deiciunio.
expetenda est remuneratio quam ipsa dilectio; nothing is so acceptable in the
The love of God is to be requited only with love.
actions of love, as love again; and that love is deemed to be lost, which is
not requited with love.

And therefore as the Magi when they came to Christ opened their treasures and
offered their gifts unto him, gold, frankincense, and mirrhe, whereof Matthew. 3.
the first is said to be the gold whereby love is signified: for as gold is
better then all other metals, so love is the chief of all virtues, (...); 1
Cor. 13.
Faith, Hope, and Charity, yet the greatest of these is Charity: and as gold
makes the owner rich, so is he truly rich which is in love with God: and as
the gold is made purer in the fire, so is our love made brighter in the fire of
temptations.

And therefore Victorinus upon the words of the Apoc. I counsel thee to buy of
me gold, does expound the same to signify love and charity: lucem intimi
Richard Victor. in Apoc.
splendoris fulgidam, feruore dilectionis ignitam, and per fornacem
tribulationis probatam, shining through the light of its inward brightness,
fiery through the feruencie of affection, and tried in the furnace of
tribulation: and therefore Thomas says that the first gift of the Thomas 1. p.
q. 38. ar. 2.
Holy Ghost which we receive from God is love; and therefore seeing this is the
first gift of God to us, whereby he is moved to do all other good things for
us, let us with the Wise men offer our love in the first place to God again:
for this is the first and great Commandment, to love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart; this is the first and chiefest oblation, and this is that which God
chiefly accepts.

Now touching the loving of God, Thom. in l. de perfect. spirit. vitae. ca. 3.
the Schole-men do assign 3. degrees.

1. Quantum diligibilis est, as much as he is worthy of love, and so he is only
loved as he should be of himself, and therefore S. Bernard cries out, O my
God, my helper; I will love thee, but Bern. in l. de diligend. Deo.
after mine own measure, less indeed then right, yet plainly, not less then
I am able, who albeit I cannot so much as I should, yet cannot further then I
am able, and indeed I shall do more when thou will vouchsafe to give me more,
yet never for all this shall I be able to do as much as thou art worthy.

2. Secunaum totam virtutem alicuius diligentis, according to the full power
and strength that is in him that loves, i. fully to love him, according to all
the virtue of the lover: and so he is loved of the Angels and blessed Saints.

3. To the uttermost of our ability, so far forth as our imbecillitie will
permit us: and thus we are to strive to love him three ways. 1. Placabiliter,
2. Ordinabiliter, 3. Appretiabiliter,
says Nider, in 1. precept.

1. To love him for his own sake, God is to be loved for his own sake.
and not in respect of any outward profit, for there is a double kind of love.

1. Concupiscentiae, of Concupiscence, in respect of our own profit, and so a
man loves his horse or his ass, for the good service he has from them.

2. Amicitiae, of friendship, as when I love a man merely for the good things
that are in him: and so God is to be beloved absque intuitu praemij, without
respect unto any profit to be gained by him, nam minus te amat qui aliquid
tecum amat, nec propter te amat, says S. Augustine.

And therefore it was the commendation Bern. in l. de diligendo Deo.
of Job, not only to love God when he was compassed about with prosper^tie, but
to love him in the midst of his adversity; so did not they that loved Christ
and followed him for the loaves sake: if therefore we love God aright, we must
not love him for wealths sake, but for his own sake.

2. To love him so, that we direct All our actions should tend to the glory of
God.
our selves and all ours, both inward and outward actions, to the extolling and
increasing of his glory; as when we apply our whole life to his service, then
we love him with all our heart; when we captiuate our senses to the obedience
of Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.
then we love him with all our understanding; and in brief, when all works
and actions are sprung from the love of God and do aim at the glory of God,
then we love him with all our strength.

And so S. Augustine says that all our actions should begin from the love
Aug de Spiritu and lit. c. 25.
of God, (quia fructus bonus non est qui de radice charitatis non surgit; for
that can be no good fruit which springs not from the root of Charity) and
should tend to the praise and glory of God, quia virtutes verae non sunt quae
in Idem de Ciuit. li. 19.
Deum finaliter non referunter, they are no true virtues which are not finally
referred to God.

And therefore we say that it is requisite that the love of God should be the
cause of the love of our neighbor, and that we should love our neighbors
propter Deum, for the honor of God: and so of all other actions, they should
all tend to the honor of God, as the Apostle shows: whether ye eat or
drink, do all to the glory of God.

3. To love him above all things, and God is to be loved above all things.
Scotus in 3. distinct. 27.
to respect him and his will above all the world: and so Scotus says, God is
to be loved extensiue, above all things, so that nothing in the world, nor all
the things of the world, should be equally prized with God: and therefore
should wish all things not to be, rather then God should not be: and intensiue,
so that we should be more willing to suffer the hatred of any thing in the
world then the hatred of God.

For he indeed is that pearl, for the gaining whereof, a man should fell all
that ever he has, as our Savior shows. Matthew. 13.
O therefore Love the Lord all ye his Psalm. 31. 27.
Saints, and love him above all things: for he that loves father or mother,
wife Matthew. 10.
or children, or any thing else more then me, the same is not worthy of me,
says the Blessed Verity: And therefore S. Bernard Bern. lib. de amore Dei,
ca. 2.
says, animam meam odio haberem, si eam alibi quam in Domino and in eius amore
inuenirem: I would hate mine own soul, if I found it not in the Lord, and in
the love of God.

And yet for all this we see how many leave the Lord to love worldly vanities:
some their pleasures, some their riches, some one thing, and some another: and
the lovers of God are like the winter gatherings, like the grapes of vintage,
rare and few.

But all men will say they love the Lord, and therefore lest we should deceive
our selves, sub specie recti, under The property of love is to desire to be
united to the thing loved.
the color of truth, we should examine and find out the truth hereof by a
double property of love.

1. To unite the lover as much as possible may be to the thing loved, and in
want of the fellowship thereof to desire and seek it above all things in the
world. So the Church in the Canticles says, I greatly desire to sit under the
shadow of my well-beloved, and I am sick of love, i. I faint for the fellowship
of my beloved.

And therefore if we love God, then as the Heart brayes for the water brooks,
so longs our souls after God, we should cry for him, and say, how long
tariest thou holy and true: and not let our souls be glued upon the vanities
of this life.

2. To accomplish and fulfill the mind and will of him that is loved: so our
Savior says, he that has my Commandments, John 14. 21.
and does them, the same is he that loves me: and this is the love Love
fulfilleth the desire of him that is loved.
of God, that we keep his Commandments: And because this might be thought to
be too general, therefore he says, that this is the Commandment that he
gives us, that we should love one another.

And therefore by this we may certainly know that we love God, if we love one
another: and so our Savior says, hereby shall not only your selves, but all
men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you love one another. The love of
our neighbor then is the surest sign of the love of God: for per amorem
proximi amor Dei nutritur, through the love of our neighbors, is the love of
God increased; therefore S. John says it is an absurd thing to say 1 Ioh. 4.
20.
we love God which we have not seen, if we love not our neighbors which we
daily see: for our neighbor is the image of God; but thou can not love Genesis
1.
thy prince if thou hate his picture.

And therefore Theodosius counted the Thessalonians traitors for abusing his
statue: and so God pronounces whatsoever disgrace is done unto his Saints, the
same to be done unto himself. Matthew. 25. 45.


But here some perhaps may demand, who is my neighbor that I should love?

To this I answer briefly, that our Savior Every man is our neighbor.
by the parable of the Samaritan that fell among thieves, shows, all men,
yea, though they be our enemies, as the jews and Samaritans were, are our
neighbors; and therefore all men are to be loved of us: friends, foes, good
and bad.

Indeed, all men may be easily persuaded to love their friends, but many cannot
be persuaded to love their foes: the Pharisees said there was a law of loving
our friends and hating our enemies: Aug. li. contra. Adamant. c. 18.
but S. Augustine denies such a law to be written of hating our enemies: and
our Savior bids us to love them, Matthew. 5 45. for amare amantem, naturae
Thom. in Caten. super Matt. ca. 5. 45.
est: inimicum, charitatis est: to love our friends is natural, but to love
our enemies is heavenly, and Christian-like, says Aquinas.

Others could be contented to love the good, but cannot endure to love the bad.
To whom I answer, that we are bound to love the wicked, and to do good for
sinners, non quia peccatores, sed quia homines, not because they are sinners,
but because they are men: and therefore Aristotle being demanded why he did
give his alms to a wicked and dissolute fellow, answered; Non Laert. l. 5. ca.
1.
mores sed hominem commiseratus sum, I pitied the man, I respected not his
manners. So S. Augustine, Etsi peccator est qui petit, da, non tanquam
peccatori, We are bound to love the wicked.
sed quia homo; nam quod homo, opus Dei est; quod peccator, opus hominis est;
if a sinner should ask, give him, not because he is a lewd sinner, but because
he is a poor man, which is the work and image of God. And so S. Gregory,
Dedi non quia peccator, sed quia homo; I love him, and I help him, not because
I suspected him to be a sinner, but because I knew him to be a man of mine own
nature and condition, and humanum est humanis casibus ingemiscere.

And therefore we must distinguish of the good and bad things that are in lewd
and wicked men, and so hare their sins which are the works of men, and love
their persons which are the works of God, as S. Augustine Aug. cont. Faustum,
li. 19. c. 24.
speaks; or otherwise as Abraham said unto God, We shall destroy the
righteous with the wicked; we shall confound good things for evil things sake.

And some there be that think they It is the greatest impiety to hate the
godly.
do God good service when they hate and persecute the godly; confessio nominis
non examinatio criminis, the confession of the name of Christians, and not the
examination of their crimes, brought them into hatred, says Tertullian:
Tertul. in Apolog. ca. 2.
so now the brood of serpents, the children of this world do hate the godly eo
nomine, because they are godly, as Aristides was banished out of Athens, iustus
quia iustus, for no other cause but for uprightness: and this is more then
heathenish impiety. But all those that desire the love of God, and profess
themselves to love God, must testify the same by their unfeigned love to all
men: for that is the only touchstone for the trial of this truth. And so much
of the first difference of the Saints, their dilection.

2. Touching the second difference, which is their vocation or calling, we must
note that there is a twofold calling, vel 1. Inefficaciter formally, or
effectually.

2. Touching the second difference, which is their vocation or calling, we must
note that there is a twofold calling, vel 2. Efficaciter. formally, or
effectually.

The 1. is outwardly: the 2. is inwardly. The 1. general: the 2. special. Of
the first, our Savior says, many are Matthew.
called, but few are chosen. Of the second, the Apostle says, whom he has
predestined, Romans 8.
them he calls, i. effectually.

Now touching the outward cal^ing, we must note that as many are called; so he
calls them many ways, especially 1. By the painful preaching of his word.
2. By the manifold benefits of his grace. 3. By the manifest judgments of his
anger.


De 1. God gave his word, and great God calls us diverse ways. Psalm. 68. 11.
were the number of the Preachers, and be commanded them to preach unto all
Nations; and so their sound went unto all lands, to all countries, to all
places, but especially to this place, where there are painful men, learned
men, that do often preach, and continually call; and yet I fear their
preaching is unrespected, I am sure themselves are unregarded. I dare boldly
testify these two things:

1. That in all England, I think I may say in all the world, there are not
more learned, and more painful Preachers, then in this famous City.

2. That over all England, there are many unworthy men, many a sir John
lacke-Latine, many a Priest lack preaching, that have better respect and more
maintenance from poor peasants then the worthiest Preachers in this City have
from you worthy Citizens. I confess, you respect them at your tables, and do
much out of your benevolence; but you may assure your selves that for the
Preachers to have their trenchers at your tables, and their means ex gratuito,
and non ex debito, is neither ptofitable for you, nor comfortable unto them: In
this respect it grieueth me when I consider the grave and worthy Preachers of
this City, and many others of the Country, etc. I have tried both places,
quorum pars magna fui. I have ended this point.

2. God seeks to draw men unto him in the chains of love, when he gives unto
them, beneficia nimis copiosa multa, and magna, and priuata, and positiua, many
and great blessings, thereby to allure them unto his service.

3. If men will not turn, nor answer to the first and second call, then will
he whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold of vengeance, he
will power out the vial of his wrath, thereby to convert them or confound
them: and no marvel, for debet amor laesus irasci, love too much provoked must
wax angry.

All these ways has God called us: the Preachers cried, and do cry and call
continually, his blessings have been manifold, and his judgments have been
manifested in some measure upon out nation. O then let us take heed unto our
selves, and not harden our hearts any longer, but let us hearken unto his
voice, lest he swear in his wrath, that we shall not enter into his rest.

But indeed all these kinds of outward callings are but in vain, and bring no
benefit unless the Lord calls us inwardly by his spirit: for

1. Nisi spiritus adsit cordi audientis, In vain is al outward calling,
unless we be inwardly called by Gods Spirit. Greg. hom. 30. super Euangel.
inanis est labor docentis: In vain do we preach unto your ears, unless the
Spirit of God does open your hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, that you may
believe our preaching, as she did the preaching of Paul.

2. All the blessings of the world will but puff us up with pride (as they did
the Israelites, as Moses shows, dilectus Deuteronomy. 32. 15
meus impinguatus calcitrauit, my beloved fatted and enlarged spurned with his
heels) unless God does give us the grace to use those blessings to the glory
of his name.

3. All punishments and all judgments will sooner work desperation then
conversion in a sinful soul, unless the grace of God work true humility in
us, to make a right use of his fatherly chastisements.

And this experience daily shows. First the word is preached, the one
believes, the other refuses it. Secondly, God bestows his blessings upon
men, the one is puffed up with pride, the other is truly thankful. Thirdly,
God sends his judgments, the one grows desperate with Saul, the other is
humbled with David. And what is the cause of this? to the one sort, he sends
his messengers only to call them outwardly, to the other sort he sends his
spirit, and gives his grace, to make them yield unto his calling: and this
effectual calling of the Saints to believe the Gospel and to obey the voice
of God, is the effect and fruit of the love of God.

Whenever therefore we be outwardly called by what way or means soever it
be, let us presently pray to God that he would inwardly work in our hearts,
to incline them to yield unto his calling, else will the outward calling bring
no benefit, but only make us without excuse. And so much of their vocation.

3. Touching their sanctification, called to be Saints, we must understand
that the word (...), is derived from the p^iuatiue particle (...), and (...),
which signifies the earth, as if it were a separating from earthly things.

So it signifies a pure and a clean thing free from all contagion and touch
of inferior things, and it is taken two ways: 1. simpliciter, 2. (...).
simply, or in some respect.

1. In the first sense God only is of himself, and of his own nature simply
holy, and the author of all holiness, for God is light, and in him there is no
^. Ioh. 1.
darkness at all, and the blessed Virgin says, holy is his name.

Conueniunt rebus nominasaepe suis.

And this name shows his nature, and the greatest praise of God: for the
glorious Seraphims which Esaias saw, Esaias 6.
and those wondrous creatures which S. John did see, cried three times, holy,
Apoc. 4.
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, which we do not read of any other attribute of
God.

And therefore Damascen reports, Damasc. l. 3. c. 10.
that when the people of Constantinople were terribly afraid of some dangers,
and did humbly pray unto God against the same, a child was suddenly rapt up on
high, and was taught by the Angels this holy Song, Sanctus Deus, Sanctus
fortis, Sanctus immortalis miserere nostri, holy God, holy Almighty, holy
immortal God have mercy upon us: and when he was restored down and declared
the same unto the people, the whole multitude sung the same incessantly, and so
were delivered from all the dangers that they feared.

And for this cause the third person of the blessed Trinity, as by a proper
name is called holy spirit, and therefore in that golden plate that was to
adorn Aarons forehead was engraven (...), Exodus 28. 36
as the Septuagint translate it, that is, sanctitas Iehouae, as Tremellius, or
sanctum Domino, as the vulgar has it, holiness to the Lord, or, all sanctity is
to be ascribed unto the Lord, and does only proceed from the Lord.

In this respect, our Church in her highest strain of devotion, immediately
after the receiving of the blessed Sacrament, sings unto God, tu solus Sanctus,
thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, that is, simply in all respects,
essentially in himself, and causally the fountain of all holiness and purity
in all his creatures.

And yet of all Gods attributes this is most contradicted and murmured against
by the wicked, as if he were not pure, upright, and holy, especially

1. In the election of his creatures. 2. In the distribution of his graces. 3.
In the remuneration of our deserts.
But for the first we answer, that he has ius absolutum in creaturas, an
absolute right over all his creatures, so that he may do with it what he
will, even as the Potter has power of the clays Romans 9.
as the Apostle shows, and yet we say, that he does not use the same, nor
preparare filios ad patibulum, but finding them all in the mass of corruption
by Adams transgression, he does show mercy upon whom he will, and whom he will
he leaves still in that state wherein they were not created nor intruded by
him, but most miserably fallen in the loins of Adam. So that herein God
shows unto his elect, indebitam misericordiam, more then deserved mercy, and
to the other, nothing but debitam institiam, what they most justly deserved.

To the second we say, that although he gives to one five talents, to others
but one, to others none at all, that he exalts one, pulls down another,
and so of all other gifts and graces, whether temporal or spiritual, yet we
say that he does no wrong to him that has least, or that has none at all,
quia non tenetur Creator creaturae, because he is debtor to none, and he is
not bound to give unto any, and therefore may most justly and freely do what
he will with his own, as our Savior shows most excellently in the Parable
of the Laborers hired unto his vineyard.

And to the third we answer, that in giving unto them, which by continuance in
well doing seek glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life, he shows
himself most gracious and merciful; Romans 2.
as all men will confess; and in rendering vengeance to them that obey not God,
indignation and wrath upon every soul that sins, he shows himself most
just and upright.

And therefore the Prophet Esaias, chapter 5. after he had set down many of Gods
judgments against the wicked, lest any should think God unjust therein, he
adds, that the Lord of hosts should be exalted in judgment, and the holy God
should be sanctified in justice, verse. 16. that is, pure and holy, and
commended for his justice. And so you see that as the Prophet David says, the
Lord is righteous in all his works, and holy in all his ways: and though as
S. Augustine says, the judgments of God occulta esse possunt, cannot be
always understood of us, by reason of our own ignorance, yet imusta esse non
possunt, they are always most just and holy, and therefore he is holy, holy,
holy; holy in the election of his creatures, holy in the distribution of his
graces, and holy in the retribution of our deserts, holy simply, holy in all
respects, and the only fountain of all holiness.

2. There are other things called holy, by communication of holiness, or by
receiving the same from this fountain of holiness: and in this sense we
find holiness ascribed to the creatures, and especially to four sorts of
them, viz.

1. To the man Christ Jesus. 2. To all truly faithful. 3. To all outward
Prof^ssors. 4. To all things dedicated.
1. In this kind of holiness the man Christ Jesus holds the first place:
for he is perfectly holy, and so is none Aug. to. ^. Beda in Lu. l. 1. c. 2 f.
63.
besides him, says S Aug and therefore Beda says that he is singulariter
Sanctus, singularly holy, and perfectly holy, in a double respect.

1. By reason of the hypostaticall union with the Deity. 2. By reason of the
most perfect quality of holiness impressed in his humanity.
For he received the Spirit of Sanctity without measure; and therefore he is
called that holy thing, and that holy one conceived without sin, because
conceived of the holy Ghost, borne without sin, because borne of a Virgin,
and lived without sin, because in his mouth was found no guile, and therefore
among all creatures he only is perfectly and singularly holy.

2. S. Bernard tells us that among other creatures there be Saints from
heaven, (whereby as I think he means the Angels) and Saints from the earth,
whereof (says he) there be

1. Some in heaven. 2. Some in earth.
1. Those that are in heaven are these holy men, that having overcome the
world, and being delivered from all sin, and endued with perfect holiness,
do now triumph with Christ, and always behold the face of God.

And because they are perfectly delivered from sin, and from the striving
betwixt the flesh and the spirit, and are now received into that Sanctum
Sanctoru^, the holy of holies, into which none unclean thing shall enter, Reu.
21. vlt. and are likewise now not only holy by the imputative righteousness
of Christ, but also by a perfect inherent righteousness, quia facti sunt
prope, because they are made near unto God, not only by a blessed communion
through the inhabitation of grace, but also by an immediate conjunction,
through the fruition of glory, therefore the name of Saints may more properly
be given and ascribed to them, then to the holiest and godliest man upon the
face of the earth.

And therefore this should teach us, as not to ascribe too much honor, so not
to deny their due honor unto them.

Bellarmine indeed does ascribe too Bellar. l. 1. c. 7. de Sanct. beatitud.
too much unto them; as,

1. The canonization of some of them for Saints, (...), above all others. 2.
The invocation of the^ in our prayers. 3. The erection of Temples to them. 4.
The oblation of Eucharisticall sacrifices upon their canonical hours. 5. The
celebration of so many holidayes to them. 6. The collation of their Pictures in
our Churches. 7. The adoration of their relics.
All which, the word of God never commanded, themselves never required, and the
primitive Church never practiced in that sort as our adversaries have
maintained; for,

1. Their canonization began not C. 1. extra de reliq. sanctor.
till 880. when Adrian took upon him this authority, and Alexander the 3.
confirmed it, or not before Leo the 3. as Bellarmine himself confesses.

2. Their invocation by us, and intercession for us, was a point never
questioned, until the time of Origin, Orig. lib. 2. ad Romans and ho. 3. in
Cant. Nazian. Orat. de laud Gorgoniae.
and afterward by Nazianzen, it was proposed doubtfully, but never received
certainly.

3. The dedication of Temples was but only a naming of the Churches after
their names, either because they were builders of them, or only for
distinction sake, to know one Church from the other; for S. Augustine proves
Aug. l. 1. cont. Maxim.
none but God should have any Temple erected to him, and S. Basil, and S.
Ambrose do prove the Holy Ghost to be a true God, because he has a Temple.

4. The Canonical hours were not intuted Walfridus de rebus eccl. c. 15.
a long while after the time of the Apostles, says Walfridus.

5. For holy days, we celebrate as many as the first Christians did.

6. Their pictures we confess may be used for civil uses, but not in
Temples to be worshipped, nor for Laymens books to be accounted.

7. Their relics are but forgeries, we know not which they be; for though
the cross of Christ was no bigger then a man might bear, yet the parcles of
wood that they say were parts of that cross (if they were gathered together)
would load a ship: and so we may think of all other relics.

And therefore though they be perfect Saints in Heaven; yet dare we not give
more honor unto them, then the word of God does warrant unto us.

But on the other side we should not deroga^e their due from them: for as
Heluidius in the time of S. Jerome was a Mariae mastix, (as Roffensis terms
Roffensis l. contr. Lutherum. f. 8. in margin.
him) so have we many that are the scourge of the Saints cannot endure to call
them Saints: we must therefore understand that the Saints in heaven are to be
honored and highly esteemed of us: for natural est praemium virtutis Arles l.
1. c. 12. aethic.
honos, it is a natural thing, that praise should be the reward of virtue,
and so God promises that men should speak of their wisdom, and the
congregations should declare their praises: and therefore the son of Syrach
does Ecclus. 44.
highly commend the Saints of God; and so Saint Paul himself, and S. Augustine
says, in Deo laudandi sunt, they Heb. 11. Aug. to. 2. f. 223. Damasc. l. 4. c.
16. de fide Orthod. Amb. sermon. 6. in fine.
are to be praised in the Lord: and Damascen says, that it behooves us to
honor the Saints as the friends of Christ, and as the sons and heirs of
God: and S. Ambrose says, that whosoever honors a Martyr, honors Christ,
and he that despises the Saints, despises the Lord; for that they are not
only the consorts of Angels, but also the glory of God, as Theophilact
speaks, f. 191.

2. For that we receive much benefit by them, for by their pains the word of
God is explained to us, by their blood the truth of God is preserved and sealed
unto us, and by their examples we are provoked to sanctity, quia sanctorum
vita norma viuendi nobis est, the lives of the Saints is a rule of life to us,
says S. Ambrose, and the history of Ambros. to. 4. f. 248.
the Saints does induce us to imitate their examples, says Nazianzen de laud
Basilij.

And therefore seeing we receive so much good from them both for illustration
of Doctrine, and imitation in manners, though we do not adore them as Gods,
yet we do reverence and honor them for Saints: and as the remembrance of
Josias is like the composition of the perfume that is made by the Art of the
Apothecary, so the remembrance of the Saints is precious unto us, their
memorial is blessed; we reverence their names, we love their pictures, more
dear then the pictures of our dearest friends, and in all respect we give them
as much, as either God commanded, or themselves required.

2. Those that are Saints on earth, are taken 1. Primarily, for the faithful
Ministers. 2. Secondarily, for the godly Christians.


For 1. S. Ambrose in 2. Cor. 1. says, Preachers above all me^ should excel
in sanctity.
that by Saints may be understood the Priests or Preachers of Gods word: and it
is observed by S. Cyril, Maldonat, Bernard, and others, that heretofore the
Prophets or Preachers, and holy men, or Saints, were voces conuertibiles,
equivalent speeches, and so it seems that the name of Prophet in Genesis 20. 7.
Luke 7. 16. John 9. 17. does imply a holy and an upright man.

And therefore David ascribes this Epithete unto Aaron the Saint of the Psalm.
Lord. For they are as a City placed upon a hill, on whom every eye does
look, and of whom every tongue does speak: and therefore they should approve
themselves to be Sancti (...) (...), Saints above al others, like Greg.
Nazianzen, of whom Ruffinus testifies, Ruffinus in vita Naz.
that ea docuit quae fecit, and seipsum minime condemnauit agendo contraria
quam do cebat, he did the things which he taught, and did not condemn himself
by teaching one thing, and doing the contrary: for a true Preacher preaches
not only with his words in the Church, but also by his works in the world, and
he that preaches unto others and does not the same himself, is like the Cook
that dresseth good meat for others, but tastes not a bit himself.

But he is a true Preacher that is in A true Preacher should preach both in
life and doctrine.
verbis Chrysostomus, in factis Polycarpus, the voice of a Crier in the pulpit,
and a Saint of God in the world; a painful Preacher and a godly liver: and
therefore in the garment of the Priest, there were to be a golden Bell and a
Pomegranate, a golden Bell and a Pomegranate in the skirts of the robe round
about. And the Law threatened death unto the Priest, if he made not a Greg.
Pastor. p. 2. c. 4
sound with his Bells, i. if he preached not the Gospel, as Saint Gregory
expounds it. And you know that in a golden Bell there are two things,

1. Matter, 2. Sound,
or 1. Price. 2. Pleasure.


For a golden Bell, and 1. Pretio valet. 2. Dulciter souat.


It is precious in estimation, and pleasant in the eloquution. So should our
Sermons be full of profitable matters, in a pleasant style: for a good matter
slubbered up in rude terms, becomes loath some to the hearers; and elegancie
of words without soundness of matter, is but niceness and vanity: and
therefore a Preacher should match words of delight with words of truth: for the
lips of the Spouse, (i. the Preachers of the Church, as S. Gregory Ide^ in
Cantic.
expounds it, nam praedicatores been labia dicuntur, quia per eos populis
loquitur Christus, and populus Christo) drop down honey combs, i. excellent
matter, and that very sweetly.

And to the golden Bells should be added Pomegranates, which is an excellent
fruit, and was therefore added for a symboll of good works: for he wants not
Pomegranates to his Bells, that ioineth holy works unto his heavenly words,
says S. Gregory; and all this was to signify what sanctity and holiness
was required in the life of the Priests above all other men whatsoever.

And therefore the Fathers of the Primitive Church were wonderful holy and
upright; they had stabilitatem in fide, sanctitatem in opere, such constancy
in their profession, and such sincerity in their conversation, as that none
could justly accuse them, as Ruffinus in the life of Nazian. Nazianzen in the
praise of S. Basil, and Possidon, in the life of S. Augustine, and S. Jerome in
the life of the Fathers do declare.

But within a short time this sanctity was changed to iniquity, and that
saying was fulfilled, qualis Sacerdos talis populus, like Priest* like people;
nay says S. Bernard, the Priest became worse then the people, and did burn in
lust and concupisence, so that

Mane filium virginis afferunt in choro, Legi quotatum ex Innocent. 3.

Nocte filium Veneris agitant in thoro:
And then they respected the satisfying of their lusts more then the saving of
their souls, and regarded their fleeces more then their flocks: for which it
was truly spoken,

Pastores odere gr^gem, nec pascere curant, Sed tondere pecus pecorique
illudere tonso: they became most wicked in their conuersations, and at last
dumb dogs in their functions; worse then all, that should be holier then
all: and therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled against us, and he
delivered us into the hands of our enemies, and took away the rewards of our
labors, to see if this would make us seek unto his name.

Wherefore (beloved brethren) seeing the Lord requires that the Preachers of
his word should be the holiest in their lives, it behooves us to pray to God
with Moses, that his Vrim and his Thummim may be upon the men of his mercy,
that he would indue his Ministers with righteousness, that all his people may
be joyful, and that he would give us grace to take heed unto our selves and
to all the flock of Christ, whereof the holy Ghost has made us Overseers: for
it is most certain, that omnis negligenter pascens toties sibi commendatum
dominicum gregem, conuincitur summum non amare pastorem: He that cares not for
the flock, cares not for him whose flock it is, as Damascen Epist. 4.
speaks.

2. All other Christians that do truly All Christians are Saints in a
threefold respect.
believe in Christ, that are washed in his blood, and sanctified by his Spirit,
are likewise called Saints: and that in a threefold respect.

1. In respect of their head Christ Jesus, into whom they are incorporated, for
he is the holiest of all holies, as I showed you before, and therefore they
being his members, they must needs be holy.

2. In respect of the graces of Gods holy Spirit, wherewith they are endued, as
faith and repentance, whereby their sins are cleansed, and the righteousness
of Christ imputed unto them. For the word Sanctus may be taken, a verbo
sanciendi, says S. Augustine, because that (...)
is called Sanctum, which is constant and firm, but there is nothing that
hinders us to remain firm for ever, but only sin; and therefore sanctity
consists in the condonation and remission c^sinne, says this father.

And the Apostle does infer as much, when after he had rehearsed a They are
Saints that have their sins remitted.
catalogue of the sins of the Corinthians, and said, that sometimes they were
such and such, he adds: But now ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, to
show that when our sins are washed, our unrighteousness forgiven, our
iniquities covered, then are we sanctified.

And Saint Chrysostom upon these Chrysostom. in hom. 5.
words, called Saints, says, that the Apostle means hereby all believers.
And S. Ambrose says, the Apostle means these, by Saints, which do think
well of Christ, and he shows them to be those, Qui censent ei soli fidendum,
and in ipso credunt perfectam esse salutem, which believe only in Christ, and
expect perfect salvation from Christ: and so the Apostle says, that fide
purificantur corda, faith purifieth the hearts, but that which is purified is
holy. And therefore they were called Saints in respect of their faith and
repentance, which washed away their sins, and endued them with the
righteousness of Christ.

Whosoever therefore would be a Saint, he must be penitent for his sins, and
wash the same away with the tears of true repentance. So S. Peter did; fleuit
amare, he wept bitterly, says the Scripture, vt lachrymae lauarent delictum,
that his tears might wash away his sin, says S. Ambrose. Vade and fac tu
similiter: Ambros. in Luc.
if thou will be a Saint, thou must do the like: Lachrymis dilue culpam, to
cleanse away thy sins with tears, for

-- Lachrymis opus est non sanguine dixit,
Saepe per has flecti principis irasolet.
And we must believe in Christ, if we will be Saints, for faith lays hold of
his righteousness, and applies the same unto us, and makes us Saints by the
imputative sanctity of Christ, who was made unto us wisdom, justification,
sanctification and redemption.

3. In respect of the holiness and piety 1. Cor. The Christians of the
primitive Church were most holy in all their life.
which they practiced. For though they lived in the world, yet were they
separated from the world, and had their conuersations in heaven, and respected
not the vanities of this life, but deemed them as nothing and worth nothing,
damnu^ and stercora, as dung, and dross, and triuiall things, as the Apostle
speaks.

And therefore if we compare the life of the Saints with the life of the
wicked, we shall see as much difference betwixt them as is betwixt light and
darkness: for whereas the wicked have their feet swift to shed blood, and are
Mezentius-like, contemners of the Gods, or as the Sicilian Tyrants, vndoers of
men, these godly Saints, says S. Augustine, did wholly separate themselves
Aug. in ps. to. 9. f. 410.
from evil, and fix their whole desire on Christ, and in summo bono sese
delectabant^^, and forsaking all worldly delights, they delighted themselves
only in the chiefest good; and S. Chrysostom says, aliena commoda propriis
Chrysostom. to. 1.
anteponebant, they preferred their neighbors good before their own proper
gain, they shed tears for sinners, and were ready to lay down their lives
even for their enemies, and were of all men admired both for their humility and
charity, for caeteris omnibus humiliores fuerunt, says S. Ambrose, they were
more meek and lowly then all others, and they were so bounteous, that
Christiana religio propter Christianorum erga omnes cuiuscunque religionis
beneficentiam propagata est, the Christian Religion by reason of their
exceeding liberality to all men, did wonderfully increase, says Maximinus.

And therefore as it was the wish of We are now far short of the sanctity of
our forefathers.
Caesar that he had such soldiers as were in the time of Alexander the Great;
so do I wish with all my heart that we had such Saints as these our
forefathers were; for we are but like the leaves of the Cypress tree,
whereof the Poet says,

Pulchra coma est, pulchro digestaeque ordine Al^iat. Emblem.
frondes,
Sed fructus nullos, haec coma pulchra gerit.
Fair leaves but no fruit: or like the Scribes and Pharisees, whose
righteousness and sanctity was (says S. Chrysostom) in ostentatione, and non
in rectitudine intentionis: in ostentation, and not in sincerity of intention;
or like the meteor which the Philosophers called assub, that made a great fiery
show for a while, and then suddenly vanished to nothing.

But the whole life of the former Saints, was a continual exercise of piety
and sanctity; they were just in promise, though it were to their own
hinderance, they were plain in their attire, and moderate in their diet.

S. Basil and Sozomene write, that the Basil. Orat. de 40. mart. Soz^m. l. 7.
beholding of their upright and godly life moved many heathens to become
Christians: and Eusebius says that Maximinus and other cruel Tyrants could
not choose but wonder to see how sedulous they were in doing good, and how
careful in avoiding evil, with true fastings, earnest prayers, diligent
watchings, and painful labors in their vocations: and therefore in respect of
their inchoatiue inherent sactity, they might well be called the Saints of
God, that lived so holily in the sight of God.

But against this it may be objected, that they were not so holy, nor could not
be such Saints, when as the best of them were tainted with great and grievous
sins, as Noah, David, Peter. etc.

I answer, that all Saints in earth have their sins: for whosoever says he
has The best Saints had their imperfections.
no sin, he deceiues himself, and there is no truth in him. Quia nihil
peccare solius Dei est, sapientis est emendare, and poenitentiam agere de
peccato. And yet if we say we have no righteousness, we belie the gifts of
God, or else we be no Christians: what then? Aliquid iustitiae haebemus, and
aliquid non habemus: some righteousness we have, and some we want: we are
baptized, and therefore our sins are forgiven to us: and yet there rests a
conflict against sin, against the flesh, the world and the Devil; but he
that strives, sometimes strikes, and sometimes is stricken, and therefore
though we have some sanctity, yet all sanctity we cannot have, says S.
Augustine, Aug. to. 10. de verb. Apostoli ser. 16. f. 131
and therefore the holiest and purest men are both Saints and Sinners.

1. Saints, because they believe in Christ, and with all desire do affect
sanctity, and do endeavor by all means, vt crescat quod habent, and impleatur
quod non habent, that that sanctity may increase which they have, and that that
may be supplied which they want: for the Apostle does not call them Saints
according to their merit, but according to their purpose, not according to what
they are, but according to what they desire to be, says S. Bernard, and
therefore whosoever Ber. ser. 3 de duabus me^sis. f. 434.
(says he) does purpose in his heart to decline from evil, and to do good,
to keep what he received, to pray for what he wants, to strive to grow
better and better, and if by humane frailty he has done amiss, to amend the
same by true repentance, without doubt he is a Saint of God.

2. Sinners, because the relics of sin are left in them to strive withal,
and their sanctity is but inchoated: and so S. Paul himself confesses, quod
nondum apprehendisset brauium, that as yet he had not attained the mark, and
therefore, septies in die cadit iustus, the holiest man falls seven times a
day, and eorum lapsus vtiles, and their falls are profitable, says S.
Augustine, and ideo scripti sunt, and therefore are written, says Theophilact.
in Mar. c. 14. f. 75.
Theophilact: and that as we may gather for two special reasons.

1. To show Gods goodness, and the riches of his mercy in forgiving our
sins, for where sin abounded, there grace super abounded.

2. For our manifold instructions, that The falls of the Saints are registered
for our good.
we should learn from the examples of the lapses and infirmities of the
Saints, not for the discrediting or dishonouring of them, which are now in
heaven, but for the bettering of our selves which are yet in earth; for the
consideration of their falls may serve,

1. For our humiliation. When we see their frailty, we should learn humility,
God suffered them to fall, that we should not presume when we stand, and
therefore the Apostle says, qui stat videat ne cadat, for as the staff that
is held up by the hand, as soon as ever the hand leaves it, though the hand
throws it not down, yet it falls down of it self, even so we even the
best of us, as soon as ever God withdrawes his help from us, we presently fall
of our selves: and therefore in all thy sanctity learn humility.

2. For our circumspection, to beware of falling; for cecidit Petrus vt reliqui
caueant: S. Peter fell, that others might take heed of falling; if I see a
Giant throw down a strong man, I shall be more afraid he will sooner throw
down me. And therefore, non sit lapsus maiorum imitatio minorum, let not the
fall of the greater be for imitation to the lesser, sed casus maiorum, sit timor
minorum, but let the fall of the greater induce a fear and a care in the
lesser, when they wrestle against that roaring Lion, says S. Augustine.

3. For our consolation, that we should not despair when we fall into sin:
for many falling into sin, desperando plus pereunt quam peccando, do sooner
perish by their despair then by their sin: for plus peccauit Judas desperando
de venia, Aug. in l. de Not. and gratia fol. 316.
quam tradendo Christum; Judas sinned more by despairing of pardon then in
betraying his Redeemer: and therefore against this dangerous disease the
commemoration of the falls of the Saints may help us, says S. Augustine* for
their sins are set down not for their shame, but for our consolation, vt in
ijs tanquam in speculis diuitias bonitatis diuinae contemplemur, that we might
Zanch. in Ephesians. ca. 2. fo. 85.
in them as in a glass see the riches of Gods great mercy, and thereby
conceive hope of pardon unto our selves, says Zanchius: for seeing they were
sinners as well as we, yet through repentance, obtained pardon; even so, if we
repent, we shall obtain pardon as well as they: for God is rich in mercy over
all, and unto all that call upon him.

4. For a confutation of Donatists, Catharists, We must not forsake the Church
upon the pretended corruption of the Church.
Brownists, etc. that would have the Church to be of perfect beauty, and from
her infirmity, do conclude her nullitie: for the infirmity of Gods children
does not presently deny them to be Gods children: and therefore the
rottenness of many members of the Church ought not to induce us to relinquish
the Church; for so long as the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses Chair, we
are inioined to hear them as the Church of God.

Yea, though there should be many imperfections, both in manners and in
Doctrine, yet many circumstances are to be considered before we deprive them
from being a Church: for no doubt but the Church of Rome had her imperfections
in both respects: and yet the Apostle says they were beloved of God, called,
Saints; or if it be denied, that it had not, then may the same be instanced in
the Churches of Corinth, and of Galatia: for in the Church of Corinth, not only
touching manners the discipline of the Church was loosely observed, but also
the sincerity of Preaching was much profaned, and a great question was among
them touching the resurrection of the flesh, an article of such weight, that
without it, our faith, our hope, and all our preaching were but vain, and yet
the Church of Corinth holds the name of the true Church of Christ; and in the
Church of Galatia, the most part of them were turned aside by the false
Apostles from free justification by the grace of Christ (which is the
principal pillar of the Christian Church) and yet S. Paul calls them the
Church of Christ.

But the Scripture tells us, that 1 Timothy 4. 1. and 2. Pet. 2. 1.
many should make such schisms, and separations from the Church, and therefore
the godly and wise should be nothing moved at their departure, for though they
pretend the cause thereof to be the want of sanctity in us, yet the true cause
indeed, is the iniquity, or at least the want of judgment in themselves: for
whenever we read of the name of Saints, ne putemus sanctitatis vocem
significare perfectionem, we should not think that the name of sanctity does
implie perfection, says S. Augustine, Aug. l. 6. contra Julian.
for that there is no Saint that wants sin, and yet hereby he cease not
to be a Saint.

And therefore, beloved, seeing the Saints and holiest men were not so holy,
but that they had their sins and imperfections, ideo patientiam eorum and
Ambros. to. 4. fo. 249.
virtutes imitemur non vitia, we should follow their virtues and not their
vices, says S. Ambrose: for not all the facts of righteous men are to be laid
as patterns for imitation, says S. Augustine, Aug. l. contra Mendac. ad
Consent.
but only those are to be followed wherein they follow Christ: for he is that
true way which leads unto life, and that true vibilia which will preserve
every man from wandering that will be guided by his direction, and therefore to
say we have erred with our Fathers, whether in life or doctrine, will not
excuse us in the day of trial.

3. Zanchie observes that all those Zanch. in c. 1. ad Philip.
that are baptized, and do profess Christian Religion, are likewise called
Saints: for though many of the Jews were wicked people, yet because they
professed themselves separated from the world, and associated themselves to the
communion of Saints, they were all called gens sancta and populus Sanctus, a
holy nation and a chosen people. Even so, the professors of Christ are called
Saints before men, though they be never so wicked before God: but herein
stands the difference.

The true Saints are not only professors, but also practisers of true
holiness, and therefore they be Saints, Sanctitate Sacramentali, imputatiua,
and inherente, by profession, by imputation, and by an inchoated inherent
sanctity: but the other are only sacramental Saints, Saints only by
profession, and not by practice, Saints outward, but not inward, a great show
of holiness ad extra, before the world, but their inward parts are very
wickedness, as the Prophet speaks.

And surely these Saints multiplicati There be many sorts of fained Saints.
sunt super numerum, are infinite in number and of diverse sorts; as, 1. The
proud Saint, 2. The idle Saint, 3. The profane Saint, 4. The verbal Saint, 5.
The Herodian Saint, 6. The Pharisaicall Saint,
or Professor.

1. Are those who in their pride and womanish niceness, do withdraw themselves
from the Church, and as if God and his ministers were all bound to attend them,
do turn their parlors into temples, and their carousing pots into communion
cups, whereas S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. to. 4. in 1. Cor. hom. 36.
says, that neque vnguentaria taberna nec officina forensis ecclesia est, we
must not make our shops or tauernes to be temples; for that the Church is locus
Angelorum, locus Archangelorum, regia Dei, coelum ipsum, a place or a house of
Angels, of Archangels, the Court of God, and Heaven it self.

2. Are those who upon a careless negligence are like those of whom S.
Chrysostom complains, that toto anno Idem in 2. Cor. hom. 2.
vix semel in ecclesia conspiciuntur, are scarce seen in the Church once a
year, and therefore are worse then the very Jews as S. Ambrose speaks: for
Ambros. ser. 19. in Psalm. 119.
that they came near unto God with their mouths, and honored him with their
lips, but these give him neither speech nor presence.

3. Are those, who though they come to the Church, yet were it as good they
came not at all, for that they make the house of prayer, a place of intemperate
babbling, or else otij diuersorium Seneca ^p. ad Lucil.
and somni domum, a place of sleeping and snorting, as Eutichus did.

4. Are those that are like the Jews indeed, that draw near unto God with
their lips, but their hearts are far from him.

5. Are those that like Herod will be contented to amend many of their lesser
faults, but their dear and darling sins they cannot yet relinquish.

6. Are those that as the Pharisees devoured widows houses under the color of
long prayers: so do these commit all villainies under this color of piety:
these men are oues habitu, vulpes astu, crudelitate lupi, in sheep clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves: none make more show of piety; none are
fuller of all iniquity; I will say no more of them, but as Saint Augustine
says, vae illi misero qui sanctitatem Aug. l. de Spiritu and anima c. 62.
seruat in memoria, and scribit in charta, sed non habet in vita; Woe to those
miserable men that have sanctity and piety in their minds, in their tongues,
and in the sight of men, but not in their hearts, in their lives, or in the
sight of God.

Wherefore (beloved brethren) let not us be such Saints as these be: for we
must be holy as God is holy, i. truly, and sincerely without hypocrisy, for
God made us in his own image, which consists in holiness and true
righteousness, but these are holy as the devil is holy, and transformeth
himself into an Angel of light, i. only in show, that he may deceive us, for
that tuta frequensque via sub amici fallere nomen, it is easy to deceive under
a fained show.

4. All other things that are dedicated to Zanch. in ca 5. ad Philip.
holy uses, and to the service of God, are likewise Sancta, sanctified things:
but of these I will say nothing in this place, as being without the compass of
this Text. And so much for the manifold sorts of Saints.

Yet one thing more I must needs note touching these differences of these
Saints, that some would have these words, called to be Saints, joined
together, as if the Apostle meant, that they were called from the filthiness
of sin Erasm. in h. loc.
unto holiness of life, and thereby would give them to understand two things.

1. Terminus a quo. That is, from what they were called, from darkness, from
wickedness, and therefore, that they should not return with the dog into his
vomit, or with the sow to wallow in the mire, a doctrine against backsliding
reuolters.

2. Terminus ad quem. That is, unto what they were called, unto sanctity, unto
light, and therefore should walk as children of light, and be now a great
deal more holy and more wary to commit sin then ever they were before; for
this is the end of our election, Ephesians. 4. Holiness the only thing that God
requires of us. Heb. 13. 14.
that we should be holy, of our redemption, that we should be holy, and of
our vocation, that we should be holy: yea, this is the end of all, that we
should be holy. For without holiness no man shall see the face of God; but
the pure in heart are blessed because they shall see God: and no marvel, for
though the Philosophers say, penes scire maxim attenditur similitudo hominum
ad Deum, that knowledge makes men come nearest to the similitude of God, yet
Divinity says, that by sanctity and purity we are made (...), consortes 2.
Pet. 1. 4.
diuinae naturae, partakers of the divine nature, not by transformation or
incorporation of us into the identity or nature of God, but by the conformation
of us to the similitude and likeness of God: especially in this one attribute
of being holy as he is holy: for licet potestas subiectionem, and maiestas
Bern. Sermon. 1. in Die not. Dom.
admirationem, neutra tamen imitationem: though the power of God inciteth us to
subjection, and his majesty moves us to admiration, yet none of them requires
imitation, but only this one attribute of sanctity, and all the rest that do
proceed from this or be like unto this. For as Christ says not disce a me
mundos fabric are atque mortuos suscitare, learn of me to create worlds, or to
raise the dead men out of their graves, says S. Augustine, but learn of me to
be meek and lowly in heart, Math. 11. so God says not be infinite, be
eternal, be omnipotent, but be ye holy, be ye pure, be ye clean, because
I am holy, I am pure, and I am clean.

Wherefore beloved brethren, let us set before our eyes,

1. God, that is sanctity and purity it self. 2. The Saints of God that lived
heretofore in all purity. 3. The benefits of sanctity and holiness.
1. How acceptable it is to God.

(...). The manifold benefits of sanctity.


The very Heavens do not so delight our God, as the holiness and sanctity of
the sons of God; deliciae Dei cum filiis Sanctis: for his only delight is
sanctity, and in holy men, he loves them as the Apple of his eye.

2. How commendable it is among all men, the very wicked commend it, (...)
Chrysostom. in c. 4. ad Ephesians.
(...). For sanctity is such a thing, that the very contemners thereof admire
it, and sin is such a thing that the very sinners themselves condemn it,
says S. Chrysostom.

3. How comfortable it is to the Saints themselves, it makes them neither
desirous to live, nor yet afraid to dye.

Missatriumphalem non tangunt fulmina laurum.

Their sanctity does so settle them in the assurance of Gods love, that all the
thunders of this world can never shake them, sed men's immota manet, for this
rooteth them here in the love of God, and unites them hereafter with the
nature of God, that they shall be blessed for evermore.

I say, let us always set these considerations before our eyes, and I hope we
shall be moved thereby to study and to endeavor to become true Saints in
earth, that we may be Saints with God in heaven.

And so much of the Saints and their description, which is the first part of
this text. Now follows the second part touching the blessings requested,
wherewith the Saints are delighted.

PART. 2. Grace be to you and peace, etc.
THese are the things requested, these are the things wherewith the Saints are
delighted. And yet that is true which the Poet speaks,

Inueniat quod quisque lubet, non omnibus vnum est
Quod placet, hic spinas colligit, ille rosas.
All men be not of the same mind, All men are not delighted with the same
things. Esaias 3.
for some affect one thing, some another.

Some delight in bravery, a vanity only fit for women, of whom the Prophet
sets down their desire, and delight at large, and of whom the Poet says,

Foemina culta nimis,
Foemina casta minus.
The more proud the less honest; for where great pride is, there can be but
little honesty.

Others delight in pleasure and voluptuousnes, but nocet empta dolor voluptas,
Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 12.
they shall pay dear enough for the same, when the bread in their bellies
shall be turned into the gall of aspes, as the Prophet speaks.

And most desire the wealth and honors of this world, they spend all their
time and all their strength in the pursuit of this vanity, and yet most of them
never attain unto it, and they that have it, have it peppered and poudered
with cares, griefs, and sorrows: for cuncta mortalium incerta, all mortal
things are uncertain things, says Tacitus, and omnia terrena cacumina
temporali Tacitus annal. l. 1.
mutabilitate nutantia, all terrene heights do reele with temporal
mutabilities, says S. Augustine: and A^g. de ciui^. Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
this may be seen in those great Commanders, Xerxes, Bajazet, Craesus, and
Belisarius, to whom Rome owed her self thrice at least, and yet at last came
to date obolum Belisario, and therefore, how can it be but that they should be
full All worldly things are full of cares and dangers.
of fear of losing those things which they got with such cares? and if they do
leese them, their sorrow is doubled; for non est tanti gaudii excelsa tenere,
quanti moeroris est de excelsis corruere, nec tanta gloria sequi potest
victoriam, quanta ignominia sequi potest ruinam: it cannot be so much joy to
be exalted, as it is grief to be dejected; nor so much glory to triumph, as
it is a shame to be vanquished, says S. Ambrose: and therefore, -- Iam non ad
culmina rerum Claud. l. 1. in Ruffin.


Iniustos crcuisse queror, tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsu maiore ruant -- -- --
It grieves me nor, says Claudian, that wicked men are hoysted up to the
height of all prosperity, that their fall may be the more grievous into the
depth of misery.

And so you see that ipse mundi qualiscunque status plus anxietatis quam
iucunditatis habet, that prosperity and sublimity, and all worldly things, have
more anxiety and grief then joy or comfort annexed to them, and if there be
any joy, yet praeterit iucunditas non Bern. Fp. 113.
redditura, and manet anxietas non relictura, the little joy will soon vanish
and never return, but the grief and sorrow will still increase and never
vanish.

And therefore, seeing that bona huius vitae sunt vanescendo transeuntia, the
Aug. l. 20. c. 3. de ciuit. Dei.
goods of this world are but vanities flying away, (...), things indifferent,
as the Peripateticks, or (...), goods, not in their own nature, but in our
judgment, as Plato calls them, the Apostle wishes those goods, quae sunt
sine fine mansura, which shall remain for ever, and seeing the goods of this
world are full of sorrow and grief, he wishes those goods that might fill us
with joy and comfort, he leaves wealth and plenty to the worldlings, and
wishes grace and peace unto the Saints.

Grace is the beginning of spiritual Grace and peace are the chiefest and only
good things.
life, because by grace we have our sins remitted, says the gloss, and are
thereby freely justified, says the Apostle, and peace is the quieting of the
mind in faith, which the gloss terms a reconciliation with God, and it is
the very end of all happiness that is desired, as the Prophet shows, sedebit
populus men's, in plenitudine pacis: for then shall be perfect peace, when the
will does rest it self satisfied in the fullness of all good, and is fully
freed from all evil; and so the Apostle in wishing grace and peace, wishes
the a and o, the beginning and ending of all spiritual good. And because the
two chiefest fiends of man are sin and a bad conscience, Lutherus in Gal. c.
1. ^. 3
therefore the Apostle wishes grace to release us from sin, and peace to
quiet our conscience; and because there can be no peace with God, except we
have the grace of Christ, therefore first and chiefly he desires grace, and
then peace.

Now touching grace, I will only observe these 4. points, viz.

The 1. Acceptance 2. Division 3. Necessity 4. Certainty
of God.

1. To omit all acceptations of small purpose to know, set down by Bellarmine,
Bell. l. de great. and lib. arbit. Tho. 1. 2 a. q. 110. ar. 1. Grace is diversely
taken.
and Aquinas, and others: I say grace is taken two ways.

1. For the free favor of God whereby he pardons our sins, and receives
us into his grace: and so it is understood in Genesis 6. 2. that Noah found grace
in the eyes of the Lord: and so in Luke 1. 30. that Mary found grace with God:
and in this sense we are said to be justified by grace; for that nihil boni
Aug in Ps. 31.
fecisti, and datur tibi remissio peccatorum, thou have done no good, and yet
thy sins are forgiven thee, and so Fulgentius says, God gives grace freely
Fulgent. l. 1. ad Monimum.
to the unworthy for his justification: datur ex prima gratia non solum
iustificatis vita beata, sed etiam glorificatis vita aeterna. So that all our
happiness, justification and glorification do proceed only from this first
grace, that is, the free love and favor of Almighty God.

2. It is taken for all those gifts that are given unto us by grace, whether
they pertain to salvation, as faith, hope, and charity, or only for the
edification 1 Cor. 13.
of others, as the gift of tongues, of miracles, of healing, and such like, and
so it is taken in Acts 11. 23. 2. Cor. 6. Ephesians. 4. 7.

And in this sense do almost all the Schoolmen expound the word grace,
wheresoever they find it, which made them ascribe our justification to these
gifts of grace, and not to the free favor of God, from whence proceed all
those gifts and graces.

We say these gifts are means whereby we are brought to eternal life, but
that by them we are justified, or made worthy of eternal life we utterly
deny. That we are justified only by the free love and favor of God.
For the Apostle after he had proved all to be sinners, he adds, as many as
are justified are justified freely, (...), through his grace by the redemption
which is in Christ Jesus, where, by the name of grace is understood the free
favor of God, without any our dignities either natural or supernatural.

For the word justified he opposes to the two former things that he had
proved.

1. That all were sinners. 2. That therefore deprived of the glory of God.
And the word grace he opposes to all our works: yea, though done by the
help of Gods spirit; so that works and grace cannot agree to justify; for if
of grace, then not of works, otherwise grace were no more grace, Aug. in Ps. 34.
quia gratia nullo modo gratia nisi sit gratuita omni modo, it can be grace no
way, unless it be freely every way: and by the name of works, he does not
only mean external works, but also all inward virtues, and faith it self as
it is a certain act of the understanding and will.

And this our Savior confirms, saying, when you have done all that are
enjoined you, that is, whatsoever the Luke 17.
law requires (and it requires faith, love, etc.) when you have done it, not
attempted to do it, and when you have done all this, not some part of this,
but all, both the inward and the outward works: yet even then say that you are
unprofitable servants, and what is that but unworthy of eternal life?

And this might be proved further by the example of Abraham, and by many other
arguments, but that I hope this is sufficient to prove that the Apostle
exludeth from our justification not only outward works, but also all inward
graces and virtues; and by being justified by grace, does understand this free
favor of God, which is residing in God and not in us, as the Philosophers say,
honor resideth in the Arles. aethic. l. 1. c 5.
person honoring, and not in the person honored; and does not understand any
virtue infused into us by grace, for that all such graces and virtues, be they
never so excellent, yet are they imperfect, and tainted by our infirmities, and
therefore cannot justify us, and make us worthy of eternal life.

And yet we must understand, that That he which is justified cannot be without
good works.
it is one thing to say faith justifies and not works: and another thing to
say, that justifying faith may be without works. And that it is one thing to
say, the free grace and favor of God justifies, and not the gifts of grace.
(i.) regeneration or renouation of works: and another thing to say that this
free grace of God does justify us without renouation of good works.

For as the fire has heat and light, both inseparable in it, and yet warmeth
us by the heat and not by the light: so the free grace of God and the gift of
grace are inseparably conferred upon a true christian man, and yet we are
justified by the former, and not by the latter: and therefore whosoever says
he is justified by grace, and yet is void of good works, he deceiues
himself, and there is no truth in him. For as the fire does ever yield forth
his heat and light, so the love and favor of God does ever infuse his graces
and effects of his love into our hearts, though not thereby to make us worthy
of eternal life, but thereby, as by external means to bring us to eternal
life. These being via ad regnum and non causa regnandi, the way that leads
us, but not the cause that procures us eternal life, as S. Bernard speaks.
And so much for the acceptance of grace.

De 2. Having spoken of the first, The diverse sorts of infused graces.
grace, (i.) the free favor of God from whence all other gifts and graces do
spring, we are now to consider of the infused graces or the effects of the
favor of God; touching which we must understand that the favor of God is
distinguished into

1. Grace purposing, 2. Grace working.
The 1. is the grace of election, whereby he has chosen us to salvation before
the beginning of the world.

The 2. is the actual execution of Ephesians. 1. 4.
this decree, generally by creating the world, and sending his Son, that
whosoever believes in him might have eternal life. And particularly by giving
unto every one those helps that are necessary for to bring them to salvation:
and these helps the Apostle calls, (...). The gift by grace.

And they are distinguished by the schoolmen into Aquinas 1. 2 ae q. 3. art 1.
Darand. in 3. sentent. Distinct. 13. q 1.
1. Gratias gratis datas, graces freely bestowed. 2. Gratias gratos facientes,
graces that make us acceptable.


Of the 1. sort are those 9. graces which the Apostle reckons 1 Cor. 12. 14.
and are given for the good of others, more then of our selves, as when I preach
to others and am my self a cast away, and they are called graces freely given,
because they be only given unto us, and yet do not make us any whit the more
acceptable in the sight of God, no more then Judas was, for all his
Apostleship. And

Of the second sort are,

1. And principally the free favor of God forespoken of, that does chiefly
make us acceptable in the sight of God; and

2. Those infused graces and effects of this first grace that are wrought in
our hearts by his holy spirit, as faith, hope, repentance, and such like. And
these are called gratiae gratos facientes, graces that make us acceptable, not
because they are sufficient to justify us, or to make us worthy of eternal
life, (as the Schoolmen do imagine) but because God is delighted and well
pleased with the works of righteousness.

And these graces which make us thus acceptable before God, are divided into 1.
Habitual graces, as faith, hope, charity. 2. Transient, which are called the
grace of special aid, which is a certain motion of Gods spirit, inducing us
to the works of piety:


And it is, 1. Excitans. 2. Adiunans.


1. Inciting man to do well: and

2. Helping him forward to do that good which before it had incited him unto.

And this grace of special aid is either 1. sufficient. 2. effectual.


1. Sufficient, whereby a man may will and do well if he please. 2.
Effectual, whereby a man is converted indeed, and does will and do that which
is good; and this effectual grace is also twofold, 1. Working, which is also
called preuenient. 2. Coworking, called subsequent.

The 1. preuenteth a man from sinning, and prepares his heart to will that
which is good.

The 2. does effect, that a man shall do and perform indeed that good which
before he willed and desired: and under these heads may all other divisions of
grace be comprehended, and subdivided: and therefore so much shall serve for
the division of grace.

3. Touching the necessity of grace, there be two special things that do
declare the same.

1. The devils great subtlety. 2. Man's great infirmity.
1. Indeed we have many enemies, but The devil is our great enemy.
the devil is the chief of all; for he is not only draco (...), that great
dragon, but also (...), the greatest enemy that we have, like Jobs Leuiathan,
the greatest among creatures; neither is he only (...), the greatest; but also
(...), the busiest enemy that we have, like S. Peter's roaring lion, that
seeks at all times, and by all means to devour us: and therefore laqueos
ponit in diuitijs, laqueos in paupertate, Aug. solil. q. ca. 16.
he lays snares upon riches, snares upon poverty, and snares upon every
thing (as Antonie saw in a vision the whole world ouerlaied with nets) that
thereby he may entrap us.

2. If we look into our selves, we Man is wonderful frail.
shall find our selves fragiles ad resistendum, debiles ad operandum, and
faciles ad seducendum, unable to resist, unwilling to do good, and ready to be
seduced, as S. Bernard says: and therefore Bern. de aduent. dom. ser. 7.
have we not need of grace, have we not need of help? but because contraria
iuxta se posita magis elucescunt, the necessity of light is seen by the
horror of darkness, we must look a little further into the infirmity of man,
that we may thereby see the necessity of grace.

But a man, without the help of grace,

1. Cannot do good. 2. Cannot avoid sin. 3. Cannot rise from sin.
De 1. S. Augustine says, that sine Aug. in l. de corrept. and gratia.
gratia nullum prorsus sine cogitando, sieve volendo, sieve agendo faciunt
homines bonum, without grace we can neither do, nor will, nor think any good
thing: and therefore Anselmus says, that as the earth, though it may bring
forth of it self thorns and thistles, yet cannot bring forth food fit for
man without the sowing of good seed therein: even so, man, though Anselm. l.
1. de corrupt. and great.
of himself he may produce evil works, and idle thoughts, yet can he bring
forth no good thing without the good seed of the grace of God.

And as the eye of the body (says Raynerius) though it be perfectly whole and
sound, yet can it not see any thing unless it be helped with the brightness
of the light, so a man, though he were perfectly just, yet can he not live
justly unless he be helped by Rayner tit. de gratia.
the eternal light of grace: and so our Savior himself testifies, sine me
nil potestis facere, without me ye can do nothing.

De 2. As we can do no good, so we cannot avoid evil; for the grace of God is
the light of a Christian, and therefore without grace, we are in darkness, and
they that walk in darkness know not whither they go. And this the Apostle
shows, that before we have grace to direct us, we are darkened in our
understandings, and therefore when our blind judgments do lead our blind
affections, they must both fall into the ditch.

De 3. Being fallen into sin, we cannot possibly rise from sin; for si stare
non potuit humana natura adhuc integra, quo minus resurgere iam corrupta? if
man could not stand when he was in his integrity, how can he now arise being
full of all infirmity, says S. Bernard? Besides, the justice of God required,
that he which would not stand in grace when he might, should not rise when he
would.

And therefore the gloss upon the words of the Psalmist, Spiritus vadens and
non rediens, observes a double infirmity in man.

1. A passing away from the world A twofold infirmity of man.
by death, and not able to return again. 2. A passing away from grace to
sin, and not able to rise again.
And S. Augustine says, that non omnino inueniretur ouis aberrata nisi
pastoris misericordia quaereretur, the lost sheep had never returned to the
sheepfold, had she not been sought and brought again by the shepherd: for
as a man that is fallen into a deep dungeon, can never be delivered unless he
be helped; so a man that is fallen into sin, can never rise from sin
unless he be helped by grace: and so you see the greatness of man's
infirmity, he can do no good, he must needs fall, and then he cannot rise:
and therefore as Cassiodorus speaks, mouet pium iudicem Cassiod. in Psalm.
fragilitas considerata peccantium, the frailty of sinners being considered,
it moved the righteous Judge to pity us; and so the Psalmist says,
recordatus God pittieth our infirmities.
est quia caro, he remembers that we are but dust, and therefore pittieth us
and sends his grace into our hearts, that so by the assistance of that grace,
we may do all things, as the Apostle speaks, we may rise from sin, we may
do good, and persevere in good unto our end.

By this therefore we may perceive from whence all things do proceed.

1. All good from grace. 2. All evil for want of grace.
And therefore, if there be any goodness, All good proceeds from grace.
any virtue in any of us, hoc totum gratiae semper reputa, we must ascribe all
to grace, and say with the Apostle, by the grace of God I am that I am; for
without his grace, I was a persecuter, and that I now preach and labor more
abundantly then the rest, it is not I that do it, (i. of my self alone that
do it) but the grace of God that is in me. So should every one of us confess
the like, that every one which reioiceth, may rejoice in the Lord: for
whatsoever good is in us, the same is only from God, and the grace of God; a
good thought, is gratia infusa; a good word, is gratia effusa; and a good act,
is gratia diffusa.

On the other side, if any man commits The want of grace is the cause of all
evil.
sin, if he comes to an unhappy end, it is because he wanted grace; and
therefore (beloved brethren) as the Apostle in the beginning of every Epistle
wishes grace unto the parties to whom he writes, and concludes every Epistle
with the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, and so make grace the
a and the o, the first thing, the last thing, and the chiefest thing he
desires; so should we, before all things, and above all things, desire grace
unto our selves, and to our children: for quando ignorabam, gratia me
instruxit; Bernard.
quando steti, me tenuit; quando cecidi, me erexit; quando veni, me suscepit:
If we be ignorant, grace will instruct us; if we stand, grace will hold us; if
we fall, grace will raise us; if we come unto God, grace will receive us; and
if we want any thing, grace will supply it: O therefore sweet Jesus grant us all
thy grace.

De 4. Touching the certainty, or assurance of grace, we must consider

these two points 1. Of the being or having of it. 2. Of the continuing. or not
leesing of it.


De 1. If want of grace be so lamentable, Many think themselves too sure of
grace, when as indeed they have no grace.
as I showed you before, it is a point most requisite to examine whether we
have saving grace or not. Many indeed are so sure of grace, that they grow
careless to seek for grace; for as multi ad veritatis cognitionem
peruenissent, nisi se iamdudum peruenisse putassent, many might have attained
to learning, but that they thought themselves learned enough; so it may be
these men would seek for grace, but that they think they have grace enough:
but I fear me, many of these will prove themselves like those that dream they
are at a pleasant banquet, and when they awake their souls are fainting, for
having slept their sleep, they find nothing in their hands.

And therefore they should take heed unto themselves, lest they deceive
themselves, sub specie recti, fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and vmbra: for
nature many times will counterfeit grace, as the Magitians of Egypt
counterfeited Moses, and it is the policy of Satan to make nature play the
part of an Ape, to imitate grace in good things, as Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and
such like, to feign repentance, when as they were hypocrites, to make them
careless in seeking for grace, by persuading them through these fained shows,
that they are sure enough of grace.

It is a strange thing to consider the Lucan. l. 1.
deceitfulness of man's heart, nondum tibi defuit hostis, man never wanted
enemies, yet none greater enemy to man In some things man is the greatest
enemy to himself.
then himself, in te verte manus: he deceiues his own self, yea many times
in matters of greatest weight, in the chiefest points of his own salvation.

And therefore that we may not wholly deceive our selves herein, but somewhat
understand our own estate, we must consider that a thing is known three ways,

1. Certainly. 2. Reuealedly. 3. Experimentally.
De 1. To know a thing infallibly, is (...), to know the first Arles 1. M^^aph.
cause, but the first cause of grace is God himself, and his only will is the
cause why he gives it to one, and denies it to another; and therefore,
because God is great, exceeding our capacities, and Job 36.
his councels are unsearchable, (for who has known the mind of the Lord?)
the Schoolmen do most constantly auerre, that a priori, from the first cause
we cannot possibly know the certainty of the presence, or of the absence of
Gods Thom. 1. 2 ae. q. 112. ar. 5. Job 9.
grace in us, according to that of Job, Si venerit ad me non videbo eum, si
abierit non intelligam: and they render three reasons to prove it expedient
that we should not know it.

1. That the fear of Gods judgments might humble us. 2. That presumptuous
security should not overthrow us. 3. That we should watchfully and earnestly
desire and expect grace: and seek for the same as for silver.
De 2. A man may know his estate, and the certainty of having grace by
revelation, as S. Paul did, when the Lord told him, sufficit tibi gratia mea,
my grace shail be sufficient for thee.

De 3. A man may know the certainty of having grace by experience, i. by the
effects and fruits of grace that he perceives in himself, and this is the
only way that we do or may know that we have any grace.

Now the fruits of grace are many: S. Bernard reckons three,

1. The hatred of sins past. Bern. in l. de lib. arbit.
2. The contempt of present vanities. 3. The desire of future felicity.
Whosoever finds these things in How we may know whether we have grace or not.
himself, may assure himself they proceed from grace. And Aquinas says, that
whosoever does believe in God, delight in Christ, despise the world, and hate
his sins, he may assure himself he has the grace of God: and what can we
say more then this? or what can any man say less then this? for the tree must
be known by the fruit, says our Savior: and therefore the knowledge of
having grace is not by any presumptuous supposition, but by a diligent
examination of having the same by the fruits of the same; and thus we say that
a man may know the certainty of his estate by the fruits of grace.

1. By the inward testimony of the Spirit, for we have not received the spirit
1 Cor. 2. 12. Romans 8. 15.
of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things
that are given to us of God. And so S. Augustine says, persuasisti mihi
Domine, thy Spirit, o God, persuades me that I am thy son, and that thou
have given me thy grace, and therefore teaches me to cry Abba father.

2. Because we are not to believe every How to know whether we have the Spirit
of God.
spirit, but are to try them, whether they be of God, we may know the same by
the outward fruits of the Spirit, whereof S. John sets down three, as the
true signs and touchstone whereby we may know the Spirit of truth from the
spirit of error.

1. By the confession of the truth, 1 Ioh. 1 Ioh. 4. 2.
3. 2. And this S. Paul likewise shows when he says, that with the mouth
confession Romans 10. 10.
is made unto salvation; for whosoever confesses Christ before men, him will
Christ acknowledge before his Father which is in heaven. And therefore
whosoever is ashamed of his profession, or conceales the truth of Christian
religion, he may assure himself he wants grace, and is as yet void of the
Spirit of God.

2. By the receiving of the testimony of Verse. 6.
the Son of God, (i.) by the hearing of the word of Christ. And this our
Savior touches, when he says, My Ioh. 10.
sheep hear my voice. And therefore they are not of God, that will not hear
the word of God.

3. By love and charity toward our Verse. 7.
brethren: and so our Savior says, Hereby shall all men know that you are my
disciples, if you love one another: and S. John says, Hereby we know that we
1 Ioh. 3. 14.
are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren.

And S. Paul does more largely set down the fruits of the Spirit of God, viz.
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, Gal. 5. 22.
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc.

These and the like graces unto these, are the fruits of the Spirit of God,
whereby a man may know whether he has the Spirit of God or not. For so S. John
shows plainly: In this the 1 Ioh. 3. 10.
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil, whosoever does
not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, but
he that loves his brother abides in the light, and he that does
righteousness, is righteous, Verse. 7.
even as God is righteous.

And so we find that the Saints of God did assure themselves of the grace of
God, by the fruits of the Spirit of God, as Job says, I know that my redeemer
Job 19. 25.
lives. And S. Paul, I live by the Gal. 2. 20.
faith in the Son of God.

And lest any man should say, that these men knew it by special revelation,
and not by any outward examination, we find the fathers of the same mind For
Epiphanius says, Christ was sent to be a Savior, that he might redeem from
bondage, (...), Epiphan. in anchor. page 496. Basil. in definitionibus.
and was made unto me righteousness, sanctification and redemption. But how
knew he this? S. Basil shows, Certo quis persuaderi potest sibi dimissa esse
peccata si odit iniquitatem and amat iustitiam: Any man may know this, if he
hates sin and loves righteousness. And so Ferus shows the same thing,
saying, In Christo si te per fidem and dilectionem inueneris, certus esto te
esse a Deo iustificatum, whosoever finds himself to be in Christ by faith
and charity, he may assure himself that he has grace, and is justified by
that grace: and so you see that by the fruits of grace, we may know we have
grace.

Yet I say this knowledge of having All our knowledge of having grace is very
weak.
grace is weak and full of imbecillitie.

1. Because all our knowledge, our hope, our faith, and all other things that
we have, are but imperfect, and only in part, as the Apostle speaks.

2. Because the works of nature are so like the works of grace, the faith of
hypocrites so hardly to be distinguished from the faith of Gods chosen, and the
spirit of error so like the Spirit of truth, vt nec ovum ouo similius, that
without diligent search and examination we cannot discern the one from the
other.

3. Because all of us, and the best of us are so pressed, and almost oppressed with
sins and the cares of this world, that we are careless and negligent in
trying the spirits, and examining the certainty of our estate, or of having
grace by these fruits of grace. But they that will try and examine the same,
may know the same, and the more they try, the better they may know, and
knowing the same they may speak of the same, to the glory of God and the
comfort of themselves: for, Dicere se esse iustificatum Aug. in Psalm. 85.
non est superbia elati, sed confessio non ingrati: For a righteous man to say
he is justified, is no token of pride and arrogancy, but of thankfulness and
true humility, to confess to others what he received from God. But the
boasting of the wicked is mere presumption, a wonder to see they are so sure
of grace, and yet the world sees they are full of sins.

And therefore this should teach us to work our salvation with fear and
trembling, and not to be too presumptuous, or too cocke-sure of grace, but
sometimes to be dubious, for Is qui nil dubitat nil capit inde boni, he that
never doubts of his estate, never tries his estate, whereas they that fear
and doubt, will be willing to examine themselves, and to use all diligence to
know their own estate, whether they have grace or not: for God will not make
us too too certain, causa solicitudinis, Bernard.
lest we should be too too careless, and yet he would not leave us altogether
uncertain, gratia consolationis, lest we should be dejected. But what he
denied us a priori, he granted a posteriori, that by the fruits and effects of
grace, we might know whether we have any grace.

De 2. We must consider the certainty of the continuing, or not losing of
grace, a point of more difficulty, and no less necessity to be known then
the former. For,

I find concerning the same three opinions.

1. Some say that both good and Whether saving grace once had, may afterward be
utterly lost.
bad may receive grace, and yet both good and bad by their sins may lose the
same, both totally, wholly, and finally.

2. Others say, that both good and bad may have grace, and that both of them
may lose it totally, but that both of them cannot lose it finally: for that the
Saints cannot finally lose grace, though many times by reason of their sins,
they may totally fall from grace, or lose all grace until the same be renewed
in them again.

3. Others say, that those which have once received grace, can never lose the
same finally, nor yet totally.

But touching this point, de amissione vel retentione gratia, of the losing or
retainign of grace: I think all must confess, that whosoever finds grace,
that is, the love and free favor of God, can never lose it, because this is in
God residing, and not in man, and therefore is this grace immutable and
unchangeable: and so the Scripture shows, whom he lo^^d, he loved unto the
end; for the gifts and graces of God are Romans 11. 29.
(...), without repentance. The question therefore (as I take it) is of the
infused graces, faith, hope, charity, and such like, whether a man may have
these graces, and afterward lose them either finally or totally.

To this I answer, that as there be two sorts of Saints,

1. Outwardly, by profession only before the world. 2. Inwardly, and truly
before God.
So there be two sorts of graces,

1. Common, to all Professors. 2. Special, to the elect only.
Or, to speak more properly, I say God gives his grace two manner of ways.
that God gives the graces of his Spirit two manner of ways.

1. Generally, and more remissely to all Professors, or to all that have them,
to make them see the greatness of his love, and to make them able thereby, if
they would themselves well use the same, to seek for more grace to continue and
be saved; or if they neglected the same, to make them without excuse.

2. Specially, and more effectually to the Elect, to make them not only to see
his love, but also by this more special and effectual working of his grace to
make them continue therein, and retain the same indeed unto everlasting life.

De. 1. Many do affirm that the outward Professors have no true graces at
all, neither faith, hope, nor charity, but only a show and an appearance of
grace; and so S. Gregory seems to affirm, Greg. moral. l. 34. c. 13.
when speaking of such men, he says, quasi habitam sanctitatem aute oculos
hominum videntur amittere, sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt, they
seem to lose that sanctity which they seemed to have in the sight of men, but
in very deed they never had any in the sight of God: and S. Paul seems to
mean the same thing when he says, qui videtur stare, videat ne cadat, he
that seems to stand, let him take heed lest he fall; as if he meant that he
did not stand indeed.

But I answer to the saying of S. Whether the wicked and hypocrites have any
true graces or not.
Gregory, that this and the like speeches may be understood of the feigned
show of Hypocrites that do seek thereby to deceive the world, but not of those
that think themselves to have faith and repentance indeed, and do many
services unto God for a time, until they fall away through the infirmities of
their own flesh; and that the sequent saying of the Apostle videat ne cadat,
let him take heed lest he fall, does in my judgment prove that he did stand,
or else how could he fall?

And therefore considering what the Scripture says, Ezech. 18. that the
righteous may leave his righteousness, that the charity of many shall wax cold,
Mat. 24. 12. 13. that their talent shall be taken from them, Mat. 25. 29. that
they receive the word with joy, Luke 8. 13. that they make shipwreck of faith,
and a good 1 Timothy 1. 19 Heb. 3. 6.
conscience, that they taste of the heavenly gift, and are partakers of the
holy Ghost, and have known the way of righteousness, 2. Pet. 2. 1. and verse.
20. and many such like speeches of their relapse, I do not see but as their
knowledge and understanding of the truth, and assent unto the same, are real
and not in appearance only; so the other graces that they have are true
graces, and not seeming graces only: and indeed, quicquid est, dum est, vere
est in suo genere.

And therefore I must confess that many hypocrites and worldlings, and outward
Professors may have faith, hope and charity, and such other infused graces of
Gods Spirit in that general manner, and to those ends that God bestows them
upon outward Professors, and that they do utterly lose the same, as woeful
experience daily proves in all reuolters: but that hypocrites or worldlings
may have saving faith, or justifying grace, or any other fruits of grace in
that special and more effectual manner as they are given unto the elect, I
utterly deny: for if they had been given them in that manner as they are unto
the elect, then could they not leese them no more then the elect do.

De 2. I say that the elect only have That the elected Saints cannot leese
wholly the saving grace once received.
the true saving graces in the special and more effectual manner given unto
them, and that they cannot leese them after they have once received them: and
this may be proved,

1. By apparent Scriptures. 2. By the consent of learned Fathers. 3. By reasons
drawn from Scriptures.
1. The holy Scripture is most plentiful of proof to confirm this point. I
will only use these few, and will be ready to b^ing more,

(...)
(...)
if we must needs strive with number.

My first proof shall be that of Esaias, c. 59 v. 21. I will make this my
Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth, even for ever. What can be plainer? for this is a
promise made unto the Church of Christ, and what is true of the whole, must be
true in every member; and therefore in what true member soever the Spirit of
God is once put, it shall never depart from thence even for ever.

2. The Prophet Jeremy says, I will Ier. 32. 40.
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, i. my fear
shall be such, and so great in them, that they will stick and persevere in my
favor, even for ever, says Saint Augustine. Aug. de bono persevere. ca. 2.


3. The Prophet Amos says, I will plant them upon their own land, and they
shall no more be pulled up again out of their own land which I have given
them, says the Lord thy God: where we may observe,

1. Who planteth them, I says the Lord, which planteth, and waters, and
gives the increase.

2. Who shall be planted, the elect only, them but not all.

3. Where, in their own land: and what is that? in the mystical body of
Christ, in the favor of God.

4. How shall they be planted; so that they shall be pulled up no more: and all
this is made plain by Christ the true Vine, into whom the elect are planted:
for every plant which my Father has not Matthew. 15. 13.
planted, i. every reprobate shall be rooted up: but every plant that my Father
has planted, i. every elect that is ingraffed in me, shall not be rooted up,
but John 15. 2.
shall be purged, that it may bring forth more fruit: and therefore every one
that is truly ingraffed into Christ, and the favor of God, cannot fall away
from God.

And Christ says, my sheep hear my John 10.
voice, and none shall take them out of my hand, it needs no exposition.

5. S. John says, he that is borne of 1 John 3.
God sins not, neither can he sin, because the seed of God remains in
him, that is, he cannot sin with all his heart, and a full consent of will,
he cannot In what sense it is said that the true Saints do not sin.
do sins to waste and overthrow his conscience, but that still there will be
a reluctation, and an unwillingness in him to do the thing that he does,
because the seed of God, though the fruit failed, does yet remain in him.

For this must needs be granted, that every regenerate man does consist of a
double man 1. The inward man 2. The outward man
And that according to the inward man, they do not sin in that very time
that they do sin, for the Apostle shows of the Saints, that when they
commit sin, it is not they that do it, but sin, i. Romans 8. 20.
the original corruption that is in them: for so he argues, If I do that
which I would not do, then it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me.

And therefore though the same sin in respect of the act and outward manner
of committing it, be done both of the godly and reprobate; yet in the wicked it
is a sin spoiling and wasting his conscience, but in the godly it is not so,
for that the one does it of delight, and set purpose, with full consent of
will; the other does it of infirmity, against his will, because the seed of
God remains in him, which cannot be taken from them, or corrupted in them:
for that it is an incorruptible seed, as the Apostle 1 Pet. 1.
speaks.

2. The Fathers confirm the same What the Fathers think of this point. Aug.
de Cor. and great. ca. 12.
thing: for S. Augustine conferring the grace which Adam had in Paradise with
that which we have in Christ, says, that to him was given such grace that he
might stand if he would, but not that he should will to stand: but to us is
given such grace, not only that we might stand if we would, but also that we
would or should will to stand and persevere in Christ.

So S. Chrysostom considering the word, (...), Romans 5. v. 2. says that the
Apostle said well, wherein ye stand: for that the grace of God, non habet
finem, non nouit terminum, sed in maius proficit, has no end, but ever
increases more and more: with men's gifts it is not so; for if a man receives
some place of honor and dignity, yet this remains not always: for either
dislike, or enemies, or death will deprive him of it, but it is not so with the
graces and favor of God, nec enim homo, nec tempus, nec rerum Chrysostom. in
Romans c. 5. 2.
vicissitudo, nec ipse diabolus, nec subveniens mors ab ijs nos possint
depellere, for neither men, nor times, nor alterations of things, nor the
devil himself, nor yet death it self can pull them from us, and deprive us
of the graces of God: what can be said more plain? yet Saint What the
Schoolmen think hereof.
Ambrose in Romans 8. Gregor. hom. 3 in c. 1. Ezech. Primasius, Prosper* and
Beda, are as plain as he.

And not only these, but the pontisicij, the Jesuits themselves, after a
manner, do confess the same thing; for Caietane Caietan. in Thom. 2. ^ae. q.
14. art. 3.
says, A man sinning mortally, does not directly exclude grace, sed ex quadam
sequela, but by consequent: and therefore if the elect do not directly exclude
grace, then they do not wholly exclude grace.

But Thomas himself goes farther, Thom. 1. 2 ^ q. 63. art. 2.
and says, that per vnu^ actum peccati non corrumpitur habitus virtutis
acquisitae, by one act of sin, we do not leese the habit of obtained virtue, or
infused grace, because every act does not contrary a habit, but a habit must
contrary a habit. Suarez. tom. 4. q. 86. ar. 2.. 3.


And Suarez yields that a mortal sin may be remitted without the infusing
of habitual grace, and he rendereth this reason, to show that God can preserve
his grace in a man mortally sinning, because there can be nothing that should
compel God to subtract or take away the same, for that the preserving of his
grace still in man so sinning, is neither against his goodness nor his justice,

Yea, the council of Trent does expressly Council. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 15.
decree, that faith is not lost by every mortal sin.

And Bellarmine himself affirms, Bellar. l. 2. c. 12. de amiss. gratiae.
that those which are just and good men, do receive the gift of perseverance,
and therefore though they fall into adulteries, thefts, or such like mortal
sins; yet, that thereby, they do not presently leese justifying grace, l. 1.
c. 8. So great is the force of truth, that the greatest oppugners thereof must
many times unawares confess the same, ea enim est Chrysostom. him. 4. de laud
Pauli.
natura veritatis, vt, licet, a quamplurimis impugnatur, suscitabit tamen and
crescet; falsitatis autem ea est natura, vt nemine impugnante tandem euanescis:
for the nature of truth is to prevail in despite of her enemies, and errors
must needs fall at last of themselves, says S. Chrysostom.

3. We may confirm this truth by reason, and arguments drawn from Scripture.

1. From the promise of God. 2. From our own prayer. The perseverance of the
Saints in grace proved by reason drawn from scriptures.
3. From the intercession of Christ.
1. God promised that his Saints should persevere, Esaias 59. ler. 32. Osee 2.
therefore without question, they shall persevere, for he is God, and changes
not; he is the truth, and cannot lie.

But it may be you will say, God promises simply and absolutely love man, and
save him, but that he would love and save every dutiful and obedient man,
because he loves obedience better then his creature, yea he loves his
creature, but for his obedience sake, and therefore his obedience failing, the
promise of God and his obligation cease.

I answer, that the covenant and promise of God is conditional in respect of
us, but most absolute in respect of his own purpose, and therefore as he has
decreed to give us glory, so he has decreed to give us the means whereby we
may come unto his glory, for that in us there is neither ability to obey, nor
to persevere, to get grace, nor to retain grace, but it is God that has begun
the good work of his grace in us, who will also perfect the same, says the
Apostle.

Or to speak more briefly, I say that Abbas de verit, gratia Christi.
the promises of God are twofold:

1. Aliae de fine, and hae conditionatae. 2. Aliae de medijs, and hae gratuitae
and absolutae.
1. Some concerning the end, (i.) eternal life, and these are always
conditional, as the Legal promises, Hoc fac and vi^^s, Do this and thou
shall live; and the Evangelical promises, Creds and vines, If you repent and
believe you shall be saved.

2. Others are concerning the meants, and the helps that bring us to this end,
(i.) to eternal life, as to do the will of God, to believe in Christ, and
such like, and these are always absolute, and most freely bestowed upon us.
For Moses says, The Lord thy God will circumcise Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. And the Prophet
Jeremy Ier. 32. 40.
says, that God would put his fear in their hearts, that they should not
depart from him. And S. Paul says, that faith is the gift of God, and so
repentance, and all other graces; God does most freely and absolutely promise
to work them in the hearts of his elect without any manner of relation or
respect to any act of theirs; he will work these graces in us, and he will
work that grace in us, whereby we may accept and receive these graces. And
therefore it is certain, the Saints shall persevere in grace, because God has
promised perseverance unto the Saints.

2. The Saints do ask and pray for perseverance and continuance of grace,
therefore they have it, for Cur poscitur si non conceditur, why should it be
sought if it be not granted, says S. Augustine. Aug. de bono perseu. cap. 2.
But Christ says, Whatsoever you ask in my name, you shall receive it: But
thou will say, thou have asked many things The Saints do pray for the
continuance of grace.
and not received them. I say: Perhaps temporal things; and temporal things,
si defuerint, petenda quidem sunt, sed non nimium requirenda, they are to be
sought, but not too earnestly, says S. Bernard, Deus enim dat prius quod
potius, Bern. de 4. modis or andi.
for God gives first the things that are best, Et non tribuit quod volunt vt
tribuat quod vtile est, and does not give the things that they would have, that
he might give them the things that they should have: audit enim ad
necessitatem non ad voluntatem, for that he hears them according to their
necessity, and not according to their importunity, as S. Augustine speaks.

But thou will say, thou have requested not obtained.

I answer: That either thou have obtained, or shall be sure to obtain them, if
thou desist not from seeking, for we must not prescribe any time to God,
because as he works grace in whom he will, so he works it when he will, Et
est animi generosi perdurare, quoad Deus misereatur nostri, says S.
Chrysostom, It is the part of a good Christian to wait until God have mercy
upon him, for he never failed any that continued to wait upon him, but at last
satisfied their desire.

And therefore despair not because they are not presently granted, but though
he tarry yet wait thou, as the Prophet speaks, Hab. 2. 3. for the Lord
sometimes does defer the grace that we seek, not because he means to deny
us, sed vt diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur, but because things earnestly
requested and long expected, are sweetest when they are obtained. And therefore
this reason must needs hold, the Saints pray for the continuance of grace,
therefore it shall continue. Christ prayed for all Saints, that their faith
should not fail.


3. Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail, therefore he
obtained the same, but what he obtained for Peter, he obtained for every one
of his elect; for our Savior says, Satan desired that he might sift them all,
but I prayed for thee, (i.) for thee chiefly, because thou did chiefly and
most foully fall: and therefore he does not here deny that he prayed for the
rest, though he affirms he prayed chiefly for Peter.

But that it may more clearly appear, that he did pray for all the rest of
his elect, he says, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me out of the world: and therefore the Saints cannot lose his grace, nor
fall away from his favor, because Christ prayed for them that they should not,
and I know (says Christ) o Father, that thou do always hear me, (i.) that
thou do always grant me the things that I request: neither did he only pray
for his Saints in the days of his flesh, that their faith should not fail:
but now likewise he prays and makes intercession for us, that God would
forgive us our sins, that he would give us his grace, and that this grace
should remain with us, to bring us to eternal life, and therefore we may
assure our selves that he which gave us grace, will likewise preserve this
grace in us.

But against this it may be objected,

That God gave his Spirit and his grace unto Saul, Judas, Simon Magus,
Hymeneus, Philetus, and such like, and yet they fell away from grace. Therefore
a man may have true grace, and yet lose it.

I answer to these and all such like The wicked reprobates may and do lose all
the graces that they have received.
examples in one word, that I do confess the wicked and hypocrites, or
whosoever not elected, may have many excellent gifts and graces of Gods Spirit,
and may utterly lose the same: I deny not this, but I say, Gods elect, the
true Saints and beloved of God, having once received grace and justifying faith
in that special manner as I showed before, can never lose the same, and
therefore all examples of hypocrites or such like, can prove nothing against
this that I defend.

But then it will be objected that David and Peter were the true Saints,
beloved of God, and elected to salvation, and had grace, and yet these men by
their sins, did lose that grace, therefore the true Saints after they have
received grace, may by their sins fall away from the same. David and Peter
lost not all graces. Bucerus de lapsu Petri.


I answer, that David and Peter did highly offend and grieve the Spirit of God,
and lost the comfort and sense of grace, but not all grace: vigor Spiritus
repressus, sed non extinctus, mota fides non amota, the strength of the Spirit
was repressed, not extinguished, his faith was shaken and moved, but not
removed.

For if Peter lost all grace and all faith, then that faith did fail which
confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and for which our Savior prayed that
it should not fail, and another faith different from the first was given unto
him, which is most absurd.

And therefore Tertullian and S. Augustine Aug. de Cor. and gr. c. 7.
do expound the Prayer of Christ, that Peter's faith should not fail, of his
constant and firm perseuering in faith unto the end: and S. Chrysostom says
that Christ did not only pray, that his faith should not finally fail, sed
etiam vt ne euanesceret, aut penitus extingueretur: but also that it should not
vanish or be quite extinguished.

But David prayed to create a new heart in him, and to restore the Spirit of
God unto him, therefore there was no grace in the old corrupted heart, but the
Spirit was quite taken from him, and his graces quite extinguished.

I answer, that David had diminished the graces of Gods Spirit in him, and
quite lost many of them, as the cleanness of heart, the joy of the Spirit, and
inherent sanctity, and faith it self in respect of the act or sense of it, for
that it did sleep in him; but not in respect of the substance or habit of it,
for else how could he pray for grace, if all grace had been taken from him?
grace therefore still lurked in the secret corners of his heart, and seemed
asleep, as Christ was in the ship: and therefore David awaked it, and desired
it might be restored, in respect of the sense and feeling of it, and that this
grace which was now like the fire that is in the sinders, might be kindled,
and therefore David lost not all grace, though he lost the sense and feeling
of all grace.

But yet again it may be objected, the holy spirit of discipline Sap. 1.
flies from deceit, and dwells not in the body that is subject unto sin:
and S. John says, he that commits sin is of the Devil, 1. Ioh. 3. and
again the Scripture says, he that commits sin is the servant of sin: and
therefore we lose Gods grace when we commit our sins.

I answer, that there are five degrees How sin and grace may stand together.
of sins.

1. (...), a thought of committing sin. 2. (...), an enticing in the
affection. 3. (...), a consent and purpose to do it. 4. (...), an actual
commission of it. 5. (...), a continuation together with delectation.
In the 4. former ways we may sin and do often sin, and yet not lose the
Spirit of grace even when we sin; for a man may sin, and yet loath this
sin, while he is in the very acting and doing of that sin: even as S. Paul
testifies, that evil that I would Romans 8.
not do, that do I: the doing of the sin is from the weakness and corruption
of nature; the loathing and disliking of it is from the power of grace.

But sin in the latter place with continuation and delectation, and the grace
of God cannot stand together, and that is the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the
first of Wisdom: for he says not, he dwells not in a body that is tainted
with sin, but in a body that is subject unto sin, (i.) where sin does
rule and reign as it does in the wicked, but not in the godly, for he that is
borne of God sins not, (i.) with delight and a full desire of sinning.

And S. Gregory says, sin is committed Greg. lib. 25. cap. 34. in Job.
three ways.

1. Out of ignorance, as Paul persecuted the Church.

2. Out of infirmity, as S. Peter denied Christ, for tenuit cord quem
denegauit ore, whom he denied with his mouth, he believed in him with his heart.

3. Out of malice, and of set purpose, as the Jews, which saw Christ and hated
him, and his Father also, as our Savior says.

In the two first senses sin may be committed, and grace not excluded: In the
latter sense sin and grace cannot stand together. But the godly never sin
of study or set purpose and malice, with a full heart and will, and delight in
the sin; and therefore though they sin, yet do they not lose all grace.

Or to answer in a word: I say, sin and grace may thus remain together in
the godly, when sin is committed, grace is thrown down, but not thrown
away, it has a fall, but it is not dead; when sin is repented of, grace is
quickened and risen, and sin is vanquished, but not extinguished.

Further it may be objected, that the Saints do fear the losing of all grace,
and

I answer, that there is a twofold fear:

1. A servile fear. 2. A filial fear.
The first is a fear of damnation, and that is only in the wicked, and is a
fear forbidden and not commanded, as you may see Romans 8. 15. Ye have not
received Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage to fear. The A religious fear of falling does preserve
men from falling.
second is a fear of offending Gods Majesty, and is ever joined with love and
humility, and a great care of avoiding sin, and this is a special fruit of
grace, and does perserue them from sin, as the Scripture speaks, Timor
Domini expellit peccatum. And therefore this fear does not take away, but
rather cherish and increase the plerophorie and full assurance of faith and
grace in the Saints of God.

And yet I deny not, but the Saints may many times fear the losing of the
same, by reason of their sins, and the infirmities of the flesh: for every
Saint consists both of flesh and spirit, and therefore although the spirit be
willing to believe, yet the flesh is weak, and by reason of its weakness, it
so weakneth our faith, our hope, our assurance of grace, and all other fruits
of grace, that there is always carentia perfectionis and fructus, (...), a
want of perfection, and a defect of that faith which should be in the best men,
while they are in this world, yet that does not prove that because they cannot
perfectly believe the same, that the same is not true: they believe it
according to the measure of faith that is given unto them.

Lastly, it may be objected, that if the Spirit of God does work so
irresistably in the hearts of men, that we cannot fall though we would, but we
do often resist the Spirit of God, as S. Steven says unto the Jews, Ye have
always Acts 7.
resisted the Holy Ghost. And our Savior says unto Jerusalem, How often would
I have gathered thy children, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings,
and ye would not. And therefore the Spirit of God does not work so
irresistably in the hearts of men, but that they may fall if they will, and do
fall when they please.

I answer: That the working of Gods That the Spirit of God works not in the
wicked as it does in the Saints.
Spirit in the hearts of men is twofold.

1. Remissely, in the wicked. For in them the good motions of Gods Spirit are
so wrought, that they may either yield unto them, or resist them; for God does
but only show them what they should do or believe, and not effectually cause
them to do or to believe the same: for otherwise, if he did effectually work
the same in their hearts, how could they resist it? For who has Romans 9.
ever resisted his will? therefore he does no more but only illuminate their
minds, and set the good motions of his Spirit before the eyes of their hearts,
whereby they may accept and follow the same if they will: but they, because of
their pronenesse to all evil, and unaptness to any good, do always resist
the Spirit of God, and refuse those good motions of grace, and therefore they
are made without excuse.

2. Effectually in the godly, for in them the Spirit of God does so powerfully
work, that they cannot resist, but do most willingly yield unto the same.

And yet this effectual and irresistible working of Gods Spirit in the godly
is done, leni spiritu, non dura manu, rather by a sweet influence* then any
extreme violence, by way of secret alluring, not coacting, inclinando
voluntatem non intrudendo potestatem, by inclining the will and affection, and
not compelling it to any action; for as love creepes into the heart of man he
knows not how, says the Poet,

-- Nam coeco carpitur igni,

And he cannot resist it: so is the love of God and all other graces wrought in
the hearts of the elected Saints of God so powerfully, so effectually, and so
irresistably, that they do most willingly yield unto all good motions, and
adhere unto God for ever, and that I say by a most voluntary yielding and
delighting in that sweet and effectual working of grace in their hearts.

And so I hope you see this doctrine of the certainty and assurance of the
continuance of grace in the elected Saints, sufficiently cleared and confirmed.

This shows the exceeding greatness of Gods love unto his elected Saints
above all other men in the world: for that he does not only offer and give his
grace unto them, as he does unto others, but also he does in a more special
manner work the same so effectually in them, as to make them always retain
the same, and persevere therein unto everlasting life. O that therefore we
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and show the wonders that he does for
these children of men.

And that this might teach us,

1. To praise God for his goodness, and his exceeding great mercy unto us, not
only in making us good, but also for giving us his grace to persevere in good:
for it is he only, says S. Augustine, qui Aug. de bono persevere.
fecit bonos, faciet perseuerare in bono, that has made us good, can and will
make us persevere in good: qui iubet credere, facit vt credamus: and therefore
we may boldly say with S. Augustine, da Domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis,
give us grace o Lord and ability to do what thou command us, and command
us to do what thou will.

2. To pray unto God that he would give us grace to serve him, and grace to
persevere in his service all the days of our life, quia incassum bonum agitur
si ante vitae terminum terminatur, because that good is of no validity that
wants perpetuity: sed perseuerantia est virtus quae coronat omnem virtutem;
but perseverance is a virtue that crowns every virtue; and without which, no
virtue will avail us any thing.

And therefore we must not begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, but we
must continue unto the end, if we would be saved: and therefore we should pray
unto God that he which has begun a good work in us, would continue the same
unto the end.

3. To make us afraid to commit sin with greediness, as the wicked do, whose
feet are swift to shed blood, as the Prophet speaks: for he that so
commits sin, is the servant of sin, and the grace of God is not in him.

4. To assure us that all those which appeared glorious for a while, and served
God for a time, and then fell away from God, and started aside like a broken
bow, were never the elected Saints of God, but were only among us, and not of
us, as the Apostle speaks; for if they had been of us, they would have
continued even as we do.

And so much for the first thing that S. Paul wishes unto the Saints, Grace be
unto you.

De 2. Peace be unto you, is the second thing that the Apostle wishes, a
companion of grace, and therefore sure a most excellent thing, being one of the
two most excellent things that can be wished, and the only thing which our
Savior always wished unto his Disciples: for when he came unto them, he said
but pax vobis, peace be unto you; and when he went away from them, he said but
my peace I leave with you: and he needed to say no more, for where peace is,
there must needs be grace, because peace is the fruit of grace.

But that you may the betrer understand what the Apostle means, you must
consider that there are two kinds of peace,

1. Pax benedicta, a blessed peace. That there is a twofold peace.
2. Pax maledicta, a cursed peace, if I may give it the name of peace.
The first is proper to the Saints: the second to the wicked; and therefore let
us consider,

First, of the blessed peace, and that is twofold, 1. Perfect. Thom. 2. 2 ae.
q. 29.
2. Imperfect.


The first is not here to be found on earth, but only in beatis, among the
blessed Saints of heaven, says Aquinas: and therefore we should long for that
place where there is perfect peace, pax super pace^, pax quae exuperat omnem
sensu^, Bern. ser. 23. de verbis Psalm.
peace upon peace, peace which passes all understanding; peace in mind, peace
with our own flesh, peace from wicked men, peace with all our neighbors,
peace from the very devils, peace with God, and there shall be no end of peace,
but peace will be the end of all our labors, says Saint Bernard.

2. The imperfect peace which the Saints have here in this life is threefold,
as the same Saint Bernard notes. Idem ser. 5. in festo omnium sanct.


1. With God. 2. With men. 3. With our selves.
De 1. Our forefathers sinning against God, made us all enemies unto God, and
God says, he will be avenged of his Esaias 1.
enemies, and therefore we cannot be delivered unless we be reconciled: for
there is no way to fly, no place to hide Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9.
us, no Attorney to plead for us, as old Ely shows, and therefore O man, 1 Samuel 25.
why striuest thou with God? durum est contra stimulum calcitrare, it is hard
to strive against the streme, it is hard to prevail against thy God, for he is
a consuming fire, and never any escaped out of his hands.

Christ therefore became our mediator, and undertook the discipline of our
peace by his most bitter sufferings for our transgressions: and so he became
peace to them that were afar off, and peace to them that were near, (i.)
both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, as S. Jerome expounds it. In respect
of this, our Savior, after his resurrection, when he bade peace be unto John
20. 20.
you, showed them his hands and his feet, as if he should have said, behold
hereby how dearly I have bought and purchased your peace, by such bitter
sufferings for your transgressions.

And so Christ has made our peace with God if we believe in him, for being
justified by faith we have peace with Rom 5. 1.
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And this is the first and the chiefest
peace, and the fountain from whence all other peace does flow.

2. The second is peace with men, and Of peace with men.
this is a fruit and effect of our peace with God, and it is nothing else, but
a sweet harmony and consent of minds to will and to do the same things, and
to help and further each other in all godly actions.

And so we read of the Christians of Act. 2. 46. and Act. 4. 32. Caluinus in 2.
Cor.
the primitive Church, that they were (...), of one heart and of one mind, and
this must prius pertinere ad opinionum consensum, first pertain to consent in
judgment and opinion, to teach and to believe the same points of doctrine, and
then, mutua sese charitate and amorum contunctione complecti, to love each
other with mutual love and charity.

(...) foederis haec species, id habet concordia Alciat.
signum,
Vt quos iungit amor, iungat and ipsa manus.
For this is the property of true peace, to have a sweet harmony of consent
and concord in all things, to will the same things, to speak the same things,
and to do the same things, and (as the Apostle speaks) to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace.

And here we must understand that That there be diverse kinds of peace with men.
this peace with men is of diverse kinds, according to the several estates and
degrees of men: but for methods sake we may divide it into a

1. Civil peace, and 2. Ecclesiastical peace.
1. The civil peace is either 1. Domestical. 2. Political. 3. Universal.


The 1. is, when man and wife do lovingly live, and peaceably agree together,
in all honesty and godliness; and so when parents and children, masters and
servants, and all that are in a house do perform each one his duty, for the
continuance of peace, and quietness within the house, without which the house
cannot continue, says our Savior. Matthew. 12. 15.


The 2. is, when Magistrate and subject, high and low, rich and poor,
neighbors, equals, and all that do remain and dwell, either in City,
Country, or Commonwealth, do each one perform his duty, to live in peace
and quietness, for the preservation either of City or Commonwealth, without
which the strongest Ibid.
kingdom cannot stand, says our Savior.

The third is when Kings, Countries, and nations, are in league, and in peace
Zach. 9. 10.
one with another, for the public good, the general commerce of all nations,
and the unspeakable benefit of all the world.

2. Ecclesiastical peace is when the Mich. 4. 3.
Ministers and Preachers of Gods word do 1. Agree in opinions among
themselves. 2. Live in peace and quietness among their neighbors and
parishioners.


Both which do exceedingly make for the happiness of the Church, for the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and the propagation of his Gospel. Of
the peace of conscience


And these are the chiefest kinds and principal sorts of peace among men,
which is the second kind of peace that the Apostle wishes unto the Saints;
peace with men.

3. The third is peace with our selves, another fruit, an effect of the former
peace with God, and it is nothing else but a quieting of our minds and
consciences; not only for that we are at peace with all men (which is an
exceeding great content unto the mind of man) but especially for that we are
at peace with God, and therefore need not fear the vengeance, and the wrath
of God, That nothing in the world can discontent the minds of the Saints. Ioh.
14. 27.
because we are reconciled unto him, our debts are paid, and our sins are
satisfied for, by Jesus Christ.

And therefore, as our Savior says, let not your hearts be troubled, neither
fear, for I have overcome the world, I have vanquished your enemies, I have
washed away your sins, and I have made your peace with God: so the Saints do
follow his advice, they do set their hearts at rest, and (because they know
that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus) they do
exultingly say with the blessed Apostle, who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? Romans 8. 1.
it is God that justifies: who shall separate us from the love of God? shall
tribulation, Ibid. v. 33. 34. etc.
or anguish, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? no: not these, nor
any of these, nor all these, nor yet principalities, nor powers, nor height,
nor depth, nor life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any
thing else shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus: for that in all these things we are more then conquerors through him
that loved us: and therefore,

Terra tremit, mare mugit, sic ruit ortus and orcus,
Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet.
Let the Sea make a noise, and let the Earth be moved into the midst of the
Sea; yea, let the Heavens vanish, and Hell perish, yet the Saints need not
fear to perish: nam conscia men's recti famae mendaciaridet.

For their consciences being at peace, assuring them, they are at peace with
God, and knowing they are at peace with men, they need not fear what man can
do unto them, nor what the devil can do against them: And therefore S.
Gregory says, nulla nocebit aduersitas si nulla dominatur iniquitas, no
adversity can hurt thee, if no sin does reign over thee.

And so you see, the threefold peace, which the holy Apostle wishes unto the
Saints, and which every godly Saint enjoys.

But here, before we pass any further, we must consider, that as the Saints
have this threefold peace, so they have a treble war: for alas, alas, non
potest Bern. in parab. Christi and ecclesiae.
esse pax firma and solida nisi in regione sua, we may not look for firm and
perfect peace, but in the kingdom of peace, says S. Bernard.

And therefore our life is but a warfare, The life of the Saints is a
continual war.
a warfare against three mortal enemies, 1. The World, and all vanities. 2.
The Flesh, and all concupiscence. 3. The Devil, and all temptations.


1. The love of the world is enmity 1 Ioh. 2. 15.
with God, says the Apostle: and therefore we must not only use the world as
though we used it not, but we must despise it, and trample it under our feet,
and have no fellowship with the workers of iniquity; but, super custodiam
nostram stare, to stand upon our guard, Hab. 2. 1.
and to profess open hostility against them: for as Iehu said unto Iehoram,
what peace can there be so long as the 2 Reg. 9. 22.
where domes of Iesabel, and her witcherafts are so many? so say I to the
wicked worldlings; what peace can they expect from the Saints, so long as their
whoredoms, idolatries, drunkenness, swearing, and other fearful sins, and
most horrible abominations do remain and reign amongst them? for we must
hate the very garment that is spotted with sin, as the Apostle speaks. Jude
ep. ver. 23.


2. The flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
says S. Paul, and lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin, and
Iac. 1. 15.
sin when it is finished brings death, says S. James: and therefore cum
Aug. to. 10. f. 333. c. 2.
vitijs bellum semper est habendunt, we must ever strive and fight against our
vices, and against the concupiscence and the lusts of our flesh, which always
fight against our souls, says S. Augustine.

3. Satan goes about like a roaring 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Lion seeking whom he may devour, he enticeth us to sin, and when we have
sinned he accuses us to God, and he brings us to hell, and there he plagueth
us for ever, for our sins. And therefore pax nostra bellum contra Satanam,
says Tertullian; Our only way Tertullian in lib. ad Martyr.
to have peace with God, is to make war against the devil: and when he
seeks to tempt us to any vice, to say, vade Satana, non tentabis, avoid Satan
Matt. 4. 10.
thou false inticer, and the accuser of our brethren, I will not yield unto thy
wicked suggestions.

And so you see, that although the Saints be at peace with God, at peace with
men, and at peace with their own selves, yet must they look for nothing else
but war, war with the world, and all worldly vanities, war with sin, and
with all sinful men, and war with Satan and with all Satan's temptations.

In this respect our Savior says, he came not to send peace into the world,
but the sword, yea many times to set a man at variance against his father, and
the Matt. 9. 35.
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in
law: yea and that which seems worst of all, to set a man against himself. For
if any man will come after me, he Mat. 16. 24.
must deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me, says our Savior,
(i.) he must not only resist the devil, and suffer all the miseries that the
world can inflict upon him, but he must mortify the deeds of his own flesh,
and destroy Romans 6. 6.
the whole body of sin.

And in this respect the whole life of the Saints is called a warfare, and all
the Saints are called Soldiers, that must manfully fight this christian
battle; and that three ways, or after a threefold manner.

1. By the word of the minister. 2. By the sword of the magistrate. 3. By the
lawful assistance of every man.
For all these must join together, not only to fight each one against his own
sins, but also with united forces to fight against all the enemies of the
Lord.

1. We that are the ministers, like chief captains, must cry aloud and spare
not to tell the people their transgressions, Esaias 58. 1. The Ministers must be
chief Captains in the war against the wicked.
and the house of Iaacob their offenses, we must refute their errors, reprove
their sins, and endeavor by all means to destroy whatsoever makes against
the glorious Gospel of Christ. To this end it is worth the noting, which the
Apostle speaks, that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds; and imaginations, and every
high thing, that exalts 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
it self against the knowledge of God, and to the bringing into captivity of
every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having vengeance in a readiness
against all disobedience. You see how strongly we are armed, and how well we
are weaponed to fight against the wicked.

And yet because we do all this but with the word of our lips, the wicked
fear us not* but let them look unto it, for that word is sharper then a
two-edged sword, and it is able to divide their souls in sunder, and to
condemn them all, in the day of condemnation, as our Savior shows: The word
that I have Ioh. 12. 48.
spoken, the same shall judge them in the last day.

2. The Magistrates must be likewise The Magistrates must war against the
wicked.
Captains and Commanders in this war of God, and with the sword of justice
they must cut off Idolaters, Heretics, Schismatikes, and such like enemies of
our peace, and root out all the workers of iniquity from the Church of God,
as King Asa, Iehu, Iehosophat, Josias and Ezechias, and all good kings and
governors ever did, and as the Lord commands all to do, Cantic. 2. 15. For
they are the ministers of God to take vengeance on Romans 13. 4.
such as do evil.

3. Every private man after a just and Every man must join help to war
against the wicked.
lawful manner in his own place and station, must to the uttermost of his
ability, aid and assist both Magistrate and Minister, to root out sin, and
debellare superbos, and to subdue the workers of iniquity. For,

In communem hostem, quilibet homo miles.

Every man must fight, when every man is interessed in the danger, or else the
sparing of our enemies will prove to be a destruction unto our selves. For

Iam tua res agitur paries cum proximus Virgil. Aen^id. l. 2.
ardet,
Vcalegon --
If thou will not help us against our enemies, but take thine ease and leave
all the burden upon thy fellows, thou may assure thy self when they have
done with us and undone us perhaps for want of help, they will begin with
thee: and then shall thou be justly left alone, as a prey unto their teeth, to
be devoured, because thou would not join help with us to extirpate all the
workers of iniquity.

And therefore, quia vis vnita fortior, because a threefold cord is hardly
broken, both the minister, and magistrate, and every man should join together,
to resist the devil, to oppose the world, and to subdue the wicked; that so
being at continual war with these we might be at continual peace with God,
which is the blessed peace of the Saints.

2. The other kind of peace, that is, the cursed peace of wicked sinful The
threefold peace of the wicked.
men, is likewise three fold.

1. With the devil. 2. With the lusts of the flesh. 3. With themselves.
1. While they serve the devil, and while he keeps them in his palace, they
are in peace, for he has Luke 11. 21.
them safe enough, and therefore he will not strive against them, but rather
lull them like Endimion into a senseless and an endless sleep of sin and
security. O most miserable estate of wretched men!

2. They loosen the bridle of licentiousness, The loose life of wicked men.
and never strive against the lusts of the flesh, but do give themselves
wholly unto all lasciviousness, they bathe themselves in delights, and
whatsoever their hearts desire they Eccles. 2. 10.
keep not from them: they say, come, Let us enjoy the good things that are
present, and let us speedily use the creatures like as in youth; let us fill
our selves with costly wine and ointments: and let no flower of the spring
pass by us, let us crown our selves with rosebuds before they be withered,
let none of us go without his part of our voluptuousness, Sap. 2 6, 7, 8, 9.
and let us leave tokens of our ioyfulnesse in every place: this is the life of
them, and therefore they are at peace with the flesh, and with all the
concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the eyes, and with the pride
of 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
life.

3. They join together in all impiety, sit nobis marsupium vnum, they will
have but one purse, and they will have but one mind, nam, vt expedit ipsis
demonibus obaudire sibi ipsis Chrysostom. hom. 29. in Matthew.
in schismate, for as it behooves the very devils to have unity in their
distractions; so it behooves the wicked men to have peace among themselves,
that they may with the more violence irresistably perpetrate and bring to pass
their mischievous purposes. And therefore, though many times Ephraim will be
against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and proditori proditor, one
lewd traitor will betray another, yet faciunt vnitatem contra vnitatem, they
will like Sampsons foxes be tied together, and they will agree in their
disagreements like Pilate and Herod to crucify the Lord and all his servants.

But as the Saints have war with The threefold war of the wicked.
Satan, war with sin, and war with sinful men, so these wicked men
have,

1. War with God. 2. War with the godly. 3. War within their own
breasts.
1. God fights against them, as the Scripture shows: Ah I will ease Esaias 1.
24.
me of mine adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies. And therefore he is
called a man of war, and the Lord Exodus 15. 3.
of hosts, because he does not only fight himself against them, who can
destroy them all with the breath of his mouth, but has also many armies of
creatures to destroy the^, especially 1. A Celestial, and army. How all
creatures do fight against the wicked.
2. A Terrestrial army.


De 1. I find a threefold heaven, 1. Aerie. 2. Starrie. 3. Glorious.


And the Lord has his army ready in each of these to fight against the
wicked, for by the first he drowned the old world, he opened the windows of
heaven, and rained forty days and Genesis 7.
forty nights upon them, until the rain had swept them all away: and so by
this one soldier of the Lord were destroyed all the enemies of the Lord. So he
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah Genesis 19.
with fire and brimstone, the Amorites with hailstones. The winds Ios. 10.
on the seas and the frosts on the lands destroy many, for if he sends Psalm.
147. 17.
forth his ice like morsels, who is able to abide his frost?

2. The very stars did fight against Sisera, as the heavens and all Judges
5. 20.
did help Theodosius in his victories against the wicked, whereof Claudian
speaks,

O nimium dilecte Deo cui militat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
O well-beloved of God, thou have the skies, and winds and all to fight for thee
against thine enemies, because they were indeed the enemies of the Lord, who
has these his armies ready at command to fight against them, as he commanded
the sun to Ios. 10. 12.
stand still in Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Aialon until Duke Joshua
was avenged of his enemies.

3. The Angels of God are not only instruments of Gods mercies toward the
godly, but also executioners of his justice upon the wicked; and therefore an
Angel slew all the Exodus 12. 2 Reg. 19.
firstborn of Egypt, and slew an hundred eighty and five thousand in the host
of Senacherib, and at the last day the Angels shall gather the wicked and bind
them up like faggots for everlasting fire. Matthew. 13. 49. and 50.


And the Saints of God though they be milites emeriti, soldiers discharged and
resting from their labors, where there is neither militia nor malitia, yet are
they fighting against the wicked, though not with their pikes, but with their
prayers, saying, how long tariest thou holy and true, to judge and to avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And this is not of any spleen to
them, but of zeal in the cause of the highest.

2. God has his terrestrial army: the sea drowned Pharaoh, and would of late
have drowned us, had not the Lord fettered the waters of the seas as Xerxes did
the waters of Hellespont, and said, hitherto shall thou go and no Job 38. 11.
further. And the earth swallowed up Dathan, and covered the congregation of
Abiram: and so the frogs, flies, and senseless creatures, the stone in the
Habacuk 2. 11.
wall, the beam, and the timber, will cry and fight against the wicked, yea,
the very devils themselves shall fight for Sam. 16.
God against them, and those creatures shall be accursed, that fight not Judge.
with the Lord against the wicked, says Debora: who then but senseless
creatures would with the Pigmies make war against Hercules, or with the
Giants (...), to make war against God? I read of the Psilli, a people of low
stature and less wit, that being troubled with the Southern wind, went out
on a day to make war against the same, but the further they went the more it
blew, until at last it covered them all with the Sands. The same end and worse
will betide them that will dare venture to stand at variance with God, and
therefore it were better for them to sue for conditions of peace, and to seek
unto Christ Jesus to be a blessed peacemaker betwixt them mortal sinners and
the immortal God.

2. They are at war with men, nam vt mali semper persecuti sunt bonos, ita
and boni semper persequuti sunt malos, for as the wicked do always persecute
the good, so the good do always strive against the wicked; hi per iustam
disciplinam, isti per iniquam superbiam, the just do reprove the wicked by
just correction and discipline, and the wicked do persecute the godly by
unjust and most cruel proceedings: and therefore seeing righteousness and
peace have kissed Psalm. 58. 10. Psalm. 34. 13.
each other, qui iustitiam non amauit, ille pacem non habebit, he shall never
have peace which loves not righteousness, and therefore inter Babilonem and
Jerusalem pax esse non potest, Bern. ser. 2. de pug. spirituali.
there can be no peace betwixt the godly and the wicked, says Saint Bernard.

3. They have wars, bella and horrida bella, and the most grievous wars
that may be within themselves: For cognatum immo innatum omni sceleri sceleris
Lipsius de Constantia l. 2. c. 13. Genesis 4. 7.
supplicium, sin bears it punishment always at his own back: and so S.
August. says, iussisti Domine, and ita est vt animus inordinatus sit sibi ipsi
poena, thou have ordained o Lord, and so it is, that a wicked mind should The
fearful conscience of wicked men.
ever be a punishment unto it self: for if we do ill, sin lies at the
doroe like a wild beast to dog us wheresoever we go: and the conscience of
sin bears forth such fruits as that nothing can be more grievous, or
miserable to a mortal man; for she is a witness of our debts, a judge of our
deeds, and a tormenter of all our actions, says S. Bernard,

Strangulat inclusus dolor atque exaestuat Ovid de trist. l. 5.
intus:

And so we read of almost infinite examples; for Oedipus that incestuous king
of Thebes was led to Athens by his daughter Antigona, and was buried in the
temple of Erinnis, i. of perturbations, and Iocasta his wife and mother
strangled her self, says Sophocles.

Theodoricus imagined he saw (as he was at supper) the visage of Symmacus whom
he had unjustly slain, in a fishes head, after which he could never be
comforted, but pined away most miserably.

Crescentius, the Popes Vicegerent, Lanquet. fo. 146.
in the Council of Trent, saw the devil in the likeness of a black dog
coming unto him, says Sleidan: and Polidor Virgil does write the like of
Richard Sleid. l. com. 23. in fine. Pol. Virg. hist. l. 25.
the third, of this kingdom.

Tiberius was so vexed with grievous torments, that he desired that the Gods
would rather destroy him at once, then suffer him to pine away through such a
tormented conscience.

Nero that monster of men, when he had unnaturally murdered his own natural
Sueton.
mother, was so grievously vexed in conscience, that he could not be comforted
by any means, but in his mind he did always see his mothers 'Ghost crying
for vengeance against him.

And although the godly says in his testament,

Terram terrategat, demon peccata resumat,
Mundus res habeat, spiritus astrapetat.
Let earth go to the earth from whence it was taken; let the devil take my
sins which he has enticed me unto; let the world have my goods wherewith I
was enriched; and let my soul climb to heaven where it may be blessed: yet I
read in the life of Rubertus, of a wicked Lat. hist. de vitis archiepisc.
Cantuariens.
couerous wretch, that when the eyes of his conscience were opened, he
bequeathed omnia bona domino regi, corpus sepulturae, and anima^ diabolo, his
goods to the king whom he had deceived, and his soul to the devil whom he had
served: to what end should I reckon more?

It is apparent, that if the wicket of wicked men's minds were opened, we
should see mangled souls, and tormented consciences, that do always sleep
like the Nightingall which has ever a prick before her breast,

Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgura J^uen. Satyr. 13.
pallent,
Cum tonat exanimes primo quoque murmr coelum.
These are they that are terrified with the very thunders, and do fly away
when none pursue them.

But it may be some will say, all sinners unquiet minds, neither have all the
wicked wounded spirits.

I answer, that some indeed are of such brazen faces, that they can laugh their
sins out of countenance, and smile with the fool when they go to the
gallows: But I assure my self their heart bleedes when their faces
counterfeit smiles; and are like Dives, that saw Lazarus a far off in
Abraham's bosom, Dr. Hall in his treat. of heaven upon earth.
but was himself in hell tormented: for the soul may be sorrowful when the
countenance is cheerful.

And this is most likely: for that they can never want furies so long as they
have themselves, or if they could find a way to run away from themselves,
and to cause their souls to run away from their bodies, yet their consciences
will not fly away from their souls, nor their sins from their consciences.

And therefore let a sinner fly ab agro ad ciuitatem, a publico ad domum, a
domo in cubiculum, from the field into the city, from the market into his
house, from his house into his bed, and thence in the bitterness of his soul
(like those impatient fishes that leap out of the pan into the flame) let them
fly out of the private hell within their breasts into the common hell of
damned souls, yet ecce hostem invenit a quo confugerat; behold, there he shall
find the enemy whom he feared, a tormenting conscience joined to that
tormenting flame: for their worm dies not, says our Savior.

Or if it be that this Erinnis conscientiae, this tormenting conscience, does
not affright them; then S. Bernard answers, Bern. in l. de conscientia, f.
1784.
that there be four kind of consciences, 1. A good, but not a quiet. 2. Both
good and quiet.
And both these may That there be four kinds of consciences.
be in the godliest men. 3. A quiet, but not good. 4. Neither good nor quiet.
And both these are proper to the wicked.

And therefore when the evil conscience of a sinful wretch is seared as with
a hot iron, so that the custom of sinning has taken away the sense of sin,
this cannot be called a peace, but a numnesse and a damnesse of conscience: for
our conscience at the first will monish us, and say, master, look to thy self.

But if we neglect our selves, this good Cassandra will cry no more; thou
may be lulled with Endimion to sleep in sins, and then it fares with
the maladies of thy soul, as it is with the diseases of the bodies, the less
seen the more dangerous, as when they are even at the door of death, and yet
will not be persuaded that they are sick: Ideo Bern. ep. 2. Ieron, ad
Sabinian. to. 1. f. 231.
doles charitas me a quod cum sis dolendus, non doles: therefore do I bewail
thy estate, because, being most miserable, thou do not bewail thy self,
says S. Bernard: and hoc plango, says S. Jerome, quod tu teipsum non plangis,
this do I lament, that thou do not lament thy self, quia nihil est
miserius misero non miserante seipsum, for that nothing in the world is more
lamentable then to see a miserable fellow, not respecting his own misery,
says S. Augustine. Aug. confess. li. 1. ca. 13.


These are like the fool Harpast, that was as blind as a Beetle, and yet
nesciebat se esse coecam, all the world could not persuade her that she was
blind, says Seneca.

And therefore this quiet conscience of wicked men is no true peace, but mare
mortuum, a dead sleep: haec tranquillitas tempestas est, and this their calm
peace is worse then the worst tempestuous war, quia tum maxim Ieron. in ep.
ad Heli^d.
impugnantur, cum se impugnari nesciunt, for then they are most assaulted when
they are ignorant of the assault, says S. Iorome.

And so you see, there is no peace to the wicked, i. no peace with God, no
peace with good men, no peace with their own souls and consciences, and
therefore no happiness in the world: for

1. Peace with God is so excellent a The excellency of each kind of peace.
thing, that it passes all understanding.

2. Peace with men is so profitable a thing, that it is most earnestly desired
of all creatures, says S. Augustine: Aug. to. 10. f. 712. 6. 2.
because as the Poet says,

Omnia pace vigent, and pacis tempore Palingen.
florent;

All things do increase and flourish in the time of peace, whereas by wars
and dissentions they are wasted, spoiled, and ruinated.

3. Peace with our selves is so sweet and so delectable a thing, that it is
better Prou. 15. 15.
then a continual feast, as Solomon speaks: it is that manna absconditum,
that exceeding great joy wherewith the Lord does so inebriate the hearts of his
Saints, that all the sorrows of the world is but as the drop of a bucket in
comparison of this Ocean of joy: -- murus aheneus esto

Nil conscire mali, nulla pallescere culpa.

For a guiltless conscience is like a brazen wall, and therefore say the world
what it will, they will not much respect it: if they be flattered, they will
not be in any pride exalted; or if they be slandered, they will not be with too
much grief dejected, for their conscience is their comfort, and vt malam
conscientiam August.
laudantis praeconium non sanat, ita nec bonam vulnerat conuitium, and as no
flattery can heal a bad conscience, so no slanders, no miseries, no villainies
can wound the good and upright conscience, but that still men's immota manet,
the mind of man does feed it self with the sweet delight of his untainted
conscience: quia nihil est quod ita voluptate afficere solet sicut pura
conscientia, for that there is nothing in the world that can so well please and
so much delight a godly man as a pure conscience, says S. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom. hom. 1 2. in 2. Cor.


And yet herein some deceive themselves, and grow careless of what the world
says of them, and respectlesse of their good name, and of all good report,
upon pretense of a good conscience; for so long as I know my self clear from
such and such imputations (says one) I care not what the world says of me.

To this I answer, that a good name That we should seek to join a good name
to our good conscience. Prou. 22. 1. Eccles. 7. 1.
and report among neighbors, is the chiefest thing, next to a good conscience,
that we should respect: It is better then fine gold, it is dearer then precious
ointment, and it is more to be desired then all the wealth in the world; for
what is a man when he is ill thought of, and ill spoken of, and has lost the
reputation of his credit? he is become as unsavory to our ears, as the vilest
object is to our eyes: and therefore I would desire to live no longer then I
should live in credit and good report among my neighbors.

But you will say, how can I stop the quorum proprium est maledicere, whose
property is to think ill of all, and to speak well of none.

I answer in a word, that the tongues of the wicked are no slanders: and indeed
I would think the worse of my self if I were commended by them, and the
better if I were dispraised; for our Savior says, Blessed are ye when men, i.
the wicked, shall revile you, and persecute Matthew. 5. 11.
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely.

But when good and honest men do think All is not well when good men speak
ill of us.
ill, and speak evil of either man or woman, I doubt not but they have some
ways, and in some respects deserved the same, and are not so good as they
should be, if they be not so bad as men Mr. Greenham in his sermon. of a good
name.
would make them to be (as a grave Divine does wisely speak) for as the evil
men cannot speak well of the godly upon any cause, so the good men will not
speak ill of any man without just cause.

But then again you will say: how can any good man speak ill of me, when is
no man can prove any ill by me? and therefore how can I lose a good name, so
long as I keep a good conscience?

I answer, that a man may have a That a man may have a good conscience, and yet
lose his good name.
clear conscience before God, and yet justly deserve a loss of his good name
and reputation in the world: for these two,

Viz 1. Bonafama, a good name,

Viz 2. Bona conscientia, a good conscience, are two several things, and may
be severally obtained: For,

1. A good conscience arises hence, when our hearts condemn us not of sin,
as the Apostle shows, 1 John.

2. A good name and report arises hence, when we give none occasion unto men
to suspect ill of us.

And therefore as he that commits sin (and therefore can have no good
conscience toward God) may notwithstanding, through the concealing and close
carriage of the same, retain a good report with men, and continue in the good
opinion of the world: so he that commits not sin (and therefore has a
good conscience toward God) may notwithstanding, by his indiscretion and want
of circumspection, give many causes of just suspicions of guiltiness, and so
lose his reputation and good esteem in the world.

And therefore that we may have a good conscience toward God, we must abstain
from all evil, and that we may He that would have a good name, must avoid
all appeara^ce of evil. 1 These. 5. 22.
have a good report in the world, we must abstain from all appearance of
evil, and give no cause to any man to suspect ill of us; for as the proverb
is,

He that will avoid an ill name,
Must avoid all that cause the same.
And

He that will no evil do, Pro. 15. 15.

Must do nothing that belongs thereto.
And so when our hearts and consciences tell us, that we neither did the
evil, nor gave any cause in the world for any man to suspect us of evil, then
shall we be happy indeed, our hearts will be at peace, and our consciences
better then a continual feast.

And thus you see the kinds of peace, and you see the goodness of each kind
of peace, that nothing can be more excellent then this blessed peace, nor any
thing in the world more miserable then to want the same. And therefore nec
vidisse satis est, iuuat vsque morari, I am loath to part yet from this point of
The means to procure each kind of peace.
peace, and I hope we shall not lose our labor, if we stay a little longer to
consider, how we may obtain each kind of peace that makes the obtainer
happy: and therefore I say,

1. That we may find peace with God, 1. How to find peace with God.
we must do three especial things.

1. To believe in Christ. 2. To avoid sin. 3. To do good.
1. We must believe in Christ, for he is the Prince of peace, and the only Esaias
9. 6.
Peacemaker between the mortal sinner and the immortal God: but Christ
dwells Ephesians. 3. 17. Aug. de Agon. Christ. ca. 12.
in our hearts by faith, says the Apostle: Et fides est prima quae subiugat
animam Deo, And our faith in Christ is the first thing that subiecteth our
soul to God, says S. Augustine, and so by faith in Christ we live, by faith
in him Romans 1. 17.
we are reconciled to God, we are justified, Romans 3. 25. 28.
sanctified, saved.

And therefore without faith it is impossible to please God, it is impossible
to Act 15. 9.
be at peace with God, for as he that believes Ephesians. 2. 8.
on him is not condemned, so he that believes not on him is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the John 3. 18.
name of the only begotten Son of God, and because in not believing on him,
he makes God alier, and believes not the record that God gave of his Son, 1
Ioh. 5. 10. 11. 12.
which is, that God has given us eternal life, and that this life is in his
Son, and that whosoever has the Son has life, and whosoever has not the
Son has not life.

And therefore this should teach us Faith is obtained and increased by 3.
especial means.
all careful diligence to get, to preserve, and to increase this precious gift
of faith, and that by three special means.

1. By the hearing of the word. 2. By the recouring of the Sacraments. 3. By
the feruencie of our prayers.
For 1. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17.
and hearing by the word of God, says the Apostle. Et accenditur fidei
lampa^igne diuini verbi, And the lamp of faith is kindled by the fire of the
heavenly word, says S. Chrysostom. And so the Chrysostom. in Matthew. 25. Ephesians. 1. 13.
Ephesians are said to have believed in Christ, after they had heard the word
of Christ. And therefore we should be ever willing and always ready to
hear the preaching of the word of God, for the more we hear, the more we
shall increase our faith, and the less we hear, the less faith we shall be
sure to have.

2. The Sacraments are Sigilla Dei, the great seals of God, that ratify unto
us the word of God, that by two immutable Heb. 6. 18.
things (viz. Gods writing, and Gods seal) we might have a strong consolation.
And they be verba visibilia Euangelij, the visible words of the Gospel that
do set before our eyes the sacrifice of Christ, and show in a visible manner
how Christ was crucified for us, and shed his blood for the remission of our
sins. And therefore we should not neglect the frequent use of these blessed
means, that God has given us to increase our faith.

3. The prayer of a faithful man avails James 5. 16.
much, to procure any thing at the hands of God, if it be fervent, says the
Apostle. And therefore as Christ prayed Luke 22. 32.
for S. Peter, that his faith should not fail, so should we pray to God, that
he would preserve and increase our faith: and because the preaching of the
word is but the demonstration of the Spirit, and 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
faith is in the power of God, therefore we should the rather pray, that when
Act. 16. 14.
Christ is preached, the Lord would sanctify our hearts, and open them as he
did the heart of Lidia, that we might believe in Christ.

2. We must avoid sin, for sin is the continual makebate between the
righteous God and the unrighteous man: sin writes bitter things against Job
13. 26.
us; sin lays us open before the face of God, and sin moves his
jealousy to burn like fire against us: for Psalm. 4.
he hates all those that work wickedness.

And therefore if we would be at peace with God, we must be at war with
sin (as I said before) and we must not only repent us of the old sins that
we have committed, but we must also resist all those new sins whereunto we
shall be enticed: for sin is like Antaeus the giant, as often as it is thrown
down,

-- viresque animumque resumit.

It will presently set a fresh upon us, and the more eagerly seek our
overthrow, and therefore we must manfully resist all the inticements of sin,
or else our sins, like those wild horses,

Qui circum illiacos raptarunt hectora Virgilius.
muros,

will tear us in pieces, while there is none to help us.

3. We must do good, for righteousness and peace have kissed each other. And
therefore nihil fides conferet emolumenti, Chrysostom. aduers. vit. Mon. l. 1.
si vita syncera non fuerit and pura: faith will avail us nothing, if we take
liberty thereby, either to commit any evil, or to omit any good; but as that
fig tree was cursed by our Savior, which had leaves and no fruit, so shall that
man be accursed before God, which boasts of his hope, or presumes of his
faith, and yet is void of goodness and merely destitute of all godliness.
And so you see that if we would have peace with God, we must believe in Christ,
we must avoid sin, and we must walk in newness of life and serve God without
fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

2. That we may find peace with men, many things are to be done according to
the several kinds of peace among men. And therefore,

1. That there may be peace in a How peace may be preserved betwixt man and
wife. What a happiness it is for man and wife to live in peace. Psa. 133. 1.
house, and that

First, betwixt the husband and the wife, I commend these three things to their
considerations.

1. The benefit of this peace. 2. The misery of their dissentions. 3. The
only means to avoid the one and to retain the other.
1. The Prophet says, Ecce quam bonum and quam iucundum est fratres habitare
in vnum. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity, here is bonum and iucundum, profit and pleasure, and Omne
tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile Horat. de art poet.
dulci. that is all that can be desired, says the most sententious Poet.

Now if it be so excellent among brethren, how much more excellent is it
betwixt man and wife? The son of Sirach says that three things do rejoice
Eccles. c. 25.
him, and are beautiful before God and man, unity of brethren, love of
neighbors, and a man and wife agreeing well together. And I say this is a type
of heaven, and a paradise upon earth, when man and wife do live in peace, and
can say each of other, my beloved Cant. 6 3.
is mine and I am his, and therefore the happiness and blessed state of
peaceable persons, should move all married couples to labor for this peace.

2. Solomon says, that a continual What a misery it is for man and wife to
live in contention.
dropping in the day of rain, and a contentious woman are both alike, and
therefore that it were better to dwell among Lions or Dragons, then for a quiet
man to dwell with a contentious woman, or for a quiet woman to dwell with a
troublesome man; for the contentions of married persons, are the very Prou. 19.
13 and 21. 19. and 25. 24.
types and tastes of hellish sorrows: for being outwardly yoked, and inwardly
discontented, they will but gall the necks, and grieve the hearts each of
other, each seeking his own credit with discredit unto both, and each weary of
his own life, longs for the death of the other. O wretched state of
miserable persons: quae vos dementia caepit? Why will you not seek for peace
among your selves, that you may be freed from these hellish wars, and woeful
discontentments?

3. That dissentions may be shunned, and that peace may be obtained, the one
God that made them both one, must be retained betwixt them both: for it is a
pretty observation of An excellent observation of a Jewish Rabbi.
a Jewish Rabbi, that in the words Ish and Isha, which signifies man and
woman, or the husband and wife, there is found the word Iah, which is the name
of God, and if this be taken away, there remains nothing else, but Esh and
Esh, which signifies fire and fire, to note unto us, that if God be not
betwixt the husband and the wife, there can be nothing betwixt them but the
fire of debate and contention.

And therefore if man and wife How man and wife may live at peace.
would live at peace among themselves, they must retain the God of peace
betwixt them. And this they shall do, if they labor to discharge each one his
duty according to the will of God.

1. Let the wife see that she does Ephesians. 5. 33.
fear her husband, (i.) let her be afraid to do any thing that might offend
her husband.

2. Let her keep her marriage bed H. b. 13. 4.
undefiled.

3. Let her do her husband good and not evil all the days of her life; good
must be the object and the subject of her labor, not a little good and a great
deal of evil, but all good and no evil, and that not for a day or two when
she is newly married, but all the Pro 31. 12.
days of her life, let her be a helper and not a hinderer unto her husband,
let her look to the ways of her household, and let her not eat the bread of
idleness.

And for the husband.

1. Let him love his wife even as himself: Ephesians. 5. 33.
for they two are one flesh.

2. Let him not be bitter unto her; not in blows, for it is a point of
sacrilege, says Bodinus, for a man to strike his wife. And so Cato Censorius
Plutarch in vita Catonis.
affirms, that he which smites his wife, does all one as if he should lay
violent hands upon the sacred images of the Gods; nor yet in words may a man be
bitter unto his wife, for a man may speak words like the pricking of a sword.
Pro. 12. 18.


3. Let him bear with the infirmities of his wife, as with the weaker vessel,
and 1 Cor. 13.
if he desire her to amend her faults, let him, saepe monere, raro corrigere,
Marcus Aurelius.
and nunquam percutere: often admonish, seldom reprove, and never smite, as
Marc. Aurelius, does advise.

4. Let him take notice of his wives diligence, and commend her for her
faithfulness: saying, many daughters Pro. 31. 29.
have done vertuousty, but thou excellest them all.

And so if man and wife will observe but these few rules and brief directions,
love one another, and bear one with another: I do not doubt but they shall
live happily, in all content and peace, and the God of peace will be with them.

Secondly, that there may be peace in How peace may be preserved in a house
among the whole family.
a house betwixt the parent and the children, and betwixt the children amongst
themselves, and so betwixt the master and the servants, and likewise betwixt
the servants among themselves, I say, that peace may be among them all, and
happiness to the whole family, I will (for brevity sake) desire you to
consider but these two things.

1. What our Savior says concerning this point. 2. What we should do to
procure this peace.
1. Our Savior says, Woe unto that Mat. 10. 36.
house where the people of the same house are divided, and where a man's enemies
shall be those of his own house, for certainly that house cannot stand, it
cannot continue; but most blessed is that house, where the hearts of the
fathers Luke 1. 17.
are turned to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers: and
where all brethren and fellow servants do live in peace, and love one another
Ro^. 12. 10.
with brotherly love, as the Apostle speaks.

2. That this peace may be procured and continued among them all, all of them
and cach one of them should study and labor to discharge his duty, and to
behave himself as he ought to do: and especially the chief man, the good man
of the house, who is the pillar of the house to uphold it, and the band of the
house, to tie and knit the same together in peace and unity, and upon whom the
greatest care, and chiefest charge is laid, should above all things have a
special care, to look unto these two principal points.

1. The choosing of his servants. 2. The teaching of his children.
1. Touching the first point, the How careful a man should be in the choice of
his servants. Psalm. 101. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Prophet David says, a froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a
wicked person, who so privily slandereth his neighbor him will I cut off, him
that has an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer, mine eyes shall be
upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in
a perfect way, he shall serve me: he that works deceit shall not dwell within
my house, he that tells lies he shall not tarry in my sight. In these words
he shows what he will do concerning his servants.

1. To cleanse his house from all wickedness, and to root out all lewd
fellows from his service.

2. To choose them for his servants that are just, honest and religious. And I
would to God all the masters in the world, would follow this worthy precedent,
which is thus amply set down, not only to be read over, once a month; but also
to be followed and practiced by all masters every day: for as a garden must be
continually weeded, or else the evil weeds will soon ouertop all the sweetest
flowers; so all ruffians, swaggerers, swearers, and all the rabble rout of such
deboist, desperate and dissolute companions must be carely destroyed Psalm. 101.
vlt.
(as the Prophet speaks) i^ soon rooted out of thy house, or else they willd
stroy thy house.

And therefore if a man would have peace and happiness to remain within his
house, he must with David discarde all dissolute fellows, which are the causes
of all discords and the bringers of all mischiefs upon a house. He must I say
either roct out all their vices from them, or root them from his house. And he
must take such for his servants that will first serve their God, and then
himself, for such will live in peace among themselves and do service unto
their masters, not with eieseruice, as men-pleasers, but in singleness
Colloss. 3. 22.
of heart as unto Christ.

2. Touching the teaching of our children, Saint Paul bids us to Ephesians. 6. 4.
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, for that would make
them fear God, glad their parents, and like Scilurus children, live Plutar. in
Apoth.
in peace and love one another with brotherly love. And so much for the means
to procure domestical peace.

2. That every commonwealth may have peace, and every city be like Jerusalem,
that was at unity within it Psalm. 122. 3.
self, I can prescribe no better means then for all kinds of men, and for
all men of every kind to perform his own duty and to discharge his own
conscience for the obtaining of this peace.

And because all sorts of men are either

1. Superiors. 2. Inferiors. 3. Equals.
Therefore that peace might remain How peace may be preserved in every
commonwealth. Esaias 49. 23
among these all, it behooves all of these to discharge their duties for the
preservation of peace. And

1. Superiors must be nursing fathers unto the people, most carefully desirous
to procure their peace, and most painfully studious to preserve them from
dissentions, ever hazarding their own happiness, for the happiness of their
people, and procuring sleep unto their subjects by their own watchfulness,
and ease unto them, by the industry of themselves, and sic viuentes Seneca de
Clem. Plinius de Traiano. The dutics of superiors for the procuring of peace.
cum ciuibus quasi parents cum liberis, and so living among their people as
the parents do among their children.

And to the end, that all superiors may the better know what should be done
herein, and be the more readily induced to perform the same, I will only
desire them to consider of those golden sentences and protestations, that
Marcus Aurelius found at Thebes, engraven upon a golden plate in the person of
Ptolomeus Aracides, and are set down in verse in the 542. page of Marcus
Aurelius his work, and which I found thus in another author set down in
prose, viz.

I never exalted the proud rich man, nor hated the poor just man, I never
denied justice to the poor for his poverty, nor pardoned the wealthy for his
riches, I never gave reward for affection, nor punishment upon passion, I never
suffered evil to escape unpunished, nor goodness unrewarded, I never denied
justice to him asked it, neither mercy to him that deserved it, I never
punished in anger, nor promised in mirth, I never did evil upon malice, nor
good for covetousness, I never opened my gate to the flatterer, nor mine ear
to the backebiter, I always sought to be beloved of the good, and to be feared
of the evil, I always favored the poor that was able to do little, and
therefore God who was able to do much did always favor me.

O most sweet and pious practice! a practice fit for the procurement of peace,
and therefore I would to God that all this were not only written in the hearts,
but also practiced in the lives of all superiors.

2. Inferiors must be subject to the The duties of inferiors for the
procuring of peace. Titus 3. 1. 2. 1 Tet. 2. 17. Aug. in Psalm. 82. 6.
higher powers, and must be ready to obey their magistrates in all humility and
meekness, as the Apostle shows. They must honor them as Saint Peter says;
and that because they bear the image of God, says Saint Augustine, and we
must assist them both by our goods and by our bloods, if need require, and
above all things we must pray for them, that we may 1 Timothy 2. 1.
live a peaceable, and a quiet life under them, says the Apostle.

3. Equals, neighbors, and all men that would desire to live in peace, must
look unto these two especial things.

1. To avoid those sins and vices that are the causes of discords and
dissentions.

2. To embrace those virtues and graces that do procure peace and quietness.

De 1. I say there be many sins The chiefest causes of contentions among
neighbors.
that are the causes of contentions, but especially these four capital
crimes. viz. 1. Pride. 2. Envy. 3. Curiosity. 4. Covetousness.


1. Pride breaks all peace, for he that is of a proud spirit stirs up Pro.
28. 25.
strife, and therefore Saint Paul joins Philip. 2. 3.
pride and contention together, as if they were like Hypocrates twins, both
borne at a birth, both live and die together. And so experience shows, how
pride has caused much division and contention in the Church of God (as I
showed at large in my Treatise of The resolution of Pilat) and so likewise much
dissentions and distractions in the commonwealth. For proud men can never agree
together,

Nec quemquam iam far potest, Caesarue Lucan. l. 1. Pharsal.
priorem,
Pompeiusue parem --
they cannot endure any man to be better then themselves, for indeed they
think none so good as themselves.

Riualem possum non ego far Iouem. Ouidius.


As the Poet speaks in another kind, so says every proud man in this kind,
he alone must be the best, and none must be his corriuall. And therefore if you
would have peace, you must have no pride, you must not lift up your horn on
high and speak Psalm. 75. 4, 5.
with a stiff neck.

2. Envy stirs up all striffe, for the Patriarchs moved with envy, despised
Act. 7. 9.
Joseph and sold him into Egypt, and the Apostle says, that where envying Iam.
3. 14.
is, there is strife and sedition, and all manner of evil works. And so we
find that this vitium diabolicum, this deuillish vice of envy (as Saint
Augustine Aug. to. 10. in Psalm. 139.
calls it) wrought much trouble unto David among the Jews, brought many
dangers unto Daniel among the Medes and Persians, and made the Plebeian faction
continually among the Romans, and does the same many times among our selves.
For the vulgar cannot endure the dignity of their superiors, nor the
felicity of their equals.

Fertilior seges alienis semper in agris, Ouidius.


Alterius messis grandius vber habet.

Every one enuieth his neighbors good, and thinks his harvest better then his
own. And therefore rather enuieth him, then thanketh God for himself.

But for the saluing of this sin, I will only set down that witty parable
Titus Liuius decad. 1. l. 2.
of Menenius Agrippa, that was sent by the nobles of Rome to appease the rage
of those envious people that had made so many factious combinations against the
state. For

He told them that on a time all the members of the body did envy the stomach,
and said she did nothing else but eat and devour with ease and pleasure what
they had purchased with great labor and pain. And therefore the feet would
walk no more for it, the hands would work no more for it, the tongue would
plead no more for it, and so said all the rest of the members of the body: but
within a while, the long fast of the stomach, made weak knees, faint hands,
dim eyes, pale visage, faultering tongue, and a heavy heart, and then they were
glad to be reconciled unto the stomach again, and to work incessantly for the
same. And so by this means Menenius appeased the people. And by this we should
all learn, never to envy the good of those men, by whose happiness we our
selves are happy, nor yet indeed the good of any man, for we are all members
of the same body, if one suffer all suffer, and if one be honored all should
rejoice. And therefore if we would have peace among our neighbors, we must not
envy the good of our neighbors.

3. Curiosity and busy meddling in other men's matters, is a maine breach of
peace: for the fool that is Pro. 17. 27.
peeping in at every window, (i.) looking to every other man's work, shall
never want sorrow, says the Wiseman, and they that are curiosi ad cogn^s.
end^m vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam, (i.) curious to know other
men's lives, and careless to amend their own lives, as S. Augustine speaks;
they do nothing else but stir up the coals of strife and dissentions.

And therefore if we desire to live in 1 These. 4. 11. Plut. de curiositate, c.
1.
peace, we must not be like unto those Lamian Witches, that when they were at
home did put up there eyes in a box, but when they went abroad, they set them
into their heads again, we must not be (...), busy bodies, imittentes falcem
in alienam messem, thrusting our oar into another man's boat, but we must look
unto our selves, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 1 These. 4. 11.
examine our selves, and meddle with our own business: always remembering
what our Savior said unto S. Peter, when he would needs know what John must
do, What is that to thee? tusequere me, do thou follow me; else shall thou be
sure, that if thy hand like Ismael, be against every man, every man's hand will
be against thee. And if thou prate of every man, every man will prate of thee,
and so thou can never have any peace.

4. Covetousness is as bad an enemy to this peace, as any other of the
former: for conetous men covet fields and Mich. 2. 2.
take them by violence, they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his
heritage; yea they that are greedy of gain would even take away the life of
the owners thereof, that they might fill their Prou. 1. 12. 19.
own house with the spoil, as Solomon speaks; and so we see that the
greedy desire of lands, goods, and worldly wealth, is the cause of many suites
and much hatred among neighbors: and therefore if we would live at peace we
must take heed and beware of covetousness, Luke 12. 15.


De. 2. I say we must do many things to procure our peace, but especially,
these five things, which I collect out of S. Bernard.

1. Pie viuere, to live uprightly. The chiefest things that procure peace among
neighbors.
2. Humiliter satisfacere, to submit our selves humbly. 3. Facile remittere, to
forgive easily. 4. Diligenter quaerere, to seek peace earnestly. 5. Volenter
recipere, to embrace peace willingly.
1. We must deal uprightly with all men, for this is the only thing to procure
peace with all men, and therefore Marcus Aurelius upon his deathbed counseled
his son Commodus, that if he would live peaceably, and quietly, he should
live instly, and uprightly, for righteousness and peace have kissed each
other, and therefore Plato says, that Plato de repub. l. 4.
publica and priuata concordia, publica and priuata iustitia praeseruatur: the
public and private peace is preserved chiefly by public and private equity.
When men do observe the ancient rule both of Morality and Divinity, viz.

Quod tibi velis alijs hoc videto,
Quod tibi nollis alijs hoc caueto.
to do unto others as they would be done unto, for this is the law and the
Prophets, says our Savior, and this is the only way to preserve peace among
all m^n, says Solon.

2 If we have done wrong unto any man we should in all humility make him
sat^^faction, as S. Bernard says. And Bern. Ser. 1. de verb. Apost. f. 388.
agree with our neighbor while he is in the way, before he complains unto
the Judge, as our Savior speaks. For that is most certain which S.
Augustine says, Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum, si commode
restitus potest. God never remitteth the wrong, unless we satisfi the party
wronged, either by restitution or confession, or humble seeking of remission.

3. If we have been wronged by any man, we should most willingly forgive the
offense, that God may forgive us our offenses; for if you forgive not one
another, neither will your heavenly father forgive you, says our Savior.

Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter. etc.
If God should punish us for every offense, alas what would become of us? but
he is slow to anger, and abundant in goodn^sse and truth, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. Does he therefore forgive thee a thousand talents,
and wilt not thou forgive thy neighbor an hundred pence? Does he write thy
sins in dust,

-- scribisque in marmore laesus?

and do thou write thy brothers faults in marble?

And therefore it is a fault amongst us, when we are so ready to go to law one
with another: why do we not rather 1 Cor. 6. 7.
take wrong, why do we not forgive the offense? as the Apostle speaks.

It was a witty counsel which Crates gane unto the Thebanes: If he which has
wronged thee be weaker then thy self, pardon him, for it is no honor for a
man to strive against a child; nor for a rich man to go to law with a beggar,
if he be more mighty then thou art, pardon thy self, for thou shall never
gain any thing, by going to law with a mighty man, says Solomon, and if he be
thine equal, pardon both thy self and him, for you shall both live by the
loss, and shall hardly know who is the gainer. And therefore strive with no
man, but if it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men,
says the Apostle.

4. We must not only remit the offense, but we must also sue for peace, before
we sue for our right; we must seek Psalm. 34. 14.
it, we must follow after it, and enquire for it, 1 Pet. 3. 11.

We must study to be quiet, and we 1 These. 4. 11.
must endeavor by all means to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace.

And therefore when the two famous Ephesians. 4. 3.
Philosophers, Aristippus and Aescines were at variance, Aristippus comes to
Aescines and seeks for peace, Aescines imbraceth the motion: well says
Aristippus, remember that I sought peace first, though I am your elder: I
confess it says Aescines, and therefore will ever acknowledge you the better,
because I began the strife, and you began the peace.

And so you see they are ever the worst men that stir up strife, and they are
the best that seek for peace. And therefore if we would be deemed good, let
us seek for peace and ensue it.

5. If we be so haughty that we cannot be persuaded to be quaerentes pacem,
seekers of peace, and suitors for our quietness, why then at least we should be
recipientes pacem, ready to embrace peace, and to be peacemakers, when others
will be mediators, that look for the blessing of peacemakers; which is to be
called the children Matthew. 6.
of God.

For God knowing the pride of men's hearts, and the haughtiness of their
spirits, that each one disdaineth, and thinks it a great disparagement unto
him to seek for peace unto his fellow (although perhaps he could willingly
affect peace, if others did affect the same) therefore our Savior promises,
that great blessing unto all those that are willing to do that great good to
make peace between those that are at variance.

And therefore when any difference arises betwixt neighbors, it were a happy
thing if some children of God would take up the matter, and they take peace
unto themselves.

I remember a pretty story, that I read of Archidamas, who seeing two
Lacedaemonians walking in the temple of Minerua, that had been long at
variance, he goes unto them, and asked them why they would not refer the
difference to some indifferent vmpire, they both said they would refer all
matters unto himself, he caused them to swear to stand to his adward, and
then he pronounced the adward, that they should never depart out of the temple,
until they had ended all differences betwixt themselves, and become good
friends, and so he parted, and they themselves were feign to reconcile
themselves.

I wish we had many such Archidamus, that either by some such politic device,
or else by some Christian advice, would be the means to further peace, and to
end all differences betwixt men.

And so you see the means to effect peace among friends, equals, and
neighbors.

But what if all these will not avail to get my right, or to procure my peace?
What if men be such as when we speak of peace, they make them ready to
battle, as the Prophet speaks, the more we seek for peace, the more insolent
they are.

I answer, that when thou have sought for peace, liberasti animam tuam, thou
have done thy duty, and therefore may the better sue for thy right, for the
law is just and holy, and Plutarch in Apoth.
many should be deprived of their right, were it not for law. Yet as Archidamus
said to the Aeolians, so say I to all neighbors, that peace is good if
possibly it may be had, for the discords of friends are like raging fires, as
Iotham shows; a fire shall Judges 9. 20.
come from Abimelech which shall devour the men of Shekem, and the house of
Millo, and a fire shall come from Sechem and the house of Millo which shall
devour Abimelech, i. they should devour and destroy each other by their
broiles and dissentions, for so we see neighbors and friends do often times
beggar and undo one another by their suites and contentions. And therefore it
would be happy for them, if they could be once resolved either to seek for
peace, or to embrace their peace. And so much for the means to procure peace
among neighbors.

3. That peace may continue among all nations, we should heartily pray to God,
as our Church inioyneth us, and say, Da pacem domine in diebus nostris, give
peace in our time, O Lord, for the prayers of the Church for peace is the
chiefest means to preserve peace in all the world, as the Emperor Constantius
did most christianly ^useb. in vita Constant. l. 1. and l. 4. Zach. 9. 10.
confess, and therefore we should all pray to God that he would speak peace
unto the heathen from sea to sea, as the Prophet speaks, that so every man
may sit under his own vine, and under his own sig tree, and that 2 Samuel 7. 1.
there may be none to make us afraid, no decay, no leading into captivity, no
complaining in our streets, but that having peace within our walls, and peace
in all our borders, we may have plenteousnesse within our palaces, as the
Prophet David speaks. Psalm. 144. 13. Wars justly undertaken are lawful.


And yet if peace may not be had, I deny not but wars are just and lawful,
when they are undertaken upon just and lawful causes: for there is a time for
war, and a time for peace, says the Wiseman. And the Eccl. 3. 8.
Lord is a man of war, says Moses, Exodus 15. 3.
and we read of the wars of the Lord, and therefore I confess that wars
are many times of equity, many times of necessity, and many times approved by
divine authority.

But for me or any other inferior subject to discuss the cause, or determine
the time of war, we shall with Shemei go beyond the river Kydron, 1 Reg. 2.
37.
and deserve the sentence of just reproof, for I am to handle points of
divinity, and not of polli^ie* and you are to follow and to obey, and not to
guide and direct. God has given the We should take heed of ouerbold meddling
with S^^te business.
care and laid the charge of kingdoms and commonwealths, upon kings and
governors, that do reign oy him and are guided by him, as Solomon speaks:
and as the spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Proph^ts, so the secrets
of a State must be known only to the Statesmen, and by them (so far as they
see cause) revealed unto others.

And therefore, it is our parts, not to be ever prating and prattling of the
wars, of the marriages, or of any other secret matters of Princes, but seeing
the hearts of kings are in the Pro. 21.
hands of the Lord, who can turn the same as pleases him, we should ever pray
unto the Lord, and that first of all, i. before we do it for any other, we
should desire of God, that he would guide our Kings to do those things that
shall tend most for his glory and our comfort; and then, if peace ensue and
continue, we should humbly embrace it, and most heartily be thankful, for so
happy and so inestimable a blessing, if war begin, we should be ready to
follow, and most willing to spend, goods, lives and all: but all to this end,
that peace may follow.

For though the haughty, and disordered spirits do itch and long for wars,
and say with the Poet.

Non pacem petimus superi, date gentibus Lucan Pharsal. l. 2.
iras:
Nunc vrbes excite feras, coniuret in arma mundus.
We seek not peace, we wish for wars, we long to see the glittering Desire
of war is a sign of a bloody mind.
swords, quia dulce bellum inexpertis* because the wars and rumors o^ wars,
are like a pleasant harmony to them that knows it not: yet to all humble
minds, and to all well-affected Christians, that do loath to bathe their
swords, and to make them drunken with the blood of men, to see the tender babes
snatched from the mothers breasts, and either bleeding upon the stones or
sprawling upon the pikes, and to behold the highways strawed with
breath-lesse carcasses; and do even tremble to make many widows and
fatherless children, to desolate towns, and ruin countries, and to bring
forth such bitter fruits of war, and therefore desire rather to enjoy that
little pittance which God has given them through peace, then all the wealth of
the world through the fury of wars and outrageous violences; to these I say
peace is happy, peace is blessed, for these will say with Drunces,

Nulla salus bello, pacem nos poscimus Virgil Aeneid.
omnes.

We know no good that can be got by war, and therefore we will pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, and for peace especially among all Christian kings and
princes. For as,

When the Lion and the Bore do Whitmaeus in Emblem.
fight,
The Ravens hope for gain by that sight.
Sic modo dum faciant discordia praelia Georgius Sabinus.
Reges,
Turcius Europae diripit hosts opes.
And therefore it were to be wished that all Christian kings would be kings of
peace, and would ever remember that saying of Sylius Italicus,

Faedera mortales ne saeuo rumpite ferro, Syluius. c. 13.

Sed castam seruate fidem, fulgentibus ostro.
Haec potior regnis --
That sacred peace should not be violated, nor Christian leagues be broken, for
that truth and fidelity, is better then the brauest kingdoms, and peace better
then all the pearls of the world.

And therefore I say that all godly All godly men desire peace.
men that do fear the fury of war, and do know the benefit of
contentment, and desire the fruits of peace, will ever pray for peace, and
never undertake the war, if peace and quietness may be gotten by any means;
as Timotheus said unto the Thebanes, Quia iniquissima pax iustissimo bello est
anteferenda, Plutarch in Apoth.
because the worst peace is to be preferred before the best war, says
Cicero, for the wars, how justly soever they be undertaken yet they will
prove at last, to be trouble some and sorrowful to the best men, says S.
Augustine, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 19.
and they will make men to be as meat unto the fire, faith the Prophet Esaias,
(i.) they shall be like stubble Esaias 9. 19.
devoured and consumed with the fiery heat of war.

And as we are to pray that peace Above all things we should avoid civil
wars.
may continue among all kingdoms, so are we especially bound to pray, and to
use all our furtherance to have peace preserved in every kingdom that there be
no civil wars and dissentions in any commonwealth, for this is the readiest
way to overthrow the greatest kingdoms.

Francia flos florum foex foecum Francia facta est,

They say France was a glorious kingdom, and the flower of allother nations,
but it would be a tragedy to relate the miseries that civil broils and
dissentions brought upon that country. The like may be said of the kingdom of
Argiers, and of our selves in former ages, in the times of the Barons wars.

And therefore to maintain this peace, we should all keep faith and true
allegiance unto those kings and governors under whom we live, for that
falsehood and treachery is the Appianus Allexand. in fine l. de Bell. Roman. cum
Mith.
greatest poison that can be unto any king, or to overthrow the greatest state,
as that most warlike and learned king Mithridates said, when he was betrayed of
his own friends, and the poison that he had taken would not dispatch him out
of life.

And above al we should all labor to preserve equity and piety amongst us, if
we would have peace to conitnue amongst us. For Marcus Aurelius says, that
king Boco made an oration to the Senate of Rome, wherein among many other
notable sentences, he left The dial of Princes page 393.
written the banes and the causes of the ruin of every kingdom in these
words, viz.

Woe to that realm where all are such that neither the good among the evil,
nor the evil among the good are known. Woe The description of a wicked
kingdom, and the fearful estate thereof.
to that realm, which is the intertainer of fools, and a destroyer of all
sages; woe to that realm, where the good are fearful, and the evil too
bold; woe to that realm, where the patient are despised, and the seditious
commended; woe to that realm which destroys those which watch for the good,
and crowns those which watch to do evil; woe to that realm, where the
poor are suffered to be proud, and the rich to be tyrants; woe to that realm,
where all do know the evil and no man does follow the good; woe to that
realm where so many evil vices are openly committed, which in another country
dare not secretly be mentioned; woe to that realm, where all procure that they
desire, where all attain to that they procure, where all think that which is
evil, where all speak that which they think, and finally where all may do
what they will. In such and so unfortunate a realm where the people are too
wicked, let every man beware that he be no inhabitant, for in short time there
must happen there, either the ire of the Gods, or the fury of men, to the
depopulation of the good, or the desolation of the tyrants.

And therefore if we would have peace, we must root out vice, and labor every
man to do justice, to be true to our king, to be obedient to the law, and to
love one another with brotherly love. And so much for the means to procure all
kinds of the civil peace.

2. That ecclesiastical peace may be preserved, and that first among the
Pastors Eusebius. Eccl. l. 8. c. 1.
themselves, we should all remember what Eusebius says, viz. that while the
Ministers and Preachers of Gods That all ministers should live at peace among
themselves.
word, were at peace among themselves and did hold together, the Gospel of
Christ flourished, and their own happiness increased, and haec nulla potuit
invidia prohibere, and yet Satan with all his subtletie, Tyrants with all their
cruelty, and the world with all his envy could never hinder the prosperous
estate of the Church.

But when the bond of peace was once broken, and they began to war among
themselves, then the Lord darkened the glory of the daughter of Sion, and the
miseries that befell these ministers were most lamentable, and so both
themselves and their people did rue their discords; for

Nulla lues ouibus tantum non vlla venena, Melancton. in Epigram.

Quantum pastorum dissidia ipsa nocent.
Nothing can be so hurtful, or so poisonous unto the people, as the
dissentions of their Pastors, says Melancthon,

And therefore we should pray to God that he would keep us secretly within
his tabernacle from the strife of tongues, that we may be at peace among our
selves. Nam multi lupi velleribus Ignat. ep. 9. ad Philad.
tecti sed in nostris concordibus animis nullus dabitur illis locus. For there
be many Wolves in Sheep clothing, but against unanimous hearts they can have
none advantage. O then beloved brethren, let us embrace this peace among our
selves,

Formicae grata est formica cicada cicadae, Rousner in Emblem.

Et doctus doctis gaudet Apollo choris.
The very brute beasts do love those best that are of their own kind,
according to that ancient proverb, birds of a fether will flock together: and
yet alas I see too many of us despising How the chief among the Clergy deal
with their inferiors.
one another, and contesting one against another, the great ones do contemn
the poor, advance the wealthy, suppress the painful, and if any one, making
a conscience to discharge his duty, does seem to exceed the rest in pains,
he shall be the only mock among the rest.

Proud envy so his virtues does deface,
It makes them foes to him they should embrace.
But for mine own part I shall be ever of S. Cyprians mind, Non videndum
Cyprian.
est quid aliqui ante nos fecerunt, sed quid ille qui ante omnes est, faciendum
sit mandarit, we are not altogether to look what others have done before us,
or what others use to do among us, but we are especially to look what he
which is before all and above all, has commanded us to do.

And therefore quum periculosa res Anselmus.
est negligentia prelatorum, seeing the negligence of the Ministers is most
dangerons, dangerous to themselves, dangerons to their people, as Anselmus
says: I would advise every faithful steward to go on in all diligence, like
king Therous coursers, that Pyndarus.
were never weary of running, as Pyndarus speaks, and though he do still
continue unregarded, yet if he preach truly, and live uprightly, merces eius
apud Deum, he shall not lose his reward.

Yet I say that this neglecting of painful upright men, and the preferring of
kinsmen, allies-men, and rich men, all perhaps ignorant men, has caused many a
man to start aside, and in the height of discontent to disturb the peace of
the Church, to overthrow themselves and many others.

And what shall become of the causers hereof. Woe to him by whom offenses come,
says our Savior: and I fear I may say, woe to him that is the cause hereof,
Woe to him that breaks peace, and woe to him that causes him to break the
peace, Nam qui praesenti pace male vt untur futuram pacem non habebunt: for
they that abuse the present peace, they shall never enjoy the future peace,
says Saint Augustine.

And therefore to conclude this point, let us abandon pride, covetousness, and
contempt, one toward another; and let us live in love and peace, for we be
brethren, and as Melancton Melancton. in Epigr.
says,

Sit procul a Christi discordia saeua Ministris,
Namque Deus poterit non nisi pace coli.
Let cruel discords and dissentions be far from us, for the God of peace can
never be served but by the Ministers of peace, for if we do despise this
peace, we may fear that we, qui prius Nazianz. Orat. 3. in princip. f. 71.
ex non populo populus, and ex non gente gens facti fueramus. Which heretofore
of no people were made a people, shall yet again be in that danger, of a great
people, to become no people, and in veterem illum statum redire in quo eramus
cum in vnum nomen ordinemque non conuenissemus.

And to return to the ancient state wherein we were, because we cannot agree
together, says that excellent man Greg. Nazianz.

Secondly, that peace may be preserved That peace should be betwixt the
preacher and the people.
betwixt the shepherd and his stock, we should remember that no good can be
there where they are at variance.

I confess the cause hereof may be sometimes in our selves, when we are either
too critic and captious in our pulpits, or too litigious in our
conuersations; but I fear me it is most commonly in our people, when they are
too contemptuous of our callings, too injurious to our persons, and especially
too envious of our maintenance, despising us and denying our due: that it were
as easy to draw sanguinem ex scilice, blood out of a flint stone, as to get
our right out of their hands, if by any means they can defraud us, for as
Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, Iesabel Exodus 7. 11.
persecuted Elias, and Alexander the Copper-smith did much hurt unto S. Paul,
though S. Paul did none to him, so I fear we want not such in these our days
to vex and molest the poor Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But for the quenching of this fire, and the abating of all heat betwixt the
Pastor and his people,

1. Let us that are ministers, live uprightly, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
preach sincerely, reprove friendly, and show our selves in charity with all,
bitter to none, that they which speak evil of us by seeing our good works,
may glorify our Father which is in heaven.

2. Let all the people know, that 2 These. 2. 10. Satan laugheth to see the
Preacher and people at varirance. Luke 10. 16.
it is the mere subtlety and policy of satan to set them on against their
Preachers, only to hinder the work of our ministry, and to increase their
own iniquity. For he that despises us despises Christ himself, and
therefore the Apostle says, that the people should know them that labor
amongst them, and account them worthy of double honor, and have them in
singular respect, even for their work sake, and 2 These. 5. 12.
indeed for their own sake, that they may reap the more good by them, and be
partakers of the fruits of their labors.

And thus I have showed the causes of dissentions among brethren in every
place, in every house, in every meeting, in every city, in every kingdom,
in every Church, in every parish; the causes I say that makes poor peace, with
Lazarus, to lie without the doors, and with the Angels Luke 16.
that came to Sodom in the streets, and then to wander like Caine as a
vagabond upon the face of the earth, Genesis 19.
and to be contemned in every place. And so I have showed the means to retain
peace among all sorts of men, and to banish all the seditious enemies of peace
from every place; God give us grace to shun discords and dissentions and to
embrace unity and peace, that the God of peace may be amongst us. And so much
for the means to procure peace among men.

3. That every man may find peace within himself, i. peace of mind, peace of
conscience, three things must be performed.

1. All sin must be banished. 2. All crosses must be sweetened. What we must
do to find peace of conscience.
3. All vanities must be contemned.
1. Sin has a finger against every kind of peace, and especially against
this internal peace of mind, sin is the chiefest captain, that makes this
domesticke Galath.
and civil war within our breasts. For sin is the only cause that the flesh
Bernar. in festo omnium Sanct. ser. 5. f. 197.
rebelleth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and sic
peccatum quod posuit nos contrarios Deo, facit nos nobis-ipsis graves: and so
sin that made us before enemies unto God, does now make us enemies unto our
selves.

And therefore as an angry swelling sore can never leave aching while the thorn
is rotting within it, so our conscience can never be pacified until our sins
be quite banished; for as the Poet says,

Conscia men's, vt cuique sua est, it a concipit intra
Pectora, pro factis spemque metumque suis.
A man's conscience will either excuse him, or accuse him for every fact, and
will bring him, either an exceeding joy, or most hellish sorrows in all his
actions.

For we must not think that this is only to be understood of the greater
sins, or enormous offenses, but even of the least sins, it must also be
understood. For, cursed is every one that Gal. 3. 10.
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law for to
do them Every sin brings a curse, and therefore every sin wounds the
conscience, and no marvel; Nam vt Bernar.
sagitta leuiter volat, tamen grauiter vulnerat, for as an arrow flies
smoothly, and is scarce seen in the air as it passes, yet it wounds deadly
when it hitteth, says Saint Bernard; even so sin that seems little or
nothing while it is in acting, will wound the conscience deeply when it is
considered, and examined.

And therefore, Noli despicere peccata The least sins must be shunned.
tua quia parua, nam and pluuiarum guttae paruae sunt, etc. Do not thou grow
careless of thy self because thy sins are small, or but venial sins as
thou think, for thou see the drops of rain are but small, and yet they
were able to drown the world, and are continually able to fill the boundless
Ocean; and the sin of Adam did seem but small, to eat but an apple, and yet
it was able to condemn the whole race of mankind: even so thy sins that in
thy thoughts are so small, will be sufficient, if thou do not banish them,
to wound thy conscience here, and to condemn thee for ever hereafter. For our
Savior tells us, that for every idle world, Aug. in Enthirid.
we shall give an account at the last day. O then beloved, vae peccatis
hominum, woe be to the sins, that we customably drink like water, and do
usually, and commonly commit without remorce.

But if we would avoid the griping conscience here, and the worm that never
dies hereafter, let us make a conscience of committing the least sin. Nam
haud cito progreditur ad maiora peccata qui parua reformidat. For he will not
easily commit the greater sins, that does loath and detest the lesser sins.

2. Crosses and afflictions do disturb How we should behave our selves in
afflictions.
the peace, and disquiet the minds of many men, and cause them to live in
perpetual discontent. And therefore we must seek to avoid them, or at least
to sweeten them if we must needs endure them: and for the sweetning of their
bitterness, or the allaying of their violence, I know no better means then,

1. To expect them before they come, that we may be prepared for their coming.
For tela praeuisa minus nocent, they will die with the Cocatrice if we see them
first, but if they come like a shower unexpected, they will prove the more
violent, and be like an armed man against whom their is no resistance. And
therefore we should ever remember that,

1. As men we are to look for our We are to look for afflictions as men.
part of afflictions, for what is the life of man, but interminabilis labor,
like the continual tumbling of Sisiphus stone, or like king Danaus daughters,
that were enjoined to fill the fatal tun, whereout the waters still did run,
and therefore, Job indefinitly says, man that is borne of a woman has but a
short time to live, and is full of miseries.

2. As Christian men, we are to expect more then any other, for so our Savior
told us, that we should be sent as sheep into the midst of wolves, and should
be hated of all men for his names sake, and Saint Paul tells us, that we must
through many tribulations Christians more subject to affliction then any other
men.
and afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven. And Saint Augustine says,
cum caeperis in Christo pie viuere ingressis torcular praeparato ad pressuram,
when thou beginnest to live godly in Christ Jesus, thou entrest into a
wine press, prepare thy self to be pressed, yea and to be oppressed too by
this wicked world, all this is told us, that we should not think it strange,
when afflictions come upon us, but should rather with Saint Paul expect them to
wait for us in every place.

2. When they come, to consider from whence they come, even from the hand of
God as Job shows, for when he had lost all that he had, he said, the Lord
has given it, and the Lord Job 1.
has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord.

3. To understand to what end they are sent, namely, to make us hate our sins
which are the cause hereof, as the Prophet shows, surely man suffers for
his sin, to weane us from the world, and to make us long for heaven, and to
know that, nullus alius noster est finis nisi peruenire ad regnum cuius nullus
est finis, this is our only end to attain unto that kingdom which is without
end. These considerations and the like will certainly make us to bear all our
crosses patiently, and in all afflictions to rest our selves most contentedly,
yea and to count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations, i.
probationis non seductionis, into those temptations, that are from God for our
trial, as was that of Abraham, but not into those that are from Satan for our
destruction, as are all wicked suggestions.

3. The vanities of this world do That we should not too egerly hunt after
worldly vanities.
so bewitch the minds of many men, that they can have no peace nor quietness
in the world, but do rise up early, and go late to bed, and eat the bread of
carfulness, and all to hunt after the wealth, the dignities and the vanities
of this world. And so man disquieteth himself in vain, heaping up riches, and
cannot tell who shall gather them: for these two, i. vanities and vexations,
must needs go together, as Solomon by his own experience has observed.

And therefore if we would avoid vexations, and enjoy peace of mind, we must
not hunt too greedily after the wealth and vanities of this world, but we must
rather rest our selves contented with that little portion that God has given
us. And we know that a very little will serve our turn, food and raiment,
What a little thing will content nature.
says the Apostle, (...), not to thrist, not to starve, says Gregory
Nazianzene. Nam cibus and potus sunt diuitiae Christianorum: For meat and
drink should be all the riches that Christians should care for, says S.
Jerome: Ieron. in Epist.
and having this we should be contented, says the Apostle.

And indeed we find that many of the very Heathens thought that enough, and
sought no more. For,

-- contentus honesto Claud. lib. 1. in Russin.

Fabritius paruo, spernebat munera regum,
Sudabatque graui Consul Serranus aratro,
Et casa pugnaces curios angusta tenebat.
Fabritius, Serranus, and the most valiant Curio's despised all the wealth and
riches of this world, and were very well contented with that little means
which they had honestly gotten; and the Poet says of this contemning of
vanities, and satisfying our selves with a little,

-- o muner a nondum Idem Claud.

Intellecta Deum. --
They are such gifts of the Gods, as that no man could yet well understand the
sweetness and the excellencies thereof. And therefore we should despise these
worldly vanities and never place our felicities therein; and to the end we may
be weaned from them, we should delight our selves in the Lord, and taste and
see how sweet he is (as the Prophet David speaks) and then no doubt, but the
soul would be so delighted with that unspeakable sweetness, Vt Aug. in
Soliloq.
supra se elata ad seipsam relabi de dignatur, that it never more delight it
self in any thing, no nor in it self, but only in God himself, where it
should have the fullness of all peace and happiness. And so you see the means
to attain unto perfect peace.

And thus I have showed thee, o man, quid sit bonum, the goodness both of
grace and peace, the two chiefest things that can be named. It rests that I
should speak of that which is maius and magis bonum, far more excellently
good every way, (i.) of the author and giver both of grace and peace. For,
Quic quid efficit tale illud ipsum est magis tale, if grace and peace be so
good, o then how good, and how unspeakably excellent is that tree from whence
these fruits do grow, and that fountain of living waters from whence those
blessings do flow? (i.) God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ; grace be to
you and peace, from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

In these words the blessed Apostle sets down two especial things to be
observed.

1. The author of these bessings is expressed. 2. The same author is more fully
described.
De 1. The ancient learned Heathens did so much urge that elegant apothegme
(...), Know thy self, Grynaeus in praefatione in Irenaeum. All wisdom
consists in the knowledte of God and of our selves.
and received the same with so great applause and consent, that Amphictiones
caused the same to be engraven upon the doore-posts of the Temple of Delphos,
because it seemed to warn every mortal man both of his good and evil.

But nature is so far unable to teach us to know our selves, that indeed it
teaches us altogether to forget our selves. For the true knowledge of our
selves teaches us the insufficiency, the meanness, and the baseness of our
selves, to pull down all pride, and to teach us all humility. But nature
alone can never do this, for when we see the Salust. lib. 1.
excellency of man's nature above all other creatures, he of all other endued
with a reasonable soul, adorned with excellent virtues, and beautified both in
body and mind above all other creatures whatsoever, he is so far from
humility, that he is puffed up with pride and haughtiness.

And therefore we join another apothegme, that is of such affinity with the
former, that the one cannot be well known of us without the other, to be
learned of all Christians, (...), Eusebius. de praeparat. Enangel.
Know God. For both must be known, or neither can be known; and therefore a
certain Indian Gymnosophist, coming to Athens to discourse with Socrates
about the study of wisdom, and having asked him how a man might become wise,
and Socrates having answered, by considering how a man should rightly live, he
somewhat smiling thereat, answered with that elegant sentence, (...), no man
can truly learn to know humane things, that is ignorant of divine things.

For to what tends the knowledge of man, and of all the virtues and
excellencies of man, if he knows not God to be the author of all these
excellencies, it puffes him up with pride (as I said before) but when he sees
that although they be in him, yet they are not from himself, but from God,
then it casts down every high thing that exalts 2 Cor. 10. 5.
it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into captivity all
imaginations unto the obedience of Christ, and so from the knowledge of God he
comes truly to know himself, and to understand he has all good from God, and
nothing from himself, and therefore seeing that in these two things, grace and
peace are contained all happiness, all blessings, and all good things (as I
showed before) and that these do proceed, not from our selves, but from God
the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: it teaches us these two especial
things.

1. Our own insufficiency. 2. Gods all-sufficiencie.
De 1. Our insufficiency is hereby sufficiently showed, that from our selves
we have neither grace nor peace.

1. No grace, for we are not sufficient 2 Cor. 3. 5.
to think a good thought: this is the least measure of grace. For there be
seven degrees of that which is good.

1. To think a good thought. The greatness of man's infirmity.
2. To know what is good. 3. To will good. 4. To speak what is good. 5. To
begin to do good. 6. To do good. 7. To persevere in what is good.
Of all these we find not one from our selves. For,

1. We cannot continue in good, but God which began a good work in us, he must
perfect it, or else though we do stand, yet are we sure to fall.

2. We can do nothing that is good, for though to will good should be Romans 7.
18.
present with me, yet bonum persicere non inuenio, I find no means to
perform it, says the Apostle. And therefore Homer and other Heathen writers
that relate the stories of the brauest Heroicks of the world, do show that
although they were endued with most valiant minds, and their minds with
heroike resolutions, yet that they could bring no great good, nor any singular
exploit to pass, unless the Gods gave them power to effect the same. And so
our Savior shows, Sine me nil potestis facere: Without me you can do
nothing. And the Prophet Esaias confesses, that it is the Lord which Esaias 26. 12.
has wrought all our works for us, or in us, as the vulgar Latin has it.

3. We cannot begin any thing that is good: for it is God that does begin a
Philip. 1. 6.
good work in us, says the Apostle.

4. We cannot speak any thing that is good: for Non vos estis qui loquimini,
It is not you that speak: and therefore though a man should purpose good
speech in his heart, yet the answer Prou. 16. 1.
of the tongue comes from the Lord.

5. We cannot will any thing that is good: for it is God that works in you
Phil. 2. 13.
both the will and the deed, says the Apostle.

6. We cannot understand any good thing: for the natural man understands
not the things of the Spirit of God.

7. We cannot so much as think any thing that is good: for the Lord knows
the thoughts of men, that they are vain, and that continually: and therefore
S. Augustine does well observe, that our Savior does not say, Sine me Aug. in
Joh. 15.
nil magnum difficile, without me you can do no great matter, but without me
you can do nothing, (i.) not the least, not the lowest degree of good.

Yea, this is not only to be understood of a mere natural man, but even of
the best regenerate men: for after that the Apostle had asked the question;
(...); who is sufficient for 2 Cor. 2. 16.
these things: he answers of himself, and of the rest of the Apostles; Not
we: because of our selves we are not able 2 Cor. 3. 5.
to think a good thought: and so our Savior spoke unto his Disciples and
followers, that they could do nothing without him, not that others could do
nothing without him. And so you see that the best of us cannot be the authors
of the least measure of grace, not so much as a grain of mustard seed.

2. As not of grace, so nor of peace, Man can effect no peace.
nor of any kind of peace.

For 1. being fallen away from God, he could never reconcile himself to God
again, debuit, sed non potuit, he ought indeed, says S. Bernard, but he could
not do it, all the wit of man could never devise the means, nor all his power
could ever effect it.

2. Being at war with God, he could never work his peace with man; for the
strongest does not always Eccles. 9. 13.
carry away the battle: but it is the Lord that gives the victory to whom he
please.

3. Being unable to make outward peace with men, he is far more unable to
work an inward peace with his own soul, for the spirit of man can bear his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Ajax could endure all brunts
of foreign foes, but his own discontented mind he could not bear, nor
reconcile himself unto himself; and so you see man's insufficiency in that he
can be the author neither of grace nor peace.

De 2. Gods all-sufficiencie is hereby Gods al-sufficiencie.
seen, in that he is the author both of grace and peace.

For 1. the Schoolmen say, that nothing in the world can be the efficient
Raynerius in tit. gratia.
cause of grace, but only God; for that grace does change the mind, and the
will of the reasonable creature, and prepare the same that it may will that
which is good: but nothing can effectually change the will of man, but he that
made the will; and therefore if there be any aptness or preparation in man for
the receiving of grace, that very aptitude is through the help of grace; for
no man comes to me unless my John 6.
Father draw him, says our Savior, i. no man has any virtue or ability in
himself, to come to me, but only by the help of those graces that my Father
gives him: for that every good and James 1.
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights.

And therefore though the heathens All the good we have are gifts from God.
out of their ignorance called their virtues and good qualities which they had,
(...) of having, as though they had them from themselves, yet we that are
better instructed in Gods truth, do call them (...), and (...), gifts from
God: for we say, that no men are worthy but such as are made worthy; none
good but such as are made good, none meet but such as God the Father Coloss.
1. 12.
has made meet to be pertakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light:
because as John Baptist says, a man can receive nothing, except it be given
him from above: and therefore we say that the very thoughts of our hearts, if
they tend to good, are from him that infuseth Thom. 1. 2 ae. q. 76. art. 2.
all grace immediately, as says Aquinas, i. from God the Father, etc.

Hereby we see that God gives grace and glory, and that he is the fountain of
all grace:

-- Iuvat integros accedere fontes
Atque haurire. -- Lucret. l. 1. p. 24.

And therefore we should go to the spring head to seek for grace.

Nam licet allata gratus sit sapor in vnda
Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae:
For there is the surest drawing, there is the sweetest drink; and although
the grace of God before the coming of Christ, quasi in vase aliquo Ambrose.
claudebatur, was like an ointment kept close in an Alablaster box, yet now vt
vnguentum effusum, it is like an ointment powered out; or though before it was
vt fons signatus, as a fountain locked up, yet now

-- vt fluuialibus vndis
Exstumuit torrens, fluit acrius amne perenni.
Like a violent floud-streame, it flows more generally over the face of all
the earth to renew it, then Noah's flood did to destroy it: and therefore vir
bonus haurit gratiam, every good man will come unto this springing well to draw
grace from this fountain of grace, Ideo enim lex data est vt gratia
quaereretur, Aug. de spirit. and lit.
and gratia data est vt lex impleretur, for to this end was the Law given that
that we should earnestly seek for grace, and grace is given that we might
keep and fulfill the Law.

2. As he is the sole author of all grace, so of all peace.

1. With himself, for he himself has wrought our peace with himself, and
therefore it is called the peace of God which passes all understanding, and we
pray for that peace which the world cannot give us, nor any thing in the world
purchase unto us: for the Lord will not be pleased with a thousand of Rams,
nor with ten thousand rivers of oil, nor yet with the fruits of our bodies
for the sins of our souls, it will cost us more to redeem our souls then
that, it must be the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

2. It is he that works our peace God works each kind of peace.
with men, that works each kind of peace among all sorts of men: for he
makes wars to cease, he knappeth the spear in sunder, be breaks the
sword, the shields and the battle, he makes men to be of one mind in a
house, and so he makes peace in our borders, peace in our houses, peace in all
places, and fills us with the fruits of peace, health, wealth, and
prosperity, to teach us that he is not only the author of inward and
spiritual graces, but also of all outward peace and temporal blessings.

For as the image of a Prince, is seen as well in a penny as in a piece of
greater price, so we may see the goodness of God as well in the things of this
life, as in the things that concern eternal life, and therefore our Savior
teaches us to pray, not only for the inestimable things of eternal life, vt
adueniat regnum, that his kingdom come, but also for the meanest things of
this mortal life, that he would give us our daily bread.

Yet some have doubted whether these outward temporal things be good or not:
and some Divines have doubted whether we may pray for temporal things, as
Barrad shows upon those words, All these things shall be cast unto you; but
we are resolved by our Saviors testimony, If you that are evil can give
your children Luke 11.
good things: for that is not only good, quod facit bonum, which makes a man 1
John 3.
good, but that also de quo fit bonum, whereby a man may do good, says S.
Augustine: and therefore, albeit riches and honors do not always make a man
good, yet because a man may do always good with them, we say they are good,
and given only of God.

And so they that have no fruits of grace, are compelled to subscribe that the
fruits of peace come from God: for when they see themselves destitute of them,
and by all their wits are unable to procure them, then they cry out, quis
ostendit nobis bona, who can show us Psalm. 4.
any good? as if they should say, none can do it unless God does the same.

3. It is he that works our peace with our selves: for in me you shall have
peace, i. such contentment of mind, and such firm resolutions, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate you from the love of God: for I will give you that
hidden manna, that secret joys and sweet contentments, that none in the world
knows the excellencies thereof, but only they that have it: and so we see
these two points sufficiently proved.

1. That in our selves there is no goodness.

2. That from God proceeds all goodness, both grace and peace, both
temporal and spiritual blessing: for application then I say, that

The first point may serve to exclude Romans 3. 27.
our boasting, and to teach us true humility, to say with Jacob, I am not
worthy Genesis 37.
of the least of thy blessings; with John Baptist, I am not worthy to untie the
latchet Matthew. 3.
of thy shoe; with Paul, I am not worthy 1 Cor. 15.
to be called an Apostle; with the Centurion, I am not worthy thou should
Matthew. 8.
come under my roof; and with the Prodigal child, I am not worthy to be
called thy son: Hoc enim piarum mentum est, nihil sibi tribuere: for it is
the parts of That we should not ascribe any goodness to our selves.
godly minds to attribute nothing unto themselves, but to ascribe all unto
God, because all is from God, says S. Augustine, Et nonest dignus peccator
pane quo ve scitur, nec lumine coeli quo illuminatur, and the sinner is not
worthy of the bread wherewith he is fed, nor of the light of heaven wherewith
he is enlightened.

And therefore it is dangerous to ascribe too little to the goodness of God,
for that is to rob him of his glory, which he will not give unto another, but
there is no danger at all to ascribe too little unto our selves, because we can
never ascribe so little unto our selves, as is due unto us: for that nothing
that is good, is of our selves, but all from the goodness of God. And
therefore let not the wise Ier. 9. 24.
man boast of his wisdom, nor the strong man of his strength, nor any man in
any thing that he has; but let every man 1 Cor. 4. 7.
rejoice in this, that he understands the Lord, and knows that himself
has nothing but what he received from the Lord, as the Apostle teaches,

The second point may serve to teach us these four principal lessons. 1. To
reprove fortune. 2. To condemn abusers. 3. To teach us to pray. 4. To move us
to thankfulness.


1. Many think that things come customably unto the^ by chance or fortune,
That nothing in the world comes by chance.
but the Apostle shows us they come from a cause intelligent, even from God
the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, for though God has sinum facile^^
heart easy to be entreated, to give us what we lack, yet has he not sinum
pensoratum, a careless respect to let us take what we like; and though he
opens his hands to fill every living Psa. 145. 15.
thing, yet he lets not his blessing to drop through his fingers, without
caring how or knowing to whom he bestows them. For as he made all things in
wisdom, so he guides all things with discretion, and gives his blessing with
deliberate consideration.

And therefore we should not be like blind Moles, or senseless Swine,
grouelling upon the earth, to gather the acornes that do fall from the tree,
and never look up to the tree from whence they fall. But as we have Sursum
capita, os homini sublime de dit, our eyes made to behold the heavens, so let
us have Sursum corda, our hearts lifted up to behold the God of heaven to be
the author and giver of grace and peace.

For it was but a heathenish conceit to That the name of fortune is a vain
conceit.
invent such a goddess called fortune, I may say of them as the Psalmist says
of idols, they that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put
their trust in them: for they that found her first, did paint her blind. And
surely they are blind, that cannot see all goodness come from God; and from
no place, no cause else, but from God: for not only the Scriptures teach the
same, that every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
father of lights, who rules the earth, and spreads the heavens like a
curtain, and closes up Orion, Arcturus, Job. 9. Psalm. 147.
the Pleiades, and all the stars as under a signet, and callech them all by
their names, who prepares rain, makes the Acts 17.
grass to grow upon the mountains, and green herbs for the use of men, who
makes his sun to shine upon the good and upon the bad, and gives life and
breath unto all things, and feeds the Ravens that call upon him; but the
wisest among the heathens, as Orphaeus, Homer, Menander, Pithagoras, and above
all, the Platonists, do most divinely teach, that all good things do proceed
from God, and are given by him to whom he please; as Mirandulanus has
collected out of their Iohanues Mirand. l. 1. de prouid. Dei.
works, and set down the same at large, in his first book, de prouidentia
Dei.

2. This should condemn the abusers We must render an account for all the
gifts we have received.
of Gods blessings: for they be indeed commendata potius quam data, rather
commended to us in trust, then given to our use; and in that respect the gifts
have a threefold voice, and salutation when they come unto us.

1. Possideto, take us and enjoy us.

2. Gratias habeto, give thanks to God for us.

3. Rationem reddito, be sure thou shall render an account to God how thou have
used and employed us. For there is (...), an account to be made of all the
gifts and graces that God has given us, especially says Antoninus, Antoninus
in summis.


1. De bonis naturalibus, of all natural gifts. 2. De donis temporalibus, of
all temporal goods. 3. De gratijs spiritualibus, of all spiritual graces.
And that not only why thou have wastefully spent them, but also how or what
thou have honestly gained by them, for

1. God made thy body, created thy soul, and adorned them both with many
excellent gifts; thy soul with memory, judgment, understanding, etc. thy
body with beauty and comeliness, and such like. All are his gifts, and do
proceed from him, and therefore he will demand an account how thou have used
all these, whether thou have given thy members servants to uncleanness Romans 6.
19.
to commit iniquity, or unto righteousness in holiness, as the Apostle
speaks, and whether thou have used thy understanding and thy learning in
testimonium very, to further the truth, or in adiutorium falsi, to maintain
errors, as Tertull. speaks.

2. Whatsoever temporal things we have, Dominus dedit, we have the Job 1.
same from God, for riches, honor, and promotion, come neither from the East,
nor from the West, but it is the Lord which gives the same as pleases him,
and therefore thou must give account whether thou have riotously spent them
upon thy self, as the rich Luke 16.
glutton did, or niggardly kept them for thy self, as the covetous cormorants
do, or else charitably bestowed them for the maintenance of the Ministry,
and relief of thy poor distressed neighbors. Quia non maioris est criminis
Habetur in decretis.
habenti tollere, quam (quum posses succurrere) denegare indigentibus. For it
is as great a fault to deny help, (when thou may do it,) to the afflicted,
as to take away thy neighbors goods, which is prohibited: quia esurientium
panis est quem tu detines, nudorum indumentum quod tu recludis, and indigentium
pecunia quam tu in arca abscondis: for it is the bread of the hungry which
mouldeth in thy cupbords, it is the garment of the naked which is moth-eaten in
thy presses, and it is the money of the distressed which is rusting in thy
coffers, says S. Ambrose.

3. As these natural and temporal things are given us of God, even so are all
spiritual graces, as the Apostle shows. 1 Cor. 12.
And therefore we exhort you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, but
that every man as he has received the gift, should minister the same unto
another, (...), as good disposers of the manifold grace of God: and let no man
brag (says S. Augustine) that he has received the good gifts and graces of
God, but let him look how he shall make his account with God, whether he be
not found like them, qui sanctis non sancte vtuntur, which do use holy things
vnholily, as wicked Saul, and covetous Balaam, and such like. Wherefore seeing
all that we have be gifts given of God, and for which we must one day render an
account to God, we should be careful to use them to the glory of God

3. Seeing God is the sole author and That we should seek for all things from
God.
giver of every good gift, it teaches us to call and sue to him by prayer for
every thing we want.

1. To seek for grace, where it may be found (i.) from God, for if any man
lack wisdom let him ask of God, says the Apostle. If any man want grace and
ability to do the will of God, let him pray to God with S. Paul (when he was
buffeted by the messenger of Satan) that be would give him grace and strength
to do it, or else he shall never be able to do it.

And therefore when he bids us do any thing, we should pray to him for
grace to do it. As when he says, turn to me, and I will turn to you, then
Lam. 4. Esaias 1.
should we presently say, convert thou us o Lord, and we shall be converted; or
when he says, wash you and make you clean, then should we pray unto him, that
he would purge us with hysope, and Psalm. 51. 10.
cleanse us thoroughly from our sins, and so of all other graces and blessings
that we do want: seek all from God: for he is the giver of all.

2. To seek for peace, and all the fruits of peace from him which is the God
of peace; if we want our health, means or maintenance, or any other temporal
blessing, we should pray to God for the same: for he is the sole giver of the
things of this life, as well as the things that concern eternal life. For the
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, and therefore he disposes the
same as pleases him, he fills the hungry with good things, and the rich he
sends empty away, he lifts up the poor out of the mire, and casts down
the high looks of the proud.

Neither does he only take care to bestow kingdoms, or the greater matters of
this life, as he pleases and upon whom he pleases, and leave small matters to
others to be disposed of, or to happen as they list, but it is he, even he
himself and none other, that gives and disposes the smallest things as well
as the greatest, as I have sufficiently proved before.

And therefore if we should want Prayer is the only thing to procure grace and
peace.
the least thing, even a crum of bread, or a cup of cold water, we must have it
from God, or go without it. Now the only way to obtain whatsoever we want,
whether grace or peace, whether spiritual or temporal blessing is prayer, for
this is situla gratia, the bucket that draws grace from God, the fountain of
all grace. This will ascend to heaven, and their mandatum nostrum peraget, quo
caro nostra peruenire nequit, it will plead for our necessities, and never
depart until the most highest has granted our requests. Therefore our Savior
says, ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall
be opened unto you, yea whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be
given you. And so you see not only where all good things are to be had, but
also That we should be thankful to God for all his blessings.
how they may be obtained, even by prayer.

4. This should move us to thankfulness for all the benefits that God has,
and does daily bestow upon us: ask of the days of old, if any nation, if the
Jews, or any other chosen and peculiar people of God can parallel us, in the
gifts of grace and peace, in pure preaching, and peaceable government, for so
long a time, and so happy a manner? I say not this to make us proud of Gods
graces, but to teach us to cry out with the Psalmist, Quid retribuam, what
shall we render unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto us?
For they that Bernard.
by receiving grace do seem to be in most favor with God, if they be
unthankful they become of least reckoning with God, says Saint Bernard. O
that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and show the
blessings that he bestows upon the children of men. And so you see that God
is Author of all goodness and the sole giver of all grace and peace, i. of all
good things, both spiritual and temporal.

And therefore from this point we must conclude a corollarie most necessary to
be defended. That God cannot be the author of any evil, because he is the
author of all good. For Saint James tells us, that the same fountain cannot
send forth sweet and bitter That God cannot be the Author of any evil.
waters, and our Savior tells us, that a good tree cannot bring forth bad
fruits, and therefore God which is summum bonum, the chiefest good, and the
fountain of all goodness, cannot be author of any evil.

Now evil is taken two ways, 1. Evil of sin 2. Evil of punishment.


And I say God simply, and in all respects, can be said to be the author of
neither.

1. Not of sin. For thou art a God that hate wickedness, neither Psalm. 5.
4.
shall any evil dwell with thee, says David; and Habacucke says, thou Hab.
1. 15.
art of pure eyes and can not see evil, thou can not behold wickedness.

And reason it self does confirm the same. For

1. That which is simply and absolutely That God is no Author of sin.
good, cannot be the cause of any evil, for how can it be simply good, if
evil does any ways proceed from it?

But God is simply and absolutely good, and the earth is full of his goodness,
Act. 17.
says the Prophet David, therefore he cannot be the cause of any evil.

But against this it is objected.

1. That in God, we live and move and have our being, i. every motion and every
action is from God, and therefore every sin.

To this it is briefly answered, that in every sin there are three things to
be considered.

1. The act. 2. The obliquity. 3. Obligation to punishment.
1. For the act, we say, it is from God, Romans 11. 36.
for of him and in him, and for him are all things, i. as well actions as
substances, as Augustine says.

2. The obliquitie, or corruption of Aug. to. 7. de great. and lib. arb. c. 20.
the action, is only from man, and no ways from God, as from an efficient
cause thereof.

Neither should this seem strange to any man, that in the self same sinful
The action, and the obliquitie of the act two different things.
act, we consider the act and the obliquitie of the act, and do affirm the
one to be from God, and therefore good, and the other from our selves, and
therefore evil, for howsoever the obliquitie does always reside in the act,
as privation in a subject, yet they be two distinct things, and may in our
understandings admit a separation of the one from the other. And the action
must needs be good; or else the obliquity could not subsist, for sin has not
any being, in rerum natura, if we consider it simply in it self, but as it is
subsistent in some subject that is good, as the Philosophers do most truly
affirm.

And therefore we say that there is no being, nothing that does subsist in
rerum natura, whether it be a substance, or an action, that can be so evil,
but it is also good; but in diverse respects, as, evil in regard of the
privation of good, and good in regard of the subject wherein this privation of
good does inhere.

And so you see that although every action is from God, yet the sin and the
obliquitie of the action is from man.

But then again it is objected, that God knows we will commit the sin when
we do commit the act, and he knew Adam would sin when he created Adam, and
therefore he should either hinder us to sin, or not complain that we do
sin.

I answer, that knowledge, being a The knowledge of God that man will sin, is
not the cause that he does sin.
mere conceining of a thing (which is a thing proper to the understanding, and
not to the will) cannot work any thing outwardly, and therefore cannot be the
cause of any thing, for I know that an old man must needs die, and that a
rotten house will soon fall, if it be not re-edified, and yet I am the cause
of neither; even so, Deus nos peccatores noscit, sed non facit, God knows,
that we will sin, but he does not cause us to sin, says Saint Augustine.
Aug. l. 7. d^ anima.


And I confess that God can as easily hinder sin as to suffer sin to be
committed, and could as easily have hindered Adam to have sinned, as to forgive
him when he had sinned: for we must not think that God suffers sin against
his will, because he cannot hinder it, for that does derogate from the power of
God, but upon just reasons and for many excellent causes, he made man so that
he might either stand or fall.

1. To show a difference betwixt the Why God made man mutable.
Creator and the creature, for immutability is proper only unto God, and
therefore he made all intelligible creatures, both men and Angels, so that they
might either stand or fall.

2. That they might be the more praiseworthy if they did stand, or most justly
condemned if they did fall, Nam si diabolus seductionis potestatem Chrysostom. oper.
imperfect. ho. 55.
non accepisset, homo probationis mercedem non recipisset, for if the devil
had not received power to tempt us, and man that liberty of will, either to
have yielded or resisted, then man could not have had the reward of his
resistance, or the reproof of his deficiencie, says Saint Chrysostom. And so
you see the reasons why God made man so that he might stand or fall. And there
be many reasons why he suffered him, and does suffer all others to fall into
sins. Among which I find these three reasons chiefly alleged.

1. For the declaration of his justice, Why God suffered Adam and all the
sons of Adam to fall.
in the punishing of all sins.

2. For the manifestation of his mercies, in the pardoning of many sins.

3. For the suppression of our pride, and the declaration of our weak and
miserable estate, that without his especial grace, we cannot keep and
preserve our selves from any sin.

But yet further it will be objected, the Lord turned the hearts of the
Egyptians, Psalm. 105.
that they should hate his people, and deal untruly with his servants, that
he hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and the heart of Eglon, and such like. Judge.
3.


I answer: that in every sin there are three concurring agents to be
considered. And the sin is ascribed sometimes to the one, and sometimes to
the other, but ever in a different respect. As,

1. It is ascribed to God, as the author How sin is ascribed to God, to the
devil, and to man.
by whom we receive power to do every action and motion. And as the
voluntary sufferer of the obliquitie or prauitie of the action, for the
reasons above showed; and thus God is said to harden the hearts of the wicked,
or to deliver Psalm. 81. 13. Romans 1. Aug. tom. 7. de gratia and lib. arbit. cap.
20.
them to vile affections, Non malum efficiendo, sed gratiam denegando: Not by
effecting the evil, but by suffering man to have that power to do the evil,
and by denying his grace to hinder and prevent that evil.

2. It is ascribed to Satan, as the inticer and suggester of man, to the
prauitie of each action and motion, and so Satan is said to have moved David to
number 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. 2 Cor. 4.
Israel, to have filled the heart of Ananias, and to have blinded the eyes of
the wicked, not by giving any power to do any action or motion (for that is
only from God) but by enticing man, a directo Tullius in parad.
scopo aberrare, to pass the prescribed bounds, and so to pervert, to corrupt
every action.

3. It is ascribed to man, as the next author of the action, and the sole doer
of the sin, by auerting from the right scope, and yielding to the enticement
of Satan, to deprave and corrupt the action. And so Pharaoh is said to have
Exodus 7. 22. etc. 8. 16.
hardened his own heart, and all the wicked are said to walk in their own
Genesis 6. 5.
ways, and according to the lusts of their own hearts. And therefore all
sins Psalm. 8 1.
are properly the works of men, because they are the next and immediate authors
of the same.

Lastly, it is objected, that he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son, and
bad the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, and willed the death of his own
Son, etc. but all these are sins, therefore sins proceed from him.

I answer: that whatsoever God commands Whatsoever God would have done is no
sin.
to do, to do the same is no sin, for sin is the transgressing of his
commandment.

And yet for the fuller understanding of this point, viz. the doing of the
thing which God wills, or commands, I say, that in some it may be a sin,
in others no sin. For,

It is not enough for us to do what he bids, but we must be sure to do it
in that very manner that he prescribes, and to that very end which he
intends, Quia modus and finis actionis constituunt actionem, Because the
manner and the end of an action, does make the action good or bad.

And therefore I say, that if Abraham The manner of doing, and the end of
actions, makes them either good or evil.
had killed his son, merely because he would obey God, and fulfill his will
in all particular respects, he had not sinned. Nor yet the Jews in crucifying
the Son of God (whereof the other was a type and figure) if they had done the
same, only to fulfill the will of God, and in the same manner, and to the same
end, as God had decreed the same. But they did not so, therefore they sinned:
for God gave him out of the depth of his love, to die for us that we might be
redeemed by him: but they put him to death out of the depth of their malice,
and envy against him, and therefore the same act of crucifying Christ, was no
sin, as it was decreed by God, but a most grievous sin as it was committed
by them. And so you see that God which is the author of grace and goodness,
cannot be the author of the evil of sin and wickedness.

2. As he cannot be the author of That God is not properly the author of any
punishment.
the evil of sin, because he is the author of grace, so can he not be the
author of the evil of punishment, because he is the author of peace, for peace
is a sweet harmony and consent of all things in their due order, without any
manner of distraction or diuulsion, but punishments are the distracting and
disturbing of the quiet dispositions of things contrary to their natural
inclinations. And therefore I say, that God cannot properly be said to be the
author of the evil of punishment.

But for the better understanding of this point, I desire you to consider, that
this evil of punishment may be taken two ways.

1. As it is evil, and a dissolution of the creature. 2. As it tends to
good, either in respect of 1. Man. 2. God.

1. In the first sense I say, God cannot besaid to be author of this evil, for
he desires not the death of a sinner, he made all things, that they might
have their being, Et quia omne agens agit sibi simile, And because every agent
works an effect like unto himself, therefore God properly works the
happiness, and not the misery, the salvation and not destruction of his
creatures.

2. I say, that the evil of punishment may tend to good, and that

1. In respect of man, and that likewise The manifold good of afflictions.
many ways: but especially these three ways.

1. To make him loath his sins, and forsake them. 2. To make him weary of
the world and despise it. 3. To make him long for Christ, and desire him.
1. As the correction of a child makes him leave his faults, so the
afflictions of the godly make them forsake their sins: for, Before I was
corrected I went wrong (says the Prophet David) but now I have learned to
keep thy commandments. And therefore, It is good for me that I have been in
trouble, that I might learn to keep thy commandments. God therefore may and
does send afflictions, that they may hedge in the ways of men, and so keep
them in the paths of his commandments. And so the Prophet says, Thou have
hedged in my ways with thorns.

2. Our souls are glued upon the vanities of this world, and therefore as the
mother puts aloes or mustard, or some like bitter things upon her teats,
when she would weane her child, that is so fond of her breasts: so does God
anoint the vanities of this world, with the bitter ointment of afflictions,
that we might be even weary of the same.

3. He sends afflictions not only to make us loath our sins, and wax
weary of the world, but also to make us long for grace, and seek to him for
peace, that we may be freed from these miseries: Nam mala quae nos hic premunt
Gregor. in Moral.
ad Deum nos ire compellunt, For the miseries of this world makes us long for
the happiness of the heavenly kingdom, says S. Gregory.

And so in this respect God may be said to be the author of afflictions and
punishments, as they tend to this good, to chasten us for our profit that we
Heb. 12. 10.
may be partakers of his holiness, as the Apostle speaks. For thus they are
like unto the bitter potions of physic, good, because necessary for some good
end, otherwise Bonum necessarium extra terminos necessitatis non est bonum, a
necessary good is not good, but for necessities sake: so is physic to
procure the health of our bodies, and so afflictions, to procure the health of
our souls.

2. In respect of God, punishments Punishments declare the justice of God.
and afflictions tend to good, for they are all inflicted upon man for sin,
and are the effects of justice, and therefore must needs be good. For,
whatsoever is just, is good. But the punishments of the wicked either in this
life, or in the future life, are the just judgments of God for sin,
therefore in this respect they must needs be good. They show Gods hatred unto
sin, and his justice in punishing all sinners.

And so I confess that in these respects the Prophet might most truly say,
there was no evil in the city which the Amos 3. 6.
Lord had not done; and God himself say, I and none else do form the light,
and create darkness, do make peace, and create evil, (i.) as I do properly,
and suapte natura, of mine own nature, effect that which is good in all
respects, so ex quadam sequela, for diverse respects tending to good, I do
willingly suffer all evil, yea both the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment, for though neither of these be simply good, yet either of them tend
to good, and therefore are suffered of God. For God would never suffer any
evil, but that he meant out of that evil to effect a greater good, says S.
Augustine, as by the suffering Aug. in enchirid. ad Laurent.
of the sins of the elect he shows the riches of his grace, and by
suffering the sins of the reprobates he makes his power known, and by all
the Idem l. 1. de predest.
punishments of the wicked, he shows his wrath against sin, and his just
judgment upon the vessels of reprobation.

And so you see that God who is properly the author of grace and peace, and of
all things simply good, can no ways be said to be the author of the evil of
sin, nor of the evil of punishment, but only as it tends to good.

And therefore, whenever we commit sin, remember that that is not from God,
and wheresoever we see plagues and punishments, remember these be the wages of
sin, and never come properly from God: but either as a means to make us leave
our sins, or to show the just judgments of God upon us for our sins.

Oh then, beloved brethren, how exceedingly How careful we should be to avoid
sin.
should we be afraid to sin, for as God does exceedingly love the things
that proceed from himself, and are agreeable to his nature, so he does
exceedingly hate the things that proceed no way from him, but are contrary to
his disposition, and therefore he hates sin with an immortal hatred, and he
punishes sin with everlasting punishments: and therefore o my soul, why
will thou sin? why will thou fly away from God? but

Quo fugis ah demens? --

Where will thou fly? or how can thou hide thy self from his all-seeing
eye? peccata latere erit impossible, peccatorem apparere erit intollerabile,
to hide thy sins is impossible, and for a sinful soul, to appear is
intolerable: and therefore S. August. tells thee what thou art best to do,
return o Shulamite, return, return again to God, quia non est quo fugias a
Deo irato nisi ad Deum ^placatum, for the only way to escape the fury of God
when he is angry, is to run unto him when he is pleased, and to say, o my
God, o my Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and I am not
worthy to be called thy son: but thou art rich in mercy, thou art full of
goodness, and thou art the fountain of all grace, and therefore I beseech
thee forgive me my sins, and give me thy grace through Jesus Christ my
Savior.

And so much for the first point, i. the author of goodness, and the giver
both of grace and peace, it rests that I should speak of the second point,
(i) the description of this author, set down in these words.

God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

De 2. In these words the blessed Apostle shows, that not only God the
Father, but also our Lord Jesus Christ, is the author and the giver of these
blessings, of grace and peace, and of all good things.

For though these words our Lord Jesus Christ, as they are in the original,
(...), may be taken either to show the Senne-ship, of Christ, as if the Apostle
should say, that the author of these blessings is God, the Father of us, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, or else to show that Christ is also the
author and the giver of these blessings as well as the father, as if the
Apostle should say, that they do proceed not only from God the Father, but
also from our Lord Jesus Christ; yet I think that the meaning of the Apostle
is to show that grace and peace do proceed from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ, as from joint authors and coequall giuers of the same. For,

Having showed in the fourth verse, that God was the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in express words, de filio That grace and peace proceed as well from
the son as from the father.
suo, concerning his son Jesus Christ our Lord, it had been frivolous to do
it obscurely, and it had been superfluous so suddenly to show the same again:
and therefore doubtless the Apostles meaning is to show that grace and peace
do not only proceed from God our father, but also from our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Because he and the father are both one, and opera triuitatis ad extra sunt
indiuisa, and all the outward works of the blessed trinity are indivisible
(i.) vnappropriated to one person more then the other, but common to each one
as well as the other, quia in operibus ad extra tres personae operantur simul,
because in all external actions they all work together, and therefore
whatsoever the father does, the son does, and what gift or grace soever the
father bestows, the son bestows.

2. Because our Lord Jesus Christ became our redeemer, to purchase grace and to
be our advocate to procure peace unto us. For

1. That he might bring grace unto us, he received all fullness of Grace in
himself without measure, and of his fullness we all receive grace for grace;
and so the Apostle shows that in him, (i.) in the man Christ Jesus, dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead, (...), bodily (i.) personally and
substantially, as Hillar. l. 8. de Trinit.
S. Hilarie expounds it.

And therefore S. John says, that the Ioh. 1. Moses only showed Gods will,
Christ gives a power to do Gods will.
Law came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ, for Moses showed us
what was the will of God, and what should be done of us, but he could not
purchase us the favor of God, nor give us any power to perform his will: but
our Lord Jesus Christ did bring unto us the love and favor of God, and gave us
grace and many gifts of grace, whereby in some measure we are enabled to please
God, and to keep his commandments, because he has not only made our yoke
easy and our burden light, because to believe in him (which Math. 11.
is the yoke whereby we are yoked unto him) is a great deal easier then to
perform the law, (which was the yoke that tied us unto God) but also, works
faith in our hearts, whereby we may believe in him, and charity whereby we
may love him, and all other graces whereby we may serve him.

And this the Apostle shows when he says that he which descended has Ephe.
4. 8.
also ascended, vt dona daret hominibus, that he might give gifts unto men,
(i.) not only gifts to wash away their sins, but also to indue their souls
with inherent virtues and graces: whereby they might proceed from faith to
faith, (i.) from a weak and a little faith, to a strong and a lively faith,
and from grace to grace, (i.) better and better, and from one degree of
perfection unto another, until at last they grow to be perfect men in Christ
Jesus.

2. Touching peace, the Prophet Esaias says, that Christ is the Prince of Esaias.
9.
peace, and Christ himself says, in me you shall have peace, and therefore he
is called our peace, and our peace he calls his peace, saying, Pacem meam do
vobis, My peace I give unto you. And so in many passages of holy writ, he is
said to be the sole procurer of our peace. For the discipline of our peace was
laid upon him, says Esayas. And S. Paul says, that we have peace with God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And so it appears plainly, that he is the
author and the giver both of grace and peace.

And therefore this does sufficiently prove the diety of our Savior Christ.
Quia Iehoua dat gratiam and gloriam, because none but God alone can give either
grace or glory, but Jesus Christ gives both grace and glory, and therefore
Christ must be the true Iehoua.

And so you see the Apostle by both these clauses of this one sentence, and by
both these titles, and both persons of this one God, does show that both of
them is the only one joint author and giver of all goodness, because grace and
peace does proceed from God our father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

And because there be many that are called Gods, as

1. Angels, God stood in the assembly of Gods. That there be many which are
called Gods.


2. Devils, as Dij gentium Daemonia, the gods of the Gentiles are Devils.

3. Priests, as offerte Dij, let the Priests offer. And, the Gods of the earth
are lifted up.

4 Kings, as dixi Dij estis, I said you are Gods.

5. Judges, as the cause was brought, ad Deos, unto the Gods, and so of others,
therefore, least we should think these blessings proceeded from any of these,
the Apostle says they come from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

And so he differenceth the true God and author of these blessings from all
other Gods in these 2. especial respects, 1. Of himself, 2. Of us.


De 1. In respect of himself, he How the Apostle distinguishes the true God
from others. Aug. de ciuit.
likewise differenceth him from all other Gods, two ways 1. From the unity of
his essence. 2. From the trinity of the persons.
for

1. The Apostle shows that the author of these blessings in respect of his
essence, is but (...) one God, and therefore though the Valentinians had their
thirty couples of Gods, as Irenaeus witnesses of them, and the heathens thirty
thousand Gods, as S. Augustine out of Varro has collected, yet do we believe
in God, and not in Gods: or as the Nicene creed has it, in one God: and do
pray to this one God, that he would give us grace and peace; for we know he can
do it, because he is the God of gods, and causa causarum extra quam nulla
causa, and cause of causes besides whom there can be no cause of any goodness,
and therefore if he will not, we know all other cannot bestow any good thing
upon us.

2. He shows that in this one God there are diverse persons, for that not only
the Father, but also the Son is the author of these blessings: and if the
Father and the Son be, the Holy Ghost must needs be also; for he proceeds
from them both, and is the ineffable bond of both, as S. Augustine speaks,
and is the worker and conueyer of all blessings from God to man; and therefore
wheresoever the other two persons are expressed, this third personalso must of
necessity be included, Quia opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa, because
the works of the trinity without, or in respect of outward operations, are
indivisible.

And therefore we say we have grace and peace from the Father, tanquam a font,
as from the fountain; from the Son, as from the procurer thereof; and from the
Holy Ghost, as from the conuayer and worker of the same in our hearts, and so
we see that, (...), Justin Martyr in expos. fidei.
the unity is understood in the trinity, and the trinity is acknowledged in
the unity, as Justin Martyr speaks.

But against this it may be objected that of these 2. persons the father only
is called God, the son is called our Lord Jesus Christ.

Tertullian answers, quia nationes a Tertul. l. contra. Praxeam. f. 389. Why
Christ is called Lord and not God in many places.
multitudine Idolorum transirent ad vnicum Deum, vt differentia constitueretur
inter cultores vnius and plurimae diuinitatis, quamuis ex conscientia scimus
and Dei nomen and domini, and patri and filio and spiritui sancto conuenire,
tamen ad quamlibet occasionem effugiendam Deos omnino ne dicimus nec dominos
sed Apostolus and nos Apostolum sequentes, Deum patrem appellamus and Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum, because the Gentiles from the multitude of Idols which
they served, should be drawn to the service of the only true God, that there
might be a difference set betwixt the worshippers of one God, and the
worshippers of infinite dieties, therefore although we certainly know that the
name of God, and the name of Lord, may be fitly and most truly attributed both
to the father, to the son, and to the Holy Ghost, yet to avoid all occasions
that might breed any suspicion or imagination of many Gods, we never say Gods
nor Lords, but as the Apostle, so we with the Apostle, do call the Father God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.

And Theoph: also, does most excellently Theoph. in 1. Cor. 8. f. 966.
resolve this question: Quum audis vnus est Deus pater, and vnus Dominus Jesus
Christus; When thou hear that there is one God, eue^ the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, lest thou should think that the name of God is only to be
ascribed to the Father, and the name of Lord unto the son, thou must know
that either of these names and titles are given to either person without
distinction, as Romans 9. the son is called God, and Psa. 109. the father is
called the Lord: as the Lord said to my Lord. But he makes this distinction
because he writ to the Gentiles that worshipped many gods; that they should not
have any cause of imagination, that we have many gods as they had: therefore he
does not call the son God, least they that were used to many Gods, should
imagine that we had two Gods, neither does he call the father Lord, least they
should think we had two Lords.

And for this cause (says Theophilact) neque spiritus hic vllam fecit
mentione^ auditoru^ imbecillitati parcens, he makes no mention of the Holy
Ghost, by reason of the imbecility and weak capacities of the hearers, even
as the Prophets made no direct or plain mention of the son, by reason of the
weak apprehensions and understanding of the Jews, least they should presently
apprehend some carnal nativity, obnoxious to humane affects: ad oppositionem
igitur vanorum Deorum non filij, dixit vnum Deum patrem, atque vt opponeret
sese mentitis Dominis non patri dixit vnum esse dominum Iesum Christum. The
Apostle therefore calls the father God, not to deny the deity of the son,
and he calls the son, Jesus Christ our Lord; not because the father is not
Lord also, but to show the vanity and idle conceit of them that served any
other false and lying Lords.

Hereby then you see that although when we do speak of these persons asunder,
we call either person indiscrimmatim indifferently, and without distinction
both Lord and God, yet when we speak of them both together, least the heathens
or any other should think we worship many Gods, if he called them both Gods, we
call the father God, and the son our Lord Jesus Christ, and this was
requisite then by reason of the imbecility of the heathens newly converted
from Idolatry: but now those questions touching the unity of the Godhead, and
the trinity of the persons, are so sufficiently and learnedly handled, that
men are now (we hope) of ripe apprehension, to know this truth, without any
such fear of danger as was then, in the infancy of the Church, and the first
publishing of this truth.

And thus you see the true God and author of these blessings differenced and
distinguished from all other false and imaginary Gods, in respect of himself.

2. He is distinguished and described in respect of us; and that two ways.

1. Ab excellentia potestatis, quia (...), from the excellency of his power,
because he is God.

2. A perfectione bonitatis, from the perfection of his goodness, because he is
our father and our Lord Jesus Christ.

The 1. shows Gods greatness,
The 2. shows Gods goodness.
both which the very heathens ascribed to the true God, though they knew him
not: for they said he was optimus maximus, best and greatest, How Gods
greatness, and his goodness are most commonly joined together, and why.
greatest to show his ableness, and best to show his willingness, to give us
all good things.

And we find these two titles always joined together, not only by the
heathens, but also by Christ himself, and all his Apostles. For Christ in lege
supplicandi, when he teaches us how to pray, says, Our father which art in
heaven, The first clause, our father, shows his goodness and his
willingness to help us; and the second clause, which art in heaven, shows
his greatness and his ableness to help us. And the Apostles jointly, in lege
credendi, when they teach us how to believe, do set down the same thing: I
believe in God the father Almighty; and each one of them severally, in loge
docendi, in all their writings, do join these two points together, that as
the first teaches reverence and fear, so the other should stir up boldness
and love, that we should not be too bold, quia (...), because he is God, nor
yet too fearful, quia pater, because he is our father. For that neither fear
without confidence, nor confidence without fear, can be acceptable unto God,
or profitable unto man, because the one breeds presumption, the other
desperation, and so each of them destruction.

And therefore God does so order his style, and join his titles together, that
his greatness should keep us from presuming, and his goodness from
desparing. Whereupon Saint Bernard Bern. ser. 52. paruorum.
says, that these two are the two feet of the Lord, whereby he walks in all
his ways, and fastneth both these feet upon every sinner that truly turns
unto him. For the goodness of God only would animate the wicked to
presumption, and his greatness only would terrify even the godly to
desperation, Psalm. 128.
and therefore David excellently says, that he would not sing of mercy alone,
nor of judgment alone, but his song should be of mercy and judgment
together, that so in respect of Gods justice, he might retain fear, and in
respect of Gods mercy he might conceive hope.

But as the consideration of Gods goodness does breed in us fiduciam, faith to
proceed boldly to the throne of grace, so I would to God that the consideration
of his greatness would breed in us devotion and reverence to work our
salvation with fear and trembling. For we are all ready enough to lay hold on
his goodness, but we are far enough from any true fear of his greatness.
Sinners lay hold on that only, that serve their turn to go on in sin; and
therefore the Prophet says, that supra dorsum Dei fabricauerunt peccatores,
prolong auerunt iniquitatem, they laid all their sins upon Gods back, and
multiplied their sins by reason of the multitude of his mercies, they make
God all of mercies, only merciful; and never remember that he is iustus and
verax, just and Psalm. 102.
true, as well, as good and gracious.

And therefore they add sin upon sin, and despise the goodness and long
sufferance of God, and never Romans 2.
think, that his goodness is used to lead them to repentance, and not to
encourage them in their wickedness; and so they heap unto themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God. And
thus much of these titles jointly: it rests, that we should speak of them
severally. And,

1. Of the title that expresses Gods greatness.

(...) God.

Damascen says that there be two What the word God does signify.
principal names of God, (...), the being, or he that is, or I am, as himself
said to Moses; and (...), God. And of this latter, he gives three special
etymologies, and deriuations.

1. (...), of running or compassing about, because by his providence over all
things, attingit a sine vsque ad finem, and disponit omnia suauiter, Job 28.
Sap. 8. 1.
he beholds all things under heaven, and disposes all things orderly, and
thus Plato, Proclus, and the rest of the Platonists do interpret (...), to
signify the providence of God.

2. (...), of seeing, because he sees all things, and all things are patent
unto his eyes, and nothing Heb. 4.
in the world can be hidden from him, the very thoughts of our hearts are seen
of him, a phrase worth the nothing, that it is not only said, Christ knew the
thoughts of men, but that he saw their thoughts, quia (...), because of his
al-seeing eye.

3. (...), of burning Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Two properties of fire.
and consuming, in respect whereof he is called fire. And that in a double
respect.

1. In regard of his wrath, and hatred 1. To consume.
against sinners. In which sense Moses says, Deus ignis consumens est, your
God is a consuming fire. To burn the wicked like stubble, and to consume the
ungodly unto ashes.

2. In respect of the brightness of 2. To cherish.
his Majesty to cherish and comfort the godly; in this sense Saint John 1 Ioh.
1.
says, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. And therefore God
appeared to Moses in a flame of fire, to Ex^d. 3.
show that he would cherish and comfort that poor people which were so much
distressed and tormented of the Egiptians; these be the two properties of fire,
to cherish, or consume: for nothing is so comfortable as fire, if it be before
us, nothing so violent, if it be upon us; so nothing is more comfortable then
God unto the godly, nothing more terrible unto wicked. Tu terribilis Deus
extunc ira tua, who is able to abide his wrath.

And to these three deriuations of (...), Zanch: adds a fourth. That Zanch de
not. Dei.
it may be derived of (...) by changing d. into th. which signifies fear,
because of all nations he should be feared. And indeed, Primus in orb Deos
fecit timor, fear makes us know, there is a God, when a man's conscience
tells him that every good shall be rewarded, and every evil must be
punished. And so you have the significations of (...), God: take it how you
will, it serves.

1. To show us, qualis est Deus, that The greatness of Gods Majesty should
teach us to fear him.
God is a great and terrible God that sees all things, disposes all things,
and rewards all things according to their just deserts.

2. To teach us, quid sit nostri officij, what our duties are, to fear and
tremble to offend this great and terrible God, and to be afraid of his
judgments; because it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

2. Though God be a burning fire, Exodus 3.
yet he consumes not presently, for though the bramble bush burned, because
God was in it, yet it consumed not because his goodness preserved Exodus 3.
it; even so, though in the first place we see his Majesty, and his title of
fear and reverence; yet in the second place, if you but look a little
further, you shall see his lenity, and his titles of love and boldness, not
one but many, like a boundless Ocean, that would extol it self in goodness
above himself; Our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now these titles are to
be considered two ways.

1. In respect of the Father. 2. In respect of the Son.
In both which respects the love and goodness of God is most abundantly showed
unto us,

1. In that he is our Father. 2. In that he is our Lord and Savior.
Of these in order. These two words Our Father contain the sum of the Law and
the Gospel.


Our Father.

De 1. The titles that do express the goodness of the first person are two.

1. Pater, Father. 2. Noster. Our Father.
The first is verbum fidei, a word of faith.

The second is verbum spei and charitatis, a word of hope and charity: and
therefore in these two words (...), Our Father, are contained both, 1. Lex
operandi, the law of works. Basil. obseru.
2. Lex credendi, the law of Faith.
i. both the Law and the Gospel. For

1. To love God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
strength, and our neighbor as our selves, is the sum of the Law and the
Prophets, says our Savior: but the name of Father, vt explicat, ita and
excitat Eliensis in orat. domin.
charitatem, as it shows the love of God to man, so it stirs up and
kindles the love of man toward God; and the word noster, Our Father, shows
the fraternity and brotherhood of us all, as being the children of the same
father, and therefore should love one another, even as brethren ought to do,
so here is our love to God and our neighbor.

2. The sum of the Gospel is faith working by charity, but Father is a word of
faith, a word of boldness, and Our is a word of community, a word of charity.
And therefore, as the whole world is described in a little map, says
Synesius; so in these two little words, are most closely included the sum of
the Law and the Gospel. And therefore I will handle them more particularly.
And first of the word Father, then of Our Father.

De 1. God is said to be a Father God is a Father in two respects.
in two respects.

1. Respectu filij, in respect of his son Christ Jesus. 2. Respectu
creaturarum, in respect of all his creatures.
1. In respect of his Son Christ Jesus he is always a Father from all
eternities. Quia and ille semper Pater, Aug. to. 10. ser. 33. in apend. de
diuersis.
and ille semper filius, ac proinde Pater nunquam non Pater, and filius nunquam
non filius, he is always a Father, and the Son is always a Son, and
therefore the Father was never no Father, and the Son was never no Son, Sed
sicut semper Deus, it a semper Pater habens semper filium, quem semel genuit ex
sua aequalem sibi natura: but was as he was ever a God, so he was ever a
Father, having ever a Son, which he once begat of his own nature coequall unto
himself, says Saint Augustine.

2. In respect of his creatures, he is said to be a Father.

1. Generally of all his creatures. God is said to be the Father of all his
creatures.
2. Particularly of man the chiefest of his creatures.
1. Seeing all creatures have their being from him, he may be well called the
Father of them all, quia Pater dat esserei. And therefore Job calls him Job
38.
Pater pluuiae, the father of the rain. And Saint James calls him, Pater
luminum, the Father of the Iam. 1.
lights. And so in respect of creation, he is the Father of all things.

2. He is the Father of men after a more special manner, then he is of all
other creatures whatsoever, and that two ways.

1. In respect of their generation. 2. In respect of their regeneration. For
1. Whereas of all other things he did but say, fiat lux, let there be light,
and producat terra, let the earth bud forth, and of all other things he spoke
the word, and they were made, he commanded, and they stood fast, yet when man
was to be created, he said, Let us make God is more properly the Father of men.
man (as consulting with his wisdom) in our own image and likeness, as more
properly to be our son then any other creature) and so he breathed in the
nostrils of man the breath of life, and man became a living soul. And
therefore the very Heathens do ascribe to the soul of man both maxima vis and
maximus honos, the greatest power and the greatest honor; and the prince of
Philosophers tells us, it is (...), an infusion celestial, and no natural
traduction, and therefore does always seek to mount up super altitudines
terrae, above all earthly things, and haerere origini suae, and to be always
contemplating of her chiefest bliss, and to enjoy the fruition of the chiefest
good.

This very point, if there were no more, should move all men to be How
negligent we are for our souls.
more careful of this heavenly soul then of our earthly bodies. And yet we
see all our care is to pamper the body, and come what will of the soul. And
therefore a merry fellow, meeting with a friend that protested he loved him as
dearly as his own soul, answered, I would thou love me as well as thou
love thy body. For I see thou art fat and well liking, thou feedest thy body
daintily, and clothest it gorgeously, but how thou love thy soul I know not.

And so we do all, we care not what expense we bestow upon our rotten bodies,
but we think all to much that we do to adorn and beautify this divine
soul. We are like that fellow, that was wonderful fat himself, and rode upon
a lean horse, and being demanded why himself was so fat and his horse so
lean, he answered, he fed himself with his own hands, but he committed the
care of his horse to his man Dicke. So do we feed our bodies, our selves, but
we commit the care of our souls to others, let them look to our souls, or
let them perish.

But indeed the excellency of the soul should make us all more diligent for
the soul, for this is it that makes man more excellent then all other
creatures. And more properly the son of God then all other sons of God. And
therefore the Heathen man could say, Qui animum curat seipsum curat, qui corpus
non se sed sua curat, Demosten. apud Volat.
qui pecuniam non se nec sua, sed valde aliena curat.

2. God is said to be the Father of man, not only in regard of generation,
because he thus created him in his own similitude and likeness, but also in
respect of regeneration, because he redeemed and delivered us from our father
the devil, and restored us again to the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. For when man had sinned, and so from the son of God had made himself
the son of satan, there were four things (says venerable Bede) imposed upon
man for his transgression.

1. Ignorance. Venerab. Beda.
2. Impotence. 3. Concupiscence. 4. Malice. For
1. Sin has so filled us with blindness, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 4.
18.
that it is natural for every man to be (...), so darkened in the ir
understandings, Tit. 3. 3.
that we neither know God nor yet our selves.

2. Sin has made us so frail Four things inflicted on man for sin.
and so miserable, as that we have no ability in the world either to do, or
say, or wish, or think any thing that is good, as I have sufficiently showed
already.

3. Sin makes us to long and lust with all greediness for that which is
evil.

Nitimur inuetitum semper cupimusque negata.

Stolen waters are sweet unto us. And our nature is such as that we do not
only, quod vetitur* the thing that is forbidden, but we do it, quia vetitur*
because it is forbidden, so far does our concupiscence lead us.

4. Sin makes us so malicious to all goodness, that although our judgment
should tell us that such a thing is good, yet are we so auerse to goodness
that we will forsake it to follow evil: as the Poet in Medea speaks.

Video proboque meliora, deteriora sequor. Seneca Medea.


I see what is good and I allow it, yet nature makes me follow that which is
evil. And so these things made man now like unto satan, that was made before
in the likeness of God. Therefore God respecting and pitying our most
lamentable and miserable estate, he sent his only Son Christ Jesus to be made
unto us,

1. Wisdom. 2. Justification. 3. Sanctification. 4. Redemption.
Four sovereign salues for our four dangerous maladies.

1. He was made unto us wisdom. How Christ was made unto us a fourefold salve
to cure fourefold maladies.
For that all our knowledge without the knowledge of Christ is but prudentia
carnis, foolishness unto God, but in Christ are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge.

2. He was made unto us righteousness, for that all our righteousness in respect
of nature is but pollutio panni^, like the righteousness of the Gentiles,
stains and filthiness, and in respect of the law, but storia abducta, like
the righteousness of the Pharisees, sin gilded, unprofitable because
impossible to be performed, but my righteous servant shall justify many, says
the Lord, and therefore believe in him which justifies the ungodly.

3. He was made our Sanctification. For that in all men there is defection, and
in the Angels unfaithfulness has been found, and how can we be clean that
were borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity? but in Christ there was no
sin, and in his mouth was found no guile.

4. He was made unto us redemption, for that all the former things had been
vnauailable for us, nisi etiam sanguis interpellit^^ pro me vt saluus sim;
unless his blood does intercede for me, that I may be saved, and therefore
Christ gave himself to be the price of our redemption (so the word (...)
signifies) to suffer for us, to shed his blood for us, and to die for us, and
for our sins, to save us from hell, and to rise again for our justification,
to bring us unto heaven, in illa instituit, in ista restituit, says Saint
Bernard, by the former parauit nos mansioni, he made us fit for heaven, and by
the latter, parauit mansionem nobis, he prepared heaven for us; by the first we
have remission of our sins, and by the second, we have hope of everlasting life.

But if any man will say the righteousness is Christ's, and the sufferings were
Christ's, and what is that to me?

I answer, that the fault was Adams fault, and is that nothing to thee? And
therefore, vt peccatum in semine, it a iustitia in sanguine, as sin is justly
mine by propagation, so it is not incongruous that righteousness should be
mine by imputation, for Christ (says Saint Ambrose) mihi natus, mihi passus,
mihi doluit, quia sibi non habuit quod deleret, did all, whatsoever he did for
me; for that there was no cause why he should do any thing for himself.

And therefore, seeing Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification, and now sits at the right hand of God to make intercession
for us, though our bodies be but semen terrae and esca verminum, dust and
ashes, and the food of vermins, yet our hope is that they shall be ^hanged,
and be made like unto the glorious body of Christ.

And thus are we made again the sons of God, by regeneration, because we are
borne of God, (i.) of water and of the spirit, which spirit bears witness
unto our spirits, that we are the sons of God, and have our sins pardoned,
our diseases cured, and the image of God renewed in us through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

And in this respect is God most properly called our father, and we his
children.

Hereby then we may see the difference between this father and all other
fathers of men; whether it be

1. In the state of nature, 2. In the state of grace.
For in both respects men are said to have diverse sorts of fathers.

1. In respect of our natural being, I find four kinds of fathers: as

1. God which makes us and breaths in our nostrils the breath of life.

2. The Earth, element or matter That fathers are so called in diverse respects.
whereof we are made. For, I said to rottenness, thou art my fathers, and to
the worms, you are my mother and my sisters, says Job, and so the earth is
called the mother of us all.

3. Men are called our fathers, and that (as S. Augustine observes) five Aug.
de 12. abus. grad.
ways.

1. By Nature, as they which begets us of their own seed, and are the
instruments of our being, and are therefore called, patres (...), the fathers
of our flesh. Heb. 12. 9.


2. By Nation, as those that are our ancestors and predecessors of the same
country and people; so God said unto Moses, I am the God of thy fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaak, and the God of Iaakob.

3. By Age, as those that are our elders, we use to call them fathers.

4. By Admonition, whether it be to good or evil. For S. Augustine tells us,
Aug. in Psalm. 49. f. 188.
that antiqui iniqui patres sunt praesentium; and qui modo sunt iniqui, patres
sunt iniquorum posterorum, those wicked men that went before us, are the
fathers of those wicked men that are Whose council or example we follow, we
make our selves their children.
now, and the wicked men that are now, are the fathers of them that shall be
wicked hereafter, and so (says he) antiqui iusti, patres sunt iustorum qui
modo sunt, and qui modo sunt iusti patres, sunt eorum qui futuri erunt, the
just men that went before us, are the fathers of those just men that are now,
and those just men that are now, are the fathers of them just men that shall
come hereafter.

And so you see that by following the counsel or example of wicked men, we
become the children of those wicked men, and by following the counsels and
examples of good men, we become the children of those good and godly men, and
therefore they that do the works of Abraham, are said to be the sons of
Abraham, and so it was taken among the heathens: and therefore Mitio says in
Terence, Natura tu illi pater es concilijs ego, thou art his father by nature,
and I am his father by advice and counsel: for, whosoever causes us to follow
his counsels or examples, whether in good or evil, we make him our father, and
our selves his children by imitation, Nam ille recte pater tuus quem tu Aug.
ser. 14. de verb^^ Apostoli.
fueris imitatus. For he may rightly be termed thy father whom thou do
imitate, says S. Augustine.

5. By aid and assistance, as when a man does help and further us in our wants
and necessities, we may truly say he has been a Father unto us.

4. We find that not only men but also the Devils are said to be the fathers of
all wicked men, for you are of your father Idemibid. We are the children of the
devil by imitation.
the devil, says our Savior unto the rebellious Jews: but you must
understand this in respect of imitation, and not of their creation, says S.
Augustine, Quia constat in Catholica fide, quod diabolus nec condidit, nec
creauit naturam: for it is certain (says he) and by our catholic faith we
believe that the devil never made any nature, or being, all his drift and
desire was to corrupt every being, but because we do the works of the devil,
Ioh. 8.
therefore our Savior says, we are the children of our father the devil.

And so it appears, that before we have the grace of Christ to do the will of
God, we are all the children of the devil, and so the Apostle shows that by
nature we are all, filij irae, the sons of wrath: this was the miserable
estate of us all before Christ; and is still the state and condition of all the
wicked men that are void of the grace of Christ, to be the sons of their
father the devil. And thus you see, that God is our father, Men are our
fathers, and the Devil is our father also. But herein is the difference,

The devil makes us his children by imitation, our natural fathers by
propagation, as being the instruments of the making of our bodies only, and
therefore are called the fathers of our flesh, but God is the chief agent, and
principal maker, not only of the soul, which he forms and makes, without
any hand of our natural fathers, and therefore is he only called the father of
spirits, but also of our bodies. For, he fashioneth the same beneath in the
womb, says the Psalmist: and therefore in respect of our natural being, God
is the only chief principal father both of body and soul.

2. In respect of our spiritual being, Diverse are our fathers in respect of
regeneration.
I find diverse sorts of fathers: as

1. And principally God himself: for of his own will begat he us with the
word of truth, and therefore as he alone is the chief and principal father of
our generation, so he is alone the chief and principal father of our
regeneration.

2. The Ministers of the Gospel are likewise called our fathers, so S. Paul
shows, I warn you as my dear children, nam ego vos genui, I have begotten
Aug. in Psalm. 78. f. 351. ^. 1.
you with the seed of the word of God. For as the natural fathers are the
instruments of our first birth, so are the Ministers the instruments that God
uses for our second birth.

3. Kings and Queens are called our Nurcing fathers and our nursing mothers,
because they be custodes vtriusque tabulae, the preseruers both of Law and
Gospel, and do by their power and authority, defend and cherish all those
children, that the Ministers by the preaching of the Gospel have begotten and
brought forth into the Church of God.

And thus you see that in respect of The difference betwixt our heavenly father
and all other fathers.
spiritual being God is our Father, the Ministers are our Fathers, and the
Magistrates are our Fathers also.

But herein is the difference, these are but the instruments of our
regeneration, or of our preservation: God himself is the chief and efficient
cause of both.

And so both in respect of our natural God only is our father in all respects.
being, and in respect of our spiritual being, all others that are called
fathers, are but fathers, (...), in some respects, as instruments only, and not
as the efficient cause of any being, but God in both respects is our father,
(...) simply and absolutely, because he is the efficient and principal cause,
both of our first and second birth.

And therefore in regard of this our Savior says, call no man father upon
earth, vnus enim pater vester Deus. For one is your father even God, (i.)
principally and properly in all respects, you can find none that can be said
to be your father upon earth, either in respect of generation, or regeneration,
and therefore you should not ascribe that unto them, which is proper unto God:
For this is not spoken to show that in no respect they be our fathers which
have begotten us, either in our first or second birth, but to show that
properly or principally in all respects, they are not our fathers of either
being.

And so S. Augustine says that our Savior spoke not this, Vt hoc vocabulum
honoris humani de loquendi consuetudine tolleretur, sed ne gratia Dei, qua in
hanc vitam generamur and in aeternam vitam regeneramur, naturae vel potestati
vel sanctitati cuiusquam hominis tribueretur. That this world of humane honor
should be taken away from use, but that this grace and goodness of God whereby
we are brought into this life, and begotten again unto eternal life, should
not be ascribed to nature, or to any power or sanctity of any man whatsoever
but only unto God, to whom it properly belongs. And thus you see how God is
our Father, and what is the difference betwixt this our heavenly father, and
all other fathers whatsoever. And this may serve to teach us many excellent
lessons, and that two ways.

1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of our selves.
1. In respect of God, it shows these two especial things:

1. The greatness of Gods love. 2. The immutabilitie of his love.
1. The greatness of Gods love is hereby sufficiently showed, in that he
expresses the same by no less title of love, then the name of a father: Quia
nomen patris plenissimum est amoris, for the name of a father is a word full of
love. And so S. John shows, Behold 1 Ioh. 3. 1.
what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called the sons of
God. And therefore it is apparent, Quanta Domini indulgentia, quanta circa nos
dignationis etus and bonitatis vbertas, qui sic nos docuit scire eum patrem
esse nostru^, and nos esse filios eius; What indulgencie and plenty of goodness
and respect the Lord shows unto us, in that he has taught Cyprian. in lib.
de orat. dominica. The love of God is unchangeable.
us to know him to be our father, and our selves his children, says S. Cyprian.

2. The immutabilitie of Gods love is likewise showed in the name of father,
Nam pater etiamsi offensus est tamen pater, and filius etiamsi nequam est tamen
filius: for a father though he be offended is still a father, and a son
though he be wicked is still a son. A master indeed can cease to be a master,
but a father can never cease to be a father, and therefore in the very depth
of sin, we may be bold to cry to God for pardon, Nam et si peccator amisit
ingenuitatem filij, creator tamen non amisit pietatem patris, for though the
sinner may lose the duty of a son, yet the Creator cannot lose the love and
piety of a father, and therefore is he always gracious and ready to receive
us, if we had any grace, to turn and seek unto him.

2. In respect of our selves, this doctrine, that God is our father, may teach
us many excellent lessons.

1. By way of comparison of our selves with others. 2. By way of collection of
certain profitable instructions both for our selves and others.
1. It shows the excellency of men The exceeding prerogative of Christians
above all creatures, above the Angels.
above all other creatures in the world, and the excellency of Christians
above all other men in the world. For men alone are created in Gods image, and
so his sons alone of the same image and likeness, and Christians alone are
his sons by adoption and grace: and therefore herein the Christians have a
pre-eminence above the Angels, for to which of the Angels said he at any time,
thou art my son, and I am thy father, in a double sense, (i.) both by
creation and regeneration?

And in this we that are after Christ's manifestation in the flesh under the
Gospel, have a prerogative above the Patriarks that were before the Law, and
the Prophets themselves that were under the Law; for before the Law was given,
Abraham says unto God, Shall Genesis 18.
I speak unto the Lord that am but dust and ashes: and in the Law God says,

I am the Lord thy God, but now he says, Exodus 20.

I am your father and you are my children.
And therefore Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Athan. li. 2. de side Christi, Aug.
tract. 106. in Johan. fol. 209. b. 2.
S. Athanasius, S. Augustine, and others, upon those words of our Savior
Christ, I have declared thy name unto my brethren, do understand it of the
name Father, for that (say they) the name of father was not known unto the
Jews, Quia veteris Testamenti status erat seruorum, for that the state of them
which were under the Law was the state of servants. The believers only under
the Gospel are in the state of children.

Or if it was known unto them, I am sure it was not, and could not be so fully
known, or so confidently used by them, as it is by us. For, considering the
Majesty of God, before whom Esaias 6.
the hills do tremble, and the Angels of heaven cover their faces, and seeing
our own baseness, being but dust and ashes, full of uncleanness, the slaves
of sin, and the children of the devil, who durst (says S. Cyprian) call God
by the name of father, if Christ himself our advocate had not first put these
words in our mouths? but now seeing he which best knows his fathers love and
affection toward us, has declared God unto us by the name of father, we do
most humbly desire him, agnoscere stylum aduocati nostri filij sui, to take
notice of that style which our Savior and his son has taught unto us.

2. From this doctrine, that God is our Father, we may collect,

1. Quid sperandum, what we may hope from him. 2. Quid praestandum, what is our
duty unto him.
1. From his fatherly love and affection we may hope for a fourefold fruit:
Viz.

1. Of Instruction. 2. Of Correction. 3. Of Indulgence. 4. Of Providence.
1. Instruction: For, parents are Fathers are bound to instruct their children.
bound to instruct their children, Ephesians. 6. 4. And therefore Abraham did teach
his sons to fear the Lord, and so did Iosuah, David, and all other good
fathers teach and instruct their children to do that which was just and
honest, and the very Heathens did account Plutarch. in Lacon. Apoth.
those parents worthy of just reproof, that were careless in the good
education and instruction of their children.

And therefore God being our father, has such a care to teach his children,
that he sent wise men and Prophets, and came himself, and sends us in his own
name, and with his own book, to teach all nations, both what they should
Matthew. 28. vlt.
do, and what they should believe. And no doubt but every wise child will
receive instruction, as Solomon speaks, and especially when they have so good
a teacher.

2. Correction: For a father must Parents are bound to correct their children.
Ecclus. 30. 8.
not be too indulgent unto his children, but they must be sure to give them due
correction; for, If thou bring up thy son deliciously, he shall make thee
afraid, if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to heaviness, says the
son of Syrach: and therefore Solomon says, Withdraw Pro. 23. 13.
not correction from thy child: if thou smite him with the rod, he shall not
die.

And therefore, God corrects and chasteneth every child that he receives,
so that whosoever is exempted a passione August.
flagellorum, exceptus est a numero filiorum, from his part of affliction, he
is excepted from the number of Gods children, he is a bastard and no son,
Heb. 12.
says the Apostle. And therefore this should make us all to rejoice in
tribulations, because they are infallible arguments to prove us to be the
sons of God.

3. Though a father is bound to Fathers are very indulgent to their children.
correct his child, yet he is so affected to his son, that pro magno peccato
panlulum supplicium patri satis est, for a great offense a small punishment
will be sufficient for a father to impose upon his son.

And therefore though Absolon sought to deprive his father of his kingdom, yet
David was most ready to forgive him, if he had sought for any pardon. And
though the prodigal child had cast off his father, and wastefully spent all
his patrimony, yet when he returned, he was joyfully received, and most kindly
entertained of his loving father: even so if we turn unto our heavenly father,
he will be willing to forgive us, and most ready to receive us, because he is
our father, and in that respect the father of mercies, as the Apostle 2 Cor. 3.
calls him.

And therefore this facilitas ad veniam, tender hearted affection, and fatherly
love of God toward us, should teach us, virtutem redeundi, at length to say
with the prodigal son, I will return and go to my father. For if the love
and affection of natural fathers be so great unto their children, as I showed
in the foresaid examples, then surely the love and compassion of our heavenly
father is a great deal more, for though the mother should forget the child of
her womb, yet will not I forget you, says the Lord.

4. A father cares for his sons, and 2 Cor. 12. Fathers are bound to provide
for their children.
lays up for his children, says the Apostle: and so God cares for us; your
heavenly father knows you have need of these things, says our Savior. And
according to our need, he is willing to supply our wants, for if you that are
evil can give your children good things, how much more shall our heavenly
father give to them that want it? neither is he only careful for us, but also
for our children, and therefore is called Pater orphanorum, the Father of the
orphans, of the poor, the father less and widows, of our selves, and of our
seed after us. Neither is he only careful to provide for us the things of this
life, but he provides for us the goods of eternal life, not lands, and
riches, and such like corruptible things, but an inheritance 1 Pet. 1.
immortal, and an heavenly kingdom that shall never have ending.

And therefore I would to God, we would leave and cast off all distrustful
care from us, and as the Apostle wishes us to cast our care upon God, that
cares for all:

-- curis tabescimus omnes;

For this musing care, and carking after the things of this life, depriues us
of all true comfort, it distracts our minds, it wearies our bodies, and it
makes us unfit and unable to do any true service unto God. And yet all to no
end, for when we have done what we can, we are at our lives end, like the
mill-wheele at the years end, after all her tumbling and turning, at the same
place where she was at the beginning, for, Naked we came into the world, and
naked we shall return again. And then as Diogenes said unto Croesus,

-- quid tibi diuitiae Auson. epig. 55.

Nunc prosunt regum rex o ditissime, cum sis
Sicut ego solus? --
What good will all the wealth in the world do unto us? and therefore seeing
God our father cares for us, let us cast all our care upon him.

2. As this doctrine teaches us what What duties we owe to our heavenly
father.
to hope for at the hands of God, so it teaches us what we owe to God: for as
he dignified us with the name of sons, so he requires of us the duties of sons:

And especially these four, 1. Fear. 2. Obedience. 3. Love. 4. Imitation.


1. If you call him Father, then pass the time of your dwelling here in fear;
1 Pet. 1. 13. How dearly children should love their father.
and because we are sons, it must be a filial fear.

2. As the name of a Father does express his love to us, so it should excite
Aug. l. 2. c. 8. de sermon Domini.
our love toward him again. For Quid charius filijs debet esse quam pater?
What thing in the world should be so dear unto the children as their father?
And therefore if I be a father, where is my love, says the Lord?

Defessum fertur portare ciconia patrem, Aelian. l. 10 c. 16.

Hinc illa piet as sancta notatur aue.
It is reported of the Storke, that he loves his sire so well, that when he
grows old and feeble, the young one will carry it upon his back. And if the
bruit beasts do show such love unto their sires, oh what love should we show
unto our heavenly father?

3. Children are bound to honor and To obey God is the chiefest honor we can
show to God.
to obey their father: for a wise son makes a glad father, says the
Wiseman. But a son can never glad his father better, then by doing his will,
and by obeying his voice: and therefore our Savior says, Whosoever does the
will of his Father, the same was his brother, his mother, and his sister: and
whosoever did the will of the devil, the same was the child of the devil.

4. Children are prone to be imitators of their fathers, though many times they
do err with their fathers: but in imitating our heavenly father, we shall be
free from the fear of error, and therefore we are enjoined to imitate him,
That we should imitate our heavenly Father.
and to square all our actions according to the actions of this our father: to
be holy as he is holy, to be merciful as he is merciful, and to be, as he is,
meek and lowly in heart. For when we are taught, that God is our father, Quid
aliud nisi per vitam innocentem nos coelesti patri similes sieri docemur? What
are we taught but through an holy and an innocent life to show our selves like
unto our heavenly father says Greg. Nissen. And so much Nyssen de orat. Dom.
for the first word that shows the goodness of God, Pater.

The second word that expresses his goodness is noster, our father: and this
does also show the brotherhood of men, as father showed the fatherhood of God.
And in sum,

1. It excludes all the wicked from all right in this heavenly Father. 2. It
includes all the godly within the paternitie of this Father.
1. In that he is said to be our father, That wicked sinners are not the
children of God.
here is an appropriation of him unto the godly, and an exclusion of all wicked
men from his paternitie: for though they be his sons by creation, yet because
they do the desires of their father the devil, they cannot be his children by
grace: and so S. Cyprian says, Quod S. Cyprian. inorat.
peccator non potest esse filius Dei, sed quibus remissio peccatorum datur, ijs
filiorum nomen adscribitur: That a sinner cannot be the son of God, but only
those whose unrighteousness are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. And this
shows us the miserable estate of wicked men, exempted from grace, excluded
from God, and separated from the society of the Saints of God.

And therefore the Saints should have That the Saints should avoid the society
of the wicked.
nothing to do with wicked men, but should withdraw themselves from those that
walk inordinately, as the Apostle speaks. Yet because the Saints must live
always among the wicked, as I showed at large before, and therefore 2 Thessalonians.
3. 6
cannot quite abandon the company of them that are evil, unless we get out
of the world, as the Apostle speaks; 1 Cor. 5. 10.
we must remember the counsel of S. Ambrose, Malorum consortia fugere debemus,
Ambros. de Off. lib. 1. cap. 20.
quoad priuatam consuetudinem, non quoad publicam conuersatione^: We ought to
shun the society of sinners in our private friendships and communications, but
not in our outward acquaintance and conuersations.

2. This word our Father does include That all the godly are the sons of God.
all the godly within his fatherhood, and shows them all to be his sons,
not only by nature, but also by grace, and therefore all the godly are
brethren, because they are all the children of the same Father. And this
teaches us,

1. To love one another with all possible How dearly the Saints should love
one another.
love that can be, for that we be brethren, and the children of the same
Father. And that (as I showed) in a double respect, 1. Respectu sanguinis. 2.
Respectu spiritus.
In respect of nature, and in respect of grace: Et mayor est fraternitas
spiritus quam sanguinis; and grace should tie us a great deal more to love one
another then nature, says S. Augustine, Quia Aug. tom. 10. in Appendie. de
diuersis, ser. 10. f. 647.
natura similitudinem corporis refert, gratia cordis vnanimitatem demonstrat,
because nature shows only the similitude of the body, but grace unites the
hearts.

And yet in former times, the love of Val. Max. l. 5.
natural brethren was such and so great, that when a soldier in the Army of
Pompey had vnbeware unto himself Aug. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 2. c. 25.
slain his brother that was in the host of Sertorius, and knew the same, when
he bestript his body, Seipsum ibi perimens fraterno corpori adiunxit, he slew
himself for very grief, and left his body upon his brothers carcass. And
the sons of Tyndarus, when Castor Idem l. 8. c. 5.
was slain by Idas, Pollux besought Jupiter that he might impart half his
own life unto his brother.

Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit. And so we read of many others: and
therefore how much more ready should we be, that are brethren both by nature and
by grace, to lay down our lives for our brethren, as the Apostle speaks.

2 To love the godly better then the That we are bound to love the Saints
better then sinners.
wicked: for though they be not to be despised, because they are the works of
God, and our brethren by creation, yet are we not to love them so well as those
that are our brethren by adoption and grace; and therefore though the Apostle
wills us, to do good unto all Gal. 6. 10.
men, yet he wishes more especially to do it to the household of faith.

3. To expellour pride: for all the elect That we should not despise one
another.
of what estate or condition soever they be, are the children of the same
father, and therefore though thou call God thy father, yet do not
appropriate any thing to thy self more then to the rest of thy brethren; for
he is father to none in a special manner singularly, but only to Christ; to
all the elect alike. Ambros. l. 5. c. 4. de Sacr.
For though we have diverse fathers in earth, some noble, and some unnoble, yet
we have but one father in heaven, and he is the father of the poor as well as
of the rich: and therefore seeing we have all one father, and we all are
brethren, we ought to honor, and not to despise one another; Cur Aug. sermon.
135.
enim non pudeat aspernari fratrem, quem Deus non aspernatur filium: For why
should we be ashamed to take him for our brother, whom God vouchsafes to take
for his son? Remember therefore communem sanctorum and parem esse omnium
nostru^ conditione^ quoad Deu^; that the state and condition of the Saints are
all alike in respect of God.

And yet I would not have any Brethren proves not that all men are equal.
from hence to conclude a paritie, for as every flower cannot be a lilly, and
every star cannot be Phoebus, so every Christian cannot be a Prince or a
Priest, and every brother cannot be primogenitus, the first borne, and therefore
the fraternity of Christians teaches charity and equality among them, it
teaches the rich not to despise the poor, but not the poor to equalize
themselves with the rich.

4. To exclude all malice, and to increase our love one toward another, vt
singuli pro omnibus, and omnes pro singulis optarent salutem, that every one
might pray and wish for the good of all, and all for the good of every one. And
thus much for the titles that do express the goodness of the Father.

De 2. The titles that do express the goodness of the Son, are these
three, Lord, Jesus, Christ: three words that would require three sermons: but I
must be brief.

Our Lord.

In that he is called Lord, that shows his authority: in that he is called
our Lord, that shows his servants.

De 1. He is Lord two manner of ways,

1. As God in his own nature. 2. As Christ in our nature.
1. He made all things, and therefore How Christ is our Lord.
is Lord of all things. So the Prophet says: The earth is the Lords, and all
that therein is, for he has prepared it upon the seas, and established it upon
the floods.

2. He that made all things as God, was made himself to be our Lord, as he is
our redeemer. And so Saint Peter says, Let all the house know for a surety,
that God has made him Lord Act. 2. 17.
and Christ. And he was made our Lord after a threefold right.

1. By right of inheritance, God made him heir of all things, and gave Heb. 1.
and 2.
him the Gentiles for his inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possessions.

2. By right of redemption, he redeemed us from our enemies, he overcame the
devil, and took us out of his hands, and so iure belli, by right of war he
became our Lord, and because his Fathers justice must be satisfied before we
could be freed, therefore he paid a ransom for us, and bought us with his own
blood, as 1 Cor. 6. 19.
the Apostles do declare. Ye are bought with a price, not with gold and
silver, or such like corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 1. 18.


3. By right of marriage, for he is the husband of his Church, and therefore as
the husband is the head, and Ephesians. 5. 23.
Lord over his wife, so is Christ over his elect. And in these respects Christ
That Christ is an absolute Lord every way.
is more properly our Lord, then either the Father or the holy Ghost.

And he is an absolute Lord in a double respect, 1. Potestatis, of his power.
2. Qualitatis, of his qualities.
For,

1. As the Father has ius absolutum, an absolute right in all his creatures,
i. such a right as that he may do what he will with any thing, and no man can
say, why do thou so? As our Savior shows, may not I do what I will with
mine own? So likewise Christ has all power given him, both in heaven and
earth, as himself confesses.

2. He is a most absolute and perfect Lord, in respect of all the parts and
properties that should be in a Lord and Master.

Antoninus wittily observes, that the word Dominus may be derived four ways,
to signify four properties that should be in a Lord.

1. Do minus, there is parcitie. 2. Do minas, there is severity. 3. Do manus,
there is piety. 4. Do munus, there is liberality.
And in very deed these are very requisite to be in every Lord and Master.

1. The first is lenity, a giving of less punishment unto servants then
Christ is wonderful gentle.
they do justly deserve, a thing not only commendable, but also most
profitable for every Lord, for mercy and truth do preserve the king, and his
throne is established through clemency, for this alluring lenity will move
every man to go and to continue in such service; whereas cruelty is a vice of
beasts, and not of men, says Seneca, l. de clementia: but Christ is so gentle
that he prayed for his greatest adversaries, and uses his patience toward all
men to lead them to repentance: to the woman taken in adultery, he said but
where be thy accusers? if they do not accuse thee, neither do I accuse thee:
and to the sick man that had his infirmity 38. years, he said but sin no
more: and to Ioh. 5.
Judas that betrayed him, he said but Judas betraiest thou the Son of man
with a kiss?

And therefore in respect of this meekness and lenity, he is called the
lamb of God. O then why should not his lenity and goodness induce us to
serve him? quia mitissimus est Chrysostom. hom. 58. in Matthew.
rex hic noster, for he is the meekest and the easiest to be served upon earth,
says Saint Chrysostom.

2. The second is severity, nam Christ very severe to the wicked.
qui non vult duci debet trahi, for it is most fit that he which will not be
persuaded by fair means, should be compelled through foul means: and
therefore constitutus est super gentes and regna, he is put over kingdoms and
nations, vt euellat and destruat, vt dissipat and disperdat, that he may root
them, scatter them, and destroy them, i. the wicked and all their wickedness,
says Saint Augustine, quia vt nulli homini Aug. in Psalm.
claudenda est misericordia, ita nulli peccato impunitas relaxanda est; for as
mercy is to be denied to no man, so the punishment of sin is to be remitted to
no man, says Saint Ambrose: Ambros. in l. de offic.
for the sparing of one wicked fellow does encourage all others in their
wickedness. But of Christ it is said, that he shall rule the Heathen with a
rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. And it is no
wonder that the meekest man, being provoked, should grow to be the seuerest man
to them that despise his patience and long sufferance: for as hot water cooled
is coldest of all, so the Patience provoked is most angry.
mildest man moved is angriest of all: and therefore Lactantius says, That God
comes slowly against a sinner as it were upon leaden feet, but he will
recompense the slowlinesse of his coming, with severity of judgment, when he
comes, and pay them home with iron hands. And therefore this should teach us
formidine poenae, even for fear of his anger to do him service, for if his
wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust
in him.

3. The third is pity and piety, to help the poor and oppressed: for Solomon
says of a good Lord, that manum suam aperuit inopi, and palmas extendit ad
pauperes, he opened his hand to the needy, and stretched out the same to defend
the poor: and Saint Ierom says, that regum proprium Ieron.
est etc. it is the property of a king, or a Lord, to do justice and
judgment, to Christ most pitiful to the poor.
deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor, and to succor the
poor, the fatherless, the widow, and the stranger: but Christ was sent into
the world, euangelizare pauperibus, to preach the Gospel unto the poor, etc.
And therefore the Apostle says of him, that he went about doing good, Act. 10.
and healing all manner of sicknesses and diseases: and therefore this piety
and goodness of this Lord should make us seek unto him for his service.

4. The fourth is liberality, in not detaining any due, but in giving
bountiful rewards unto his servants: For,

Clamitat ad coelum vox sanguinis and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressoru^, merces retenta laboru^.
The detaining of wages is one of those crying sins, that cry to the ears
of the Lord for present vengeance, and therefore a Lord should not detain, or
take away any thing from his poor servants, as Achab did the vineyard of
Naboth, but he should be a liberal rewarder of their service.

But our Savior Christ is the most bountiful rewarder of any service Of all
Masters and Lords Christ is the most bountiful rewarder.
done unto him, that can be conceived, for whosoever gives any thing for his
sake, he shall receive the same a hundred fold, and whosoever gives but a cup
of cold water in his name, he shall not leese his reward, and therefore the
Apostle bids us to behold Romans 11. 22.
the bountifulness of God.

But here you must note that the We must not look for our reward until we
have ended our service.
bounty and liberality of a Lord, or Master unto his servants, is not to be
done, during the time of their service, for that would make them to neglect
their duties, but it should be showed at the end of their time, for during
their time, they should have nothing but necessaries, and that not in the
daintiest manner neither, for the milk of the goats should be a sustenance
for thy family; and therefore our Savior Christ, though he provides all
things sufficiently, and plentifully for his servants in this life, yet he
keeps his reward, and his chiefest blessing only for the future life; for
when they have finished their course, they shall enjoy the crown of
righteousness, says the Apostle, they shall have himself to be the
satisfying of their desires, to Bern.
see him without end, to love him without loathing, and to praise him without
ceasing, then shall they have the reward of their service, a reward indeed,
says Saint Augustine, Quod fide non capitur, spe non attingitur, charitate non
apprehenditur, desideria and vota transgreditur, acquiri potest, aestimari non
potest, that by faith cannot be conceived, by hope cannot be attained, and by
charity cannot be apprehended, it surmounteth all desires, and it passes all
understanding, for the joys of heaven, says Saint Bernard, adeo innumera
sunt, vt nequeunt numerari, adeo preciosa, vt nequeunt comparari, adeo diutina
vt nequeunt terminari, are so innumerable, that they cannot be numbered; so
precious, that they cannot be valued; and so lasting, that they shall never be
finished.

And therefore seeing Christ is so meek a Lord to receive us, so strong to
defend us, and so bountiful to reward us, let us be most willing to serve him
as our only Lord and Master. And so much for the word Lord. It follows that
he is our Lord, for it must be referred to Lord, as well as to father,
expressed to the one, understood to the other.

Touching this, we must understand that the word our Lord, does not exclude the
reprobate from being under his dominion, as our father does exclude the wicked
from being his children, but only shows, that After what manner Christ is
Lord of the godly and of the wicked.
after a more especial manner, he is the Lord of the elect, then he is of all
other creatures whatsoever, for he is Lord of all, for of the elect he says,
serve the Lord in fear, and of the wicked he says, be thou ruler even in the
midst of thine enemies, (i.) have thou full dominion over them. And therefore,
our Lord, shows the different manner of his rule and dominion over his
people, and not the excluding of any from his rule and dominion; for though he
be the Lord of all, yet not after the same manner, nor to the same end, for he
is the Lord of the godly, to guide them, to protect them, and to reward them
for their good service done unto him: but he is the Lord of the wicked, to
punish and destroy them, for not serving him as they ought to do.

But it may be some will say, how can he be the Lord of the wicked, when as
they refuse his service, follow the world, and obey their master the devil?

I answer with the Canonist, that inobedientia subditorum non tollit ius
dominationis; The disobedience of subjects takes not away the right of the
Sovereign: and therefore though the wicked do serve Satan, yet has he no
right in them, but only by usurpation, and therefore they must look for
nothing for serving him, but only their destruction.

And so much for the first title that expresses the goodness of God the
Son, our Lord. Now follows the second.

Jesus.

De 2. Jesus. Besides infinite observations that do express the superabundant
suauitie and goodness of Jesus, the very letters of the name and the
signification of the word do most excellently show the same.

1. Venerable Bede observes, that The mystery of the letters in the name
Jesus.
as the name of Antichrist contains the number of 666. so the name (...) does
contain 888. the first is numerus rerum caducarum, the number of the world and
worldly vanities, that were made in 6. days, and shall continue 6. ages, to
show that Antichrist should be worldly and hunt after earthly dignities, and
never attain unto the heavenly felicities. The second is the number of the
circumcision of the Jews, the resurrection of Christ, and the salvation of us
all, 8. souls were saved in the Arc, and 8. is the number of eternity.

2. Jesus is derived of the verb Iasaper Barrad.
ain in fine, which signifies seruare, to save, and in Greek it signifies
the very same, as (...) does, (i.) a Danaeus. l. 1.
Savior, or more then a Savior, as Cicero says the word does import. And
this signification of his name is justified by the testimony of the Angel who
said he should be called Jesus because he Matt. 1.
should save his people from their sins. For there were two things required
at man's hands, before he could be saved. 2. Things required of man before he
could be saved.


1. A satisfying of Gods justice for the sins we had committed. 2. A
fulfilling of all righteousness, which all of us had omitted.
The first was necessary to deliver us from hell, which for our sins we had
most justly deserved, and

The second was requisite to bring us unto heaven, for want whereof we were
justly excluded. And therefore

1. In respect of the first, Christ was How Christ discharged both for us.
contented to become a curse for us, to be wounded for our sins, and to be
broken for our transgressions, that we might be delivered from the curse of the
law, and by his stripes to be healed. For seeing the son of God suffered for
sin, what could the justice of God require more for the greatest
transgressions?

2. In respect of the second he did most perfectly fulfill the royal law, that
his righteousness might be imputed unto us, because it was done for us and in
our nature, in the person of Jesus Christ. And therefore S. Paul speaking of
this righteousness, says, that it is made manifest by the faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all that believe.

And so you see how Christ by washing us from our sins, through his death and
passion, and clothing us with his righteousness that he has performed for
us, is become our Jesus, our Savior to deliver us from hell, and to purchase
us the inheritance of heaven.

And yet for all this many are so addicted to humane merits, that

1. In respect of satisfaction for our sins, though they yield that original
sin is wholly and freely in all respects satisfied for by Christ Jesus, yet for
sins after baptism, they have invented other fountains to wash them away, as

1. The Sacrament of penance consisting of 1. Contrition, The vain devices of
men, to satisfy for their sins.
2. Confession, 3. Satisfaction.
2. The Priests absolution. 3. Masses and Mediations of 1. Saints, and 2.
Angels.
4. Works satisfactory, by themselves or others. 5. Extreme unction. 6.
Suffering for a time the pains of purgatory.
These must be as 6. planks, after shipwreck, whereby they seek to escape the
danger of the tempestuous seas of Gods wrath. And

2. In respect of enduing us with righteousness, they invent a former A fond
distinction of a double justification.
and a latter justification, whereof they yield the first to be had from
Christ, and affirm the second to be inherent and from our selves. And
therefore they teach that God may not impute righteousness through faith,
unless he be righteous of himself also; and that whosoever will defend that
the ungodly Concilium Trident. sess. 6. can. de iustificat.
are justified by faith only, and that for the obtaining of Gods mercy, works
are not needful, let him be accursed, for that, although the merits of Christ
are the most especial deserts, through which Gods mercies and the way to the
kingdom of heaven is granted unto us, yet is it in no wise to be reckoned for
the only Sentent. 3. distinct. 20. concl. 5.
whole and full satisfaction for sins, or the sole means of our justification.

And so in both respects they make Christ to be a defective Jesus, an imperfect
Savior, neither soly to deliver us from hell, not yet wholly to indue us with
righteousness, that we might have the inheritance of heaven.

But in a word we answer to these absurdities, and

1. We confess, that contrition, satisfaction, and all such works of piety
are commended and commanded by God, most earnestly persuaded unto by the
preachers, and most comfortable for the doers, yet in no ways as satisfaction
for sins past, but only for prevention of sins to come, and for a
testimony of our obedience and thankfulness unto God. And

2. We say, that as there is but one God, so there is but one justification
before God, and therefore that which they call a former and a latter
justification, That a righteous man may be more righteous.
we say (as the Scripture teaches us) that it is a proceeding and a growing
forward from faith to faith, and from grace to grace. And thereby we do
conclude that he which is justified may in regard of his apprehension thereof,
be said to be more justified according to the measure of his faith to lay hold
on that justification which is most absolute and fully performed in the sight
of God, and that he which is holy may be said to be more holy according to the
measure of grace that he receives, whereby he labors for uprightness more
and more, and endeuoreth to live better and better: but hereupon to build two
distinct kinds of justification, before the tribunal seat of God, were to
build without foundation, and with ambiguitie of words, to deceive poor simple
christians. And therefore seeing our Jesus has trodden the wine press alone,
and will not give his glory unto another, we do most constantly believe, and
as constantly teach, that sicut nudos nos prima gratia in fide genuit, it a
nudos per fidem eadem iustificat, and nudos saluabit; as the first grace found
us naked of all goodness, so it justifies us without respect to any goodness
of our own, and will likewise save us through the faith in the goodness of
the son of That Christ is our sole and perfect Savior.
God; and we say that he alone is the way, the truth, and the life, the a and
o, the author and the finisher of our faith, the beginner and the consummator
of our salvation, the alone whole and perfect satisfaction both for the guilt
and punishment of all our sins, both original and actual, and the only
righteousness, that brings us to eternal life, and so alone without any
partner agent, the most perfect deliverer of man from hell, and the most
absolute giver of everlasting glory, and that neither works of the law, nor
inherent righteousness, nor habitual grace, nor any other thing, or name
under heaven, can be found whereby we may be saved, but only this sweet name of
Jesus. And if this be not all-sufficient, or if he has not wholly and soly,
fully and freely satisfied for all my sins, and perfectly gained unto me
eternal life without any works or merits of mine, then let my body be damned,
and my soul never come unto Gods kingdom, for in him is all my hope, and if
that fail I perish. But seeing as God said to Abraham, fear not, I am God
all-sufficient, so the Scripture says to me, fear not, he is a Jesus
all-sufficient, whosoever believes in him shall never be confounded, I will
never commit these two evils, to forsake the fountain of living waters, and to
dig unto my self pits and puddles, but I will trust in him, hope in him, and
place all my joy in him, and take no joy where I find not him. Si scribas, non
placet mihi, nisi legam ibi Iesum; si conferas, non sapit mihi, nisi sonuerit
ibi Jesus: Quia Jesus est in ore meo mel, in aure melos, and in cord Iubilum.
No writing shall please me where I see no Jesus, no conference shall content me
where I hear no Jesus, no thing shall delight me where I find no Jesus, for
he is the honey unto my mouth, music unto my ears, and all the joy and
delight of my heart. And therefore sweet Jesus forsake me not, and let not mine
enemies triumph over me.

And so much for the second title, that expresses the goodness of God the
Son, Jesus. Now follows the third, Christ.

(...).

In the first word Jesus, the Apostle shows, that he whom before he had
called our Lord, and Master, is our Saui^ur: and in this word (...), he shows
how he was fitted for the executing of that office to save us, viz. that he was
anointed, to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, that he might guide us,
redeem us, and instruct us.

From whence we may observe, before we pass any further, that those whom God
intends to employ in any That God furnishes every man that he sends of his
business, with sufficient gifts to discharge that duty.
especial office, he makes them sit, and furnishes them with gifts suitable
to the nature of the business in which he mears to employ them. For when he
sent Moses unto Pharaoh, I will be with thy mouth (says God) because Moses
said, I have a stuttering tongue: and when he sent Esaias to prophecy, he
touched his tongue with a burning coal from his Altar. The very like we find
in Jeremy, in Ezechiel, and in all the Prophets and Apostles, he filled them
with the holy Ghost, that they might do the work of the holy Ghost: and so
here of his own Son, he anointed him, prae consortibus, above his fellows,
that he might be a Jesus to save his fellows.

And therefore let every one take heed how he enters into any office in Gods
business, lest the Lord should say unto him friend, how came thou in hither,
being no ways fitted for my service? surely, thou did run before I sent
thee, thou did thrust thy self before I called thee, and therefore I will
thrust thee out before thou art willing to go; take him, bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

But because few consider how they are fitted for their places, but only what
gain and profit they shall reap by their places, therefore I wish that they
who placed them upon hope of their sufficiency, would likewise displace them
upon the fight of their deficiencie, and unworthiness of their places and
calling: for though some think the calling of the Ministers to be character
indelibilis, and therefore once a minister never to be deprived, yet I say that
herein they deceive themselves, because they do not rightly distinguish
betwixt the outward and the inward character, for there be four sorts of men
employed in the business Ieron. l. 1. c. 1. comment. in Galat. Four sorts of
men in the ministry.
of the Gospel, as Saint Jerome says.

1. The first sort were sent immediately by Christ, as were the Prophets and
Apostles.

2. The second sort were sent of God, but by the allowance and approbation of
men, and these two sorts are ever furnished with gifts sufficient, for the
discharging of their callings from God: and therefore can no ways be
discharged, or deprived by man.

3. The third sort are sent of men, and not of God, and these may be silenced
and excluded from the ministry. For as they had power to ordain them when
they thought them fit, so they have power to deprive them when they see them
unfit, either in respect of their notorious crimes, or erroneous opinions, or
some such other just and lawful cause.

4. The fourth are those that are neither sent by God, nor yet by men, and
therefore should be prohibited and restrained by men, else should we have no
order, either in Church or commonwealth. And so you see that those which are
not called, nor yet fitted for their callings from God, may be restrained That
unworthy Ministers should be displaced.
by men: and should be (in mine opinion) because the fitting and furnishing of
men with gifts answerable to their callings are the chiefest signs, that they
are called by God. For so we see, the Son of God being appointed to be the
Savior of men, he was anointed of God, and so fitted for the office of a
Redeemer.

Now touching this anointing of Jesus (for so the Greek word (...)
signifies, of (...) vngo, or (...) vnctio) for to fit him to be a Savior, we
must necessarily consider these two points,

1. How he was anointed. 2. To what end he was anointed.
De 1. There was a twofold anointing,

1. Inwardly with the (...) of grace. 2. Outwardly with material oil.
In the first sense Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were Christi Dei, the anointed
of God, for of them it was spoken, touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, but anointing with material oil, was not yet in rerum
natura, and therefore their anointing was with the gifts of Gods spirit. In
the second sense the Kings, the Priests, and the Prophets, were after the time
of Moses anointed with material oil: and of this outward anointing, some
think there were two kinds.

1. Either with the vulgar and common oil, or 2. With the holy oil that he
commands Exodus 30.
Moses to make.
And they say that the Priests only were to be anointed with the holy oil;
because the Lord says, Whosoever shall make the like ointment, or whosoever
shall put any of it upon a stranger, or any Israelite save only the Priests,
(says the gloss) even he shall be cut off from his people.

But against this we may object, that Sadocke took the horn of oil from the
Temple, and anointed Solomon: and David says of himself, I found David my
servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. And so Euthymius and Genebrard
do affirm, that Samuel and the rest of the Prophets That Christ was not
anointed with material oil.
did anoint the Kings with this holy oil.

Now our Savior was not anointed with any material oil, for that his
kingdom was not of this world, nor his Aug. in Psalm. 140.
Priesthood after the order of Aaron: but as the Patriarchs were Vncti ante
vnctionem, anointed with the inward unction of the Holy Ghost; so was our
Savior Christ, as S. Peter testifies. God anointed him with the Holy Ghost
and with power. And so Esaias cap. 61. And so Saint Cyril, Saint Augustine,
Cyril. c. de fide. Aug. de Trinit. l. 15. c. 26. Naz. orat. 4. de Theolog.
Nazianzen, and others say, quod vnxit eum Deus Spiritu Sancto, non visibili
oleo, sed dono gratiae, that he was anointed not with oil, but with grace.

But here you must understand that Christ was far otherwise anointed with
the Holy Ghost then were the Patriarks or any other whatsoever. For he was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. And therefore the
Apostle says, that to them were given the graces and gifts of Gods Spirit,
iuxta mensuram donationis Christi, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, but Christ received the spirit himself without measure; in him is the
fullness of all grace, of all virtue, of all knowledge, and all other gifts of
Gods spirit, mostfully and most perfectly, says Aquinas, and in him dwells
the fullness Thom. p. 3. q. 15.
of the godhead bodily, says the Apostle, and from his fullness have we all
received grace for grace.

And thus you see how Christ, is anointed with the spiritual oil of
gladness above his fellows.

De 2. That we may understand to what end he was anointed, we must search, to
know how many sorts of men were Christi, anointed. And I find three several
opinions touching this point.

1. Some, though they yield that Eliensis super haec verba, nolite tangere
Christos meos.
Priests were vncti, yet do they affirm that none but Kings were Christi: and
I am to speak but of them that were Christi.

2. Others, though not much contradicting Barrad. to. 1. de circumcis. Domin.
that there were three sorts of men anointed, yet do they rather incline to
think that there were but two sorts anointed, that is, Kings and Priests.

3. But many of the ancient writers have thought that Kings, Priests, and
Eusebius. l. 1. Eccles. hist.
Prophets, were not only vncti, but Christi also. Now

1. Touching the first opinion. I see How many sorts of men were anointed.
no reason why Christus should be appropriated to Kings, and vnctus to the
Priests, unless it be only this, that where it is to be referred unto Kings,
it is left untranslated, and where it is to be referred to the Priests, it is
translated vnctus, for in the original both of the Greek and Hebrew, the same
word is used, as well where it is spoken of the Priests, as where it is spoken
of Kings.

But if the not translating of a word Whether Kings only were Christi, and
Priests Vncti.
retains unto it any greater dignity, then it has being translated, or if
the translating of a word derogateth any thing, from the excellency it had in
the original, then must it needs follow that it were better not to translate
any word at all, lest we derogate any thing from the excellency of the
original, for that there is a woe and a curse annexed to the diminishers of
the authority of the divine word, whether it be by corrupting, or translating,
or any way else.

But it is most absurd to say that the translating of a word does derogate any
thing from the dignity of the original word; and therefore seeing in the
original, God calls both Kings and Priests, Christos eius, his anointed,
whom he joined together with the same name in the original; I may not sever by
the translation, nor make any difference betwixt Christos and vnctos, but that
the first is a Greek word, and the second a Latin word, that do both
signify the same thing, (i.) anointed: For I am sure the precept de non
tangendo Christos, was spoken of Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob, and they were no
more Kings, then they were Priests and Prophets, for neither the word pater nor
(...), does declare them to be the one rather then the other, for as they were
to govern their households like Kings, so were they to teach them and to bring
them up in religion, like Priests and Prophets, and therefore I see no reason
that this precept of not touching them, should be given because they were
Kings, rather then because they were Priests, or if as one rather then as the
other, then why not as Priests and Prophets rather then as Kings, for that
Kings are better able to defend themselves then the Pri^sts or Prophets: they
have the sword Ambros. in erat in Auxent.
of vengeance: but dolor, and gemitus, and praeces nostrae sunt arma nostra:
sighing and sobbing, tears and prayers are all the weapons that the poor
Priests have to defend themselves, says S. Ambrose. And secondly, for that the
Lord sets this as a manifest reason, why Abimelech should not touch Abraham,
Genesis 20.
because he was a Prophet, and should pray for him.

And therefore seeing this precept, de non tangendo Christos, of not touching
Gods anointed was spoken of them that were as well Priests and Prophets, as
Kings; and that they should not be touched as Priests, no more then as Kings: I
dare not touch the text so roughly, as to say that the word (...), was more
properly given them, as Kings, then as Priests or Prophets.

But we see how it is (and it should be so) that no man does nor should not
dare to take the least grain from the excellency of the names or titles of
Kings, and yet we see how many, yea Priests themselves, like wicked birds that
defile their own nests, that care not how much they speak against, or how
little they speak for the excellency of the Priesthood: which makes Policy
so great, Piety so little, and Priests so mean and so contemptible.

I say not this to derogate the least Iota from the dignity or excellency of
Kings: God forbid: and I hope none will imagine that I do, (for I know, and no
man can deny, but they be Christi Domini, the anointed of the Lord) but I say
this to declare also the excellency of the Priesthood: for in the beginning the
same men were Kings, Priests, and Prophets, as Abraham, Isaak, How kings and
Priests should defend each other.
and Iaakob, and especially Melchisedech, king of Shalem, and the Priest of the
most high God, and in respect of either office they were styled by the same
name, Christi Dei, the anointed of God, and in the latter ending both Kings
and Priests shall be attoned, and both shall be regale Sacerdotium: Kings made
Priests, and Priests made Kings. And therefore Kings and Priests should be like
Moses and Aaron, two loving brethren, they to protect our dignity with the
sword of Justice, and we to defend their authority with the word of truth: they
never to oppress us, and we never to speak against them.

2. Touching the second opinion, Nicholaus de Lyra, Carthusianus, Barradius,
Whether the Prophets were anointed.
and others, do yield many probable reasons to show that the Prophets were not
anointed with any material oil. As,

1. Because we read but of one, even Elizeus, that was ever bid to be anointed.

2. Because we do not read that Elias did anoint Elizeus, but only threw his
cloak over him, which throwing of his mantle Carthusianus and Lyra do call his
anointing, and therefore they do expound the word, Vnges Elizaeum, to
signify nothing else but Eliges Elizaeum, and creabis eum Prophetam, thou
shall choose Elizaeus and make him Prophet in thy stead.

3. Because a little before the phrase of anointing was twice used, for the
anointing of the two kings, Hazael, and Iehu, and therefore the same phrase
was still used to anoint Elizeus for the appointing of him to be a Prophet.

4. Because God himself seems to put a difference betwixt Christos and
Prophetas, the anointed and the Prophets, when he says, touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, as if Prophets were not included in
the word Christos, mine anointed, but rather were of another kind, and
because extraordinary, therefore not to be ordained with this ordinary rite
which belonged properly to the office of Kings and Priests, which though they
were most excellent, yet were they successiue and ordinary.

5. Because S. Augustine says that Aug. in. Psalm. 26.
duae personae illo tempore vngebantur, two kinds of men were anointed at that
time, (i.) Kings and Priests, and induabus personis praefigurabatur futurus
vnus Rex and Sacerdos, vtroque munere vnus Christus, and ideo Christus a
chrismate, (i.) unction, and in both these persons was prefigured that one
king and Priest which was to come, even that one Christ that was to enjoy both
functions, and therefore was called Christ, of his anointing: and so both
Ruffinus and S. Cyprian were of the Ruffinus in expos. Symb. Cyprian. in
sermon de unction Christi.
same mind.

And surely as they do not absolutely deny but the Prophets might be
anointed, so do not I absolutely deny but these reasons may be true, to
prove that the Prophets were not anointed: yet I am inclined with S. Clemens,
Eusebius, Clemens l. 1. recog. Eusebius. l. 1. Eccles. hist.
and others, to think that these three sorts of men were anointed with
material oil.

1. Priests, as Aaron, Exodus 29. 7. 2. Kings, as Saul, David, etc. 1 Samuel 10.
1. 3. Prophets, as Elizeus, 1 Reg. 19. 16.
And therefore as these were outwardly anointed with oil, so Jesus was
anointed with the inward unction of the spirit of God, to be

1. A Priest, 2. A King, 3. A Prophet.
1. He was anointed to be a Priest, for the Lord swear and will not repent,
thou art a Priest for ever, after the order Psa. 110. 4. That Christ was
anointed to be a Priest.
of Melchisedech. And in these words the Prophet sets down,

1. The certainty of his ordination, the Lord swear that thou art a Priest. 2.
The irreuocability of his office, the Lord will not repent it that thou art
made a Priest. 3. The perpetuity of his Priesthood, thou art a Priest for
ever. 4. The excellency of his Priesthood, for it is after the order of
Melchisedech.
1. It is certain then that he is a Priest, and so we may see in the 6. of
Zach. 13. and almost in all places of the Epistle to the Heb. And therefore
Tertullian calls him Catholicus Tertul. l. 4. contr. Marcion.
patris Sacerdos, per quem munus Deo offerre debemus, the Catholic Priest of
his father, by whom we are to offer our sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving
unto God. And although Saint Chrysostom denies him to have descended Chrysostom.
hom. 16. in c. 5. Matt.
of the Priestly lineage, yet venerable Bede affirms flatly, that our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to the flesh was to be true King and Priest, did
therefore de vtraque stirpe David sc. Beda l. 1. in c. 1. Luc.
and Aaron ipsam carnem suscipere, take his flesh both from the stock of David
and Aaron. But whether he did or not, it was not much material, for that his
Priesthood was not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of
Melchisedech.

And so you see the certainty of his anointing to be a Priest.

2. It is irreuocable, not only because the Lord spoke it, which had been
enough, because he is immutable, Iam. 1.
without any shadow of turning, but also because he swear it, and adds
further that he will not repent it, and therefore this truth that he is a
Priest, must needs be more irreuocable then the laws of the Medes and
Persians, that cannot be changed.

3. It is a perpetual Priesthood, (i.) The order of Melchisedech, more
excellent the^ the order of Aaron, in diverse respects.
an eternal Priesthood, because it is not after the order of Aaron, but after
the order of Melchisedech, for the Priesthood of Aaron was to be abolished when
the Priesthood of Christ was to come in esse: but the Priesthood of
Melchisedech has all the notes of eternity. For Melchisedech has neither
beginning of days, nor end of life: but is likened unto the son of God, and
continues a Priest for ever.

For when we read of Melchisedech, we never read of his father, of his mother,
of his beginning, or of his ending, and such a one is Christ, as he is a God,
without mother, wonderfully begotten; as he is a man, without father,
wonderfully conceived; as he is a God, without beginning of days, and as God
and man, without end of time: and therefore a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech. And

4. It is a most excellent Priesthood, because the order of Aaron was far
inferior to this order of Melchisedech, for Leui himself, in the loins of
Abraham paid tithes unto Melchisedech, to show that there was no perfection in
the Priesthood of the Levites, for the tenth is a sign of perfection Them.
part. 3. q. 31. art. 8.
(says Aquinas) in quantum est quodammodo terminus omnium numerorum qui
procedunt vsque ad december, in as much as the tenth is the last of all number,
which proceed to ten, and then begin again; and therefore he that gives
the tenth unto another, protests himself to be imperfect, and ascribes
perfection unto him, to whom he pays his tenth, and therefore Leui paying
tithes unto Melchisedech, did acknowledge himself imperfect, but our Savior
paying tithe to none, shows himself most perfect.

But then it may be objected, that as Leui, so Christ himself was then in the
loins of Abraham, when Abraham paid tithes unto Melchisedech, and therefore
Christ himself was tithed.

I answer briefly, that Christ was not in the loins of Abraham as all others
were: for he was to be derived from Abraham, non secundum rationem seminalem,
sed secundum corpulentam substantiam, not according to our natural begetting
with man's seed, but only in respect of his corporal substance, and therefore
he was in Abraham potius vt medicina vulneris, quam vt indigens curatione,
rather as the physic that heales the sick, or the salve that cures the
wound, then as one that Thom. ibid. ex Aug. l. 10. c. 20. sup. Genesis ad liter.
wanted to be cured, says Aquinas.

And thus you see that Christ was anointed to be Priest; an eternal Priest,
and a most excellent Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, and that
(as we do collect) for two especial ends.

1. To make satisfaction for the sins To what end Christ was made a Priest.
of his people.

2. To make intercession for them, to gain the love of God again. For these
be the two essential parts of the priestly office.

1. Those that were slaves in bondage, had four manner of ways to be redeemed.

1. By Manumission, when they had served out their time.

2. By Exchange, when another was put in their place to endure and serve for
them.

3. By Force of arms, when through strength they were taken away.

4. By Satisfaction, when with a price and ransom they were redeemed.

But we being the slaves of Satan, had no way to be delivered but only by No
way to redeem us but only by satisfaction.
the last: for,

1. Our time to suffer, was infinite.

2. No creature could be found that would exchange: and

3. It was against Gods justice to take us away by force: and therefore,

4. Gods justice must be satisfied, and sufficient ransom must be offered, or
we cannot be saved.

And therefore Christ was contented to make satisfaction for our sins, and to
pay the ransom of our transgressions, touching which S. Augustine Aug. l. 4.
c. 13. de trinitate.
says, we should consider these four especial things,

1. To whom this ransom must be offered. 2. By whom it must be tendered. 3.
What ransom must be paid. 4. For whom it must be given.
1. God was offended, and therefore to God this offering must be offered, that
Gods anger may be appeased.

2. God is of pure eyes, and cannot endure the sight of sinners, and therefore
such an high Priest it became us to have which should beholy, harmless,
undefiled, Heb. 7. 27.
defiled, and separate from sinners; Et quia sacrificium Deo offerri non potest
nisi per Sacerdotem sanctum and iustum, and because no sacrifice can be offered
unto God, but by a just and a holy Priest, says Saint Augustine, therefore
Christ the only Son of God, that just and holy man, in whose mouth was found
no guile, became our Priest, that he might offer this ransom or our sins
unto his Father.

3. What should be offered was The greatness of the price that was paid for us.
prefigured in the law, an offering immaculate and undefiled, for thou shall
choose a kid or a lamb that has no blemish, and it must be slain too, for
without blood there is no remission. And therefore this our high Priest was
contented to yield himself to be slain for the sins of his people, to be
made himself a sacrifice for us, and to offer himself an oblation unto his
Father, as Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. to. 2. hom. 13. in c. 1. Ioh.
speaks.

For seeing the thing offered must be clean, Quid tam mundum pro immundandis
vitijs mortalium, quam sine vlla contagione carnalis concupiscentiae, caro nata
in vtero and ex vtero virginali? What can be so clean to purify the
uncleanness of men, as that undefiled flesh, that without any touch of carnal
concupiscence, was conceived and borne out of a virgins womb? And seeing our
sacrifice must be slain, quid tam aptum huic immolationi quam caro mortalis,
what is fitter to be slain then mortal flesh? And therefore what could be
better offered of us, or better accepted of God for a Sacrifice, then the body
of our priest to be made the flesh our sacrifice?

4. It is apparent that this ransom Tertull. l. contra Iud.
was to be paid for all sinners, and for all nations, says Tertullian.

And so you see that he was one, to whom this sacrifice was offered, that he
was one who did offer it, and that it was but one thing which was offered, and
all to make us one with God, and one among our selves, for whom it was offered.
And you see also the greatness of the ransom that was paid, even the flesh of
our priest, and the blood of our Savior, yea such a Priest that was not only a
most righteous man, but also the Son of the most righteous God. And so God
that gave our selves unto our selves in our creation, gave himself unto us in
our redemption, and quod homo est esse Cyprianus de idolat. vanitate.
voluit Christus, vt and homo possit esse quod Christus est, and was contented
to be made what we are, the Son of Man subject to all infirmities, that we
might be made what he is, the sons of God filled with all felicities.

And therefore, seeing we are redeemed from our vain conuersations, not with
gold or silver, or such like corruptible things, but with the precious blood of
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, it behooves us to show all obedience and
thankfulness unto God How thankful we should be to Christ for the great
ransom he paid for us.
for the same, and cum nihil dignum Christo habeamus, and seeing we have
nothing to give that is any way worthy to be offered unto Christ, hoc vnum
damus quod habemus, nosmet ipsos, let us give our selves unto him that gave
himself for us, and offer up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto him that offered up his body for us.

2. The other part of the Priestly office of Christ is intercession, i. a
continual craving and requesting of God, that for that sacrifice and ransom
which Christ paid, and offered for man, the grace and favor of God might be
restored to man again.

Now touching satisfaction (now spoken of) Bellarmine wiser then the rest,
yields that it belongs to Christ alone, because he alone is the ransom for
sin, and reconciled us to 1. Tim. 2.
God with his own blood.

But touching intercession, they ioyn Whether Christ alone be our intercessor.
others with Christ in this action, and therefore they have recourse both to
the Saints and Angels, and do pray unto them, that they would pray for them
unto God, and indeed if they could prove the one, they might be the better
excused for doing the other.

But Saint Augustine tells us plainly, that although all Christians do commend
one another in their prayers to God, pro altero tamen nullus interpellat, sed
ipse pro omnibus vnus verusque mediator Jesus Christus: yet none does intercede
or mediate for the other, but Aug. l. 2. c. 8. contra Parmen.
he that intercedeth for all, that one and true Mediator Jesus Christ. And
Saint John likewise says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, 1 Ioh. 2.
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he Romans 8. 34.
is the propitiation for our sins. And so Saint Paul says, that Christ
sits at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.

But to all these places Bellarmine answers, that he is not herein called the
only and sole advocate for men, and therefore, though he be the chief
advocate, yet it proves not but others may intercede with him.

I answer, that it needs not, when we read not of any others that are said to
be our advocates but only he.

But it is objected, that the fathers taught and maintained this doctrine, that
the Saints do intercede and pray Nazianz. orat. de laud Basilij. Aug. ser.
17. de verbis Apostoli.
for us: as

1. Gregory Nazianzene says that Saint Basil was in the heavens offering
Sacrifices for us, and prayers for the people.

2. Saint Augustine says, it is an injury to pray for a Martyr, by whose
prayers we on the other side ought to be remembered: and so many others, and
therefore they do pray and intercede for us.

I answer, first that whosoever will look into that place of Nazianzen, shall
there find that Nazianzen does but think so.

And secondly, he shall find that he spoke this Orator-like, who many times
speak to the absent as though they were present, as Pliny says unto Cicero,
salve primus omnium parens patriae.

And thirdly, I say that this place of Nazianzen, and likewise that of Saint
Augustine do prove nothing We yield that the Saints do after a sort pray for
the whole Church.
but that in a general manner, they pray for us, as they do for the whole
Church; which we do not deny: for that cannot be called an intercession, but
rather an approbation of the intercession of Christ, and as it were clerks
unto this high priest to say Amen, to approve his will in heaven as we should
in earth.

And so you see how Christ was anointed to be a Priest, which I think should
be sufficient to take away all contempt from the name of Priests.

And you see to what end he was anointed priest, first to make satisfaction
for our sins, and secondly to make intercession for us, that we might regaine
his fathers favor. And therefore this should teach us,

1. To cast away that deceitful doctrine That we merit nothing at the hands of
God.
of works satisfactory, or meritorie, or call them what you will. For this our
Priest has paid for all, when we could pay for nothing: and he merited all
happiness for us, when we merited destruction unto our selves: and therefore I
say with Saint Bernard, that sufficit ad meritum scire quod non sufficient
merita, herein we merit best when we know that we merit nothing but hell, and
when we cry with the Psalmist, Enter not into judgment with thy servants O
Lord, for in thy sight can no flesh living be instified.

2. Seeing Christ is our only mediator that prays for us, we should only pray
to him: for Abraham has forgotten us, and Isaac is ignorant of That we should
pray to none but to God alone.
us, but this our Priest will never forget us, he does at all times hear us,
and can at any time help us, if we do call unto him for help.

And therefore though we love the Angels, and reverence the Saints, their names
are sweet unto us, and their memorial is blessed, yet we will pray to none of
them, for we have neither precept from God, nor practice in Gods Church to do
the same. But we find the same flarly forbidden in many places. For Origin
says, ne quis audeat Origin. l. 5. contra Celsum.
praeces offerre nisi soli Domino Deo: Let no man dare to offer prayers unto
any but only to the Lord God. And the council of Laodicea does anathematise
all those that leave the Lord Council. La^d. c. 35. Basil. in orat. de 40.
Martyr. Ambros. in l. de viduis.
Jesus, to pray unto any Saint or Angel.

But against this it may be objected, that Saint Basil exhorts us to have
recourse unto them in our necessities, and to pray unto them. And so Saint
Ambrose likewise exhorts the widows to pray unto the Saints, and to the
Angels when they were in their necessities.

I answer, that Saint Basil does not say confugiat and oret, but confugit and
orat, i. he tells us what they did, and not what they should do.

And it is no marvel that people That we are feign to suffer many things that
we do not approve.
newly converted from Gentilisme to Christianity, should retain something of
their old idolatry, and that the godly fathers should be constrained for a
while to tolerate those tares among the wheat, lest the good seed scarce rooted
should be endangered. For Saint Augustine says, that he knew Aug. l. 1. c. 24.
de moribus Eccl. and l. 2. c. 21. contra Faust. Manich.
many that adored sepulchers, and pictures, and such like, and many that drunk
most excessiuely over the dead: but he says, aliud est quod docemus, aliud est
quod sustinemus, and hoc tolerare compellimur donec emendemus; It is one thing
that we teach, another thing that is suffered until it be amended. And for the
book of Saint Ambrose concerning widows I say with Molinaeus, that it is one
of Molinaeus contra Coefetau.
his first works, that he made after his conversion, and therefore sauoreth of
infirmity, and fails of sound divinity in many points.

For in the same book he says, that the Martyrs if any sin remained in
them, did purge the same with their own blood, and this is a doting of the
truth, and an error plain contrary unto all truth.

For first, who knows not, that no man is void of sin?

And secondly, who knows not, that no man can wash away his own sins 1 Ioh.
1.
with his own blood? For the Scripture says plainly, that it is the blood of
Jesus Christ, that washes and cleanses us from all sin.

And therefore Saint Ambrose recalleth this error, Ambros. in c. 1. Ep. ad
Roman.
and says, it is a miserable excuse to say we go to God by the mediation of
Saints, as we go to the king by his officers: for therefore (says he) do we
go to the king, because he is a man, and knows not to whom to commit
himself, or his affairs, but God knows all things, and is ready to receive
all men: Ideo ad Deum promerendum* suffragatore non opus est, sed mente deuota;
and therefore we need not any other suffragan to go to God, but a devout and
pious heart. And in his oration upon the death of Theodosius, he says plainly,
Tu solus Deus es inuocandus, turogandus: Thou only O God art to be prayed unto,
thou only O God art to be entreated. And so much for the anointing of Jesus to
be a Priest.

2. He was anointed to be a king: That Christ was anointed to be a king.
For thy throne O Lord is for ever and ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a
scepter of righteousness, etc. And this we may see in Psalm. 2. 6. Ierem. 23.
5. 1. Chron. 17. 12. 14. and in many other places of the Scripture. And this
point, viz. that Jesus is a king, and how he differs from all other kings,
and what lessons we might learn from this doctrine, I have handled at large in
my Treatise of The resolution of Pilate: and therefore now I will but only
desire all men to consider, that seeing Christ was a king, and yet refused all
pomp of worldly vanities, yea rex fieri noluit, this king would not be made a
king in this world, because his kingdom was spiritual, and so not of this
world: he was a king of righteousness; then why should not we his subjects
imitate this our king herein?

It is reported of king Alexander, That we should not too eagerly seek for the
things of this world.
that his soldiers would imitate him even in his stoopings. And if they
imitated him in his vices, why should not we imitate our king Christ Jesus in
his virtues? His kingdom is spiritual, and he is a spiritual king, and
therefore if we would be his subjects, we must be spiritual men, and we must
utterly despise these worldly vanities. For it is possible we should do both,
we cannot serve God and mammon, we cannot be filled with temporal and
spiritual things at once. For if thy hand be full of counters, thou must throw
away the same before thou can fill it with gold, says Saint Chrysostom:
even so if thy heart be full of the riches of this worldly kingdom, there can
be no room for spiritual riches.

Why then do we not seek to be rich Ieron. de vita solit. in ep. ad Heliodor.
in Christ? nam affatim dives est, qui cum Christo pauper est, for he is truly
rich that is poor in spirit, poor with Christ, says Saint Jerome: and
therefore seeing our kingdom is not of this world, cibus and potus sunt
diuitiae nostrae, meat and drink, food and raiment is all the riches that we
should desire, all other things we should willingly leave unto the subjects of
this world, apud quos solummodo splendour tectorum attenditur, labes animorum
non attenditur: For they only respect the gainesse of their houses, and the
greatness of their lands, but they never look to the foulness of their
souls.

And further I must desire you to note this one thing, that Christ is an
eternal king, and his kingdom an everlasting kingdom, gloriosum imperium
sine fine dabit, and so shall all his subjects have an everlasting kingdom;
for that good is no good that wants perpetuity: but our life in this How
short is the life of man.
world is very short, it is but a span long, it is even as nothing, orimur,
morimur, as soon as we are borne we draw to our end, and cum vir crescit vita
decrescit, and while a man grows more and more in years, his years grow
fewer and fewer unto him, and sic breuis vita and ipsa breuitas semper incerta,
and so our life is but a very little little while, and that little while is
always uncertain, for Irus erit subito qui modo Croesus erat.

There are twenty ways for the vanities of this world to vanish away: and
therefore Saint Augustine says, Si Aug. l. confess.
quid arisisset prosperum, taedebat apprehendere, quia pene priusquam teneretur
auolabat. If any worldly wealth did offer themselves unto me, I was even loath
to accept them, for I saw they were ready to fly from me before I could lay
hold upon them. But the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom unshaken, (...), it
knows no Chrys^st. in 5. Romans That the kingdom of Christ is without ending.
end, it has no bounds, and the riches of this kingdom are (...), graces
given without repentance, never to be taken away. I will therefore conclude
this point with that sweet demand of Saint Augustine, Quae mayor est insania
quam pro momentanea delectatione perdere aeterna gaudia, and nosmetipso^
obligare ad aeterna supplicia! O what great madness is it, or what greater
madness can there be, then for a little momentarie delight to deprive our
selves of an everlasting kingdom, and to cast our selves headlong to
everlasting destruction? And so much for the kingly office of Christ and his
kingdom.

3. He was anointed to be a Prophet, That Christ was anointed to be a Prophet.
for I will raise them a Prophet from the midst of their brethren like unto
thee, him shall they hear. And therefore he is called pacis annunciator, and
Dei fidelissimus testis, the proclaimer of our peace, and Gods most faithful
witness. And therefore the Lord says, that whosoever would not hear that
Prophet, that soul should be cut off from his people.

Now the parts of his Prophetical office are,

The true exposition of the law.
The joyful declaration of the Gospel.
The infallible prediction of future things.
All these he did himself while he was on earth, and now likewise by his
spirit inwardly, and by the preachers outwardly he informs his Church of all
truth unto the end of the world, for whosoever hears you, hears me, says
this great Prophet, qui omnes Prophetarum prophetias signauit and adimpleuit
primo aduentu, which sealed and fulfilled Tertull. l. contra Iudaeos.
all the prophesies of his precedent Prophets by his first coming, says
Tertullian, and now left none but his own to be accomplished.

And thus you see, first how Jesus That all Christians are anointed with the
graces of Gods Spirit.
was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. In respect of the
sweetness of which oil, the Church says, meliora sunt vbera tua vino
fragrantia vnguentis optimi, thy love is better then wine, it is sweeter then
the sweetest ointment.

And with this ointment he annointeth all his members: and from this (...) they
are likewise called Christians, quia excellenter vnctus corpus suum perungit,
because he being most excellently anointed, did anoint all his body, says
Saint Augustine: and so Saint John Aug. in Psalm. 103.
says, we have an ointment from that holy one, i. from Christ the anointed,
that is, the sweet gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit, as Theodoret does
expound Theodor. in Cant.
it, and as the Prophet David did mean when he says, that the precious
ointment was powered upon the head, and ran down upon the beard, even unto
Aarons beard, and ran down to the skirts of his clothing, for this cannot be
interpreted literally, of any material oil,

1. Because we never read that Aaron Anton. p. 1. to. 6. c. 2. 5.
was so anointed, that the oil ran down to the borders of his garments.

2. Because the words immediately following, like the dew of Hermon that fell
upon the hill of Sion, must necessarily be spiritually understood; for the dew
of Hermon cannot possibly descend upon the hill of Sion,

1. Because they are far distant the one from the other. 2. Because mount
Sion is far higher then mount Hermon, as Hugo Cardinalis does observe.
And therefore this must be understood of that spiritual oil of gladness,
the most excellent graces of Gods spirit, that was powered upon the head Christ
Jesus without measure, and thence ran down upon the beard, (i.) the Apostles
and Preachers, and so to the skirts of his clothing, (i.) to all faithful
Christians, be they never so mean.

And therefore if we be Christians, (i.) anointed with the graces of Gods
spirit, odor bonus sumus Deo, we smell sweetly in the sight of God; we are
like the smell of a pleasant field, which the Lord has blessed, and he will
find in us a savor of rest. But if we live in loathsome sin, we shall smell
most odious in the nosthrils of God.

And 2. you see how Christ was anointed to be King, Priest, and Prophet: which
should teach us two especial lessons.

1. The dignity, the superiority, and Dignity of Kings, Priests, and Prophets.
the excellency, of Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and that in many respects:
For,

1. They only were anointed: a sufficient argument of sovereignty: for if you
power Water, Wine, Vinegar, and Oil, together, they say Oil will needs be
uppermost.

2. They were not only anointed with oil, sed oleo sancto, but with holy
oil, he took it not from the Apothecaries shop, or the Merchants warehouse,
but from the Sanctuary, to teach us that sacred is their office, whereunto
they are designed, sacred the power wherewith they are endued, and sacred the
persons whereunto it was applied: and therefore this should teach all men to
render unto these their due respects, and to beware of the contradiction of
Corah, lest we fall into the same destruction.

But it may be some will say, what if these anointed prove wicked? if Kings
prove Tyrants, Priests Heretics, and Prophets lewd and lying Prophets, are we
still enjoined to the same reverence and obedience?

I answer, that some indeed are of mind, if this anointing prove defective,
this oil may be wiped off, and as the Jews gave there bill of diuorcement, so
we should have our writ de iusta abdicatione, of renunciation.

But if this were allowed, all Kings That inferiors must never stand against
their superiors.
would be soon made Tyrants, and all Priests, Heretics, in the judgment of
the disobedient, and therefore we say, Prove what they will, thou art bound to
obey in all civil and outward actions, and never to rebel in any action. For
the anointing of these men did not give them grace to execute their offices,
but only a just title to enjoy their offices, neither does it include any
thing but a just title of administration, nor exclua^ any thing but usurpation:
for we read that Cyrus was Christus, anointed, though no christian, and Julian
was vnctus, though worse then a Pagan, and so Saul was the anointed of God
when he was forsaken of the spirit of God, and yet David would not touch Saul,
though he was a tyrant, and the Christians would not lift up their hands
against Julian, though he was an Apostata, because they were anointed, (i.)
appointed of the Lord, though they were none of the true servants of the Lord.
For the Lord many times will place wicked men over us for our correction, as
well as godly men for our consolation: and therefore when God places any, we
must not seek to displace him, though he were never so wicked, unless it be
by our private prayers, and public patience.

Yet I deny not, but in cases of great In cases of extremity we may fly to
save our lives.
extremities, where loss of life, or danger of soul is imminent, we may with
Lot, fly and haste away to save our selves, ^s David did from Saul, but to take
arms against the Lords anointed, or any ways to prove imurious unto them, to
their persons, places, or dignities, we may no ways do it, though we had
power to do it: as that most excellent example of David toward Saul does most
excellently declare.

And therefore S. Ambrose says, Ambros. orat. in Auxent. We must not rebel
against the most wicked Kings.
that in such a case we may refuse the doing of the fact if it be contrary to
the word of God, but we may not refuse to submit our selves to the penalty; we
may sigh and mourn, but we may not stir up rebellion; we may humbly entreat
and beseech, but we may not stubbornely fight, for we are bound to yield our
true allegiance, though we be forbid to yield to any wicked performance. And
what is said of Kings, I say the same of Priests, that their people should have
no hand in their deposition, nam sapientis est, sapientes indicare, and they
ever hate us, because we hate their vices.

And so much for the dignity and sovereignty of Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

2. Seeing Christ was anointed to be King, Priest, and Prophet, and that
Christ was anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, to make every christian a King,
a Priest, and a Prophet. 1 Apoc. 6. Acts 2. 24.
from Christus we be all christians, it must needs therefore follow, that we
were all anointed to be Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and that as he has
appointed Kings, Priests, and Prophets to be such over many, so he has
anointed every man to be such over himself, for so the Scripture shows, he
made us kings and Priests unto God his father: and again, I will power out my
spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, says
the Lord. And therefore this should teach every man,

1. As a King to rule and reign over That every man should rule as a King over
his own affections. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
his own affections, and as the Poet says of Aeolus,

Luctantes ventos tempestatesque sonoras,
Imperio premit, ac vinclis and carcere fraenat.
to bridle all our untamed lusts, and to suppress all the unruly motions of
our flesh, for this is most certain, that against all the temptations of sin,
there is no better remedy then the mortification of our flesh, and the
suppression of our affections, but if we be tam grauiter temptats, so violently
assaulted, and so strongly beset against, that we cannot utterly expel them,
nor perfectly subdue them, then let us ever look to this, vt minime superati,
that they may Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 1. c. 10.
never subdue us and deprive us of our kingdom.

For, if they once get the upper hand over us, we shall be no longer Kings, but
the bond-slaues of sin and Satan.

And therefore, vt barbara gens, optima flens, pessima ridens: as barbarous men
are best, subdued, but the worst of all when they have their liberty; so these
barbarous lusts of our flesh must be subdued, if ever we would be happy Idem
in Psalm. 137.
Kings, and these Babylonish children must be taken, and dashed against the
walls (as S. Augustine expounds those words of the Psalmist) if ever we would
be happy.

2. As Priests, we should all offer up those christian sacrifices that are holy
Perkins in expos. Symb.
and acceptable unto God: and most especially these,

1. A most pure and an upright life, as the Prophet David shows, offer the
Psa. 4. 6.
sacrifice of righteousness, (i.) reddite vnicuique quod suum est, deal
justly and An upright life is an acceptable sacrifice to God.
honestly with every man, as holy Job did, that was a just and an upright man,
for this is a wonderful pleasing sacrifice in the sight of God, and whosoever
will use the same, shall with Noah find grace and favor with God.

Iustitia in se virtutes continet ownes.

2. We should offer up all manner of prayers and supplications, as the Apostle
speaks: for this is likewise a most acceptable sacrifice unto God, as the
Prophet David shows, let my prayer Psa. 141. 2. Prayer is a sweet sacrifice.
be directed in thy sight as the incense, and the lifting up of my hands as an
evening sacrifice.

Now because prayer is so acceptable a sacrifice unto God, and so profitable an
action unto man, I will in few words show thee how it must be done.

1. Thou must prepare thy self, before We must wash our selves from sins
before we pray to God.
thou come to pray, for as it is the note of wicked men, that they have not
called upon God, so it is the punishment of a reprobate man, when his prayer
shall be turned into sin; but if the fountain be foul, or the conduit
defiled, or the cup polluted, how can the liquor choose but be corrupted: even
so if our hearts be full of malice, if our mouths be full of bitterness, and
our hands be full of blood, as the Prophet speaks, how can it be but those
prayers that proceed from thence should be turned into sin? and therefore if
we would be heard in what we ask, we must hear him in what he commands:
wash you and make you clean, then pray Esaias 1.
and he will hear you, offer up this sacrifice, and he will accept it: or else
as the precious stone Diacletes leeseth all her virtues being once put in a
dead man's mouth, so does that prayer which proceeds from a Sinners mouth.

2. When thou have prepared thy How prayer should be made.
self for prayer, set the pattern of prayer, (i.) Christ himself before thy
face, and look how he prayed, and so do thou. For

1. He kneeled down, in all humility. 2. He said, Father, in the assurance of
faith. 3 He said, o my father, to show his zeal. 4. He prayed 3. times, to
show his constancy. 5 And upon the cross he said, father forgive them, to show
his charity.
1. Humility then must be the first stone in this building, for the prayer
Eccl. 5. 15.
of the lowly pierces the skies, says Syracides; and this must be, not only
inwardly The humble prayer is soonest heard.
in our hearts, but also outwardly upon our knees, we should worship and fall
down, and kneel before the Lord our maker.

2. As Humility casts us down, and shows, vbi non sit remedium, that in us
there is no health, so, faith must raise us up and show us vbi fit remedium,
where we may have help.

And S. Cyprian says, that iuxta mensuram Cyprian. ad Donat.
fidei eri mensura impetrandi, according to the measure of thy faith, shall be
the measure of thy obtaining, for as a little vessel cannot carry much water,
so a little faith cannot obtain Iam. 1.
great matters. And therefore when you ask, ask in faith, and waver not,
says the Apostle.

3. To faith, we must join zeal, for We must ever pray in faith.
God hears the desire of the poor, and vocem in silentio, and the secret
silent voice of the affection: quia ad cordis potius vocem, quam ad corporis
aures eius apertae sunt, because he looks rather to the desire of the heart,
then to the voice of the tongue, says S. Bernard: and therefore a vehement
desire, is a loud cry, as the Lord shows of Moses, Why criest thou unto me,
and yet he said never a word.

But alas, such is our weakness, that How idle thoughts do many times
disturb us when we pray.
as the furies are described to have snakes and serpents upon their heads, in
stead of hairs, so, by Satan's subtlety and our own infirmity, our heads are
distracted with idle thoughts, when we should be most intentive about heavenly
meditations. And so S. Jerome complained Ieron. in dialog. ad Lucifer.
that his mind would be now and then walking in the galleries of Rome, when
his tongue would be talking with God.

And I read a pretty story alleged, ex vitis patrum, that one offered his
horse unto his fellow, if he would say his Lords prayer, and think on nothing
but God: and he began, Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name,
but I must have the bridle too (said he) no nor horse neither said the other,
for thou have lost both already. This only shows that many times when we pray
to God, the devil is most busy to make our minds wander about other worldly
things.

And therefore we should watch in prayer that our hearts and tongues may go
together, for verbum forense, the outward work only is but like the loathsome
smoke of Sodom, whereas the devotion of the heart is like the pleasant
perfume of the sweetest frankincense.

4. We must continue and persevere Plut. in Numa. We must persevere in prayer.
Leu. 6. 13.
in prayer, our zeal herein must be like the fire that the vestall virgins
kept in Rome, or rather like the sacrificing fire upon the altar that ever
burnt, and never went out, and as the stone Asbestos in Arcadia (mentioned by
Solinus) Polihist. c. 12.
which being once set on fire cannot be quenched again, so our hearts being
once kindled with zeal by the fire of Gods spirit, should always remain
fervent in our prayers to God.

5. Lastly our prayers should be in We must be in love with all men when we
pray to God.
charity, for prayer indeed is (...), the engaging of our love and charity,
for we desire forgiveness of God no otherwise then as we forgive our brethren.

Now such a prayer made in humility, in faith, in zeal, with continuance, and
in charity, is such a sacrifice, so acceptable unto God, that he will hear
us, that he will help us, that he will give us all good, that he will deliver
us from al evil.

-- Nondum mihi defuit hostis.

I have had my part in afflictions, I never wanted enemies: yet prayer
delivered me out of all their malice.

I read of many that always used to Eusebius. in vita Constant. A most excellent
example of a godly man.
pray, as that most Christian Constantine, Gorgonia, Trasilla, and diverse
others: but above all I admire Paul the Eremite that (as S. Jerome says) was
found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, and looking with his
eyes to heaven, and sic cadauer mortui officioso gestu precabatur, and so the
dead corpse by this officious gesture did seem to pray. O how happy was the
soul of that man without the body, when as the body without the soul seemed
so devout!

O that it might be so with me, that I might even weary and wear out my self
in prayer, that whenever my master comes he should find me so doing.

3. Praises and thanksgiving are very Thankfulness is the only thing God
requires at our hands.
acceptable sacrifices unto God.

For, who so offers me thanks and praise he honors me, says the Lord: and
therefore the Apostle says, Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise
always to God, that is the fruit of the lips which confess his name. Where I
desire you to observe that the Apostle would have us always to offer this
sacrifice unto God: in other sacrifices we may have a cessation, but this must
be done without intermission: and no marvel, nam Gregor.
cum Deus nunquam cessat benefacere, ideo semper debet homo gratias agere, for
seeing God ever bestows blessings and graces upon man, therefore man should
never cease to render thanks unto God, says S. Gregory.

And therefore holy David would even at midnight praise the Lord for his
righteous judgments, for it becomes well the just to be thankful: and
therefore vaetacentibus de te Domine, Woe to Aug. in confess.
them that are mute in rendering thanks and praises unto God, for this is all
that we render unto God, for all the benefits that he has done unto us; even
to take the cup of salvation, and to call upon the name of the Lord.

4. Releeuing of the poor, is another sacrifice Releeuing the poor is most
pleasing unto God. Phil. 4. 18.
that we are to offer, as the Apostle shows, for I was even filled (says he)
after that I had received of Epaphroditus, that which came from you, an odor
that smells sweet, and a sacrifice pleasant and acceptable to God: and
therefore we should never forget to bestow alms upon the poor, quia manus
pauperis est gazaphylacium Christi; for the hand of the poor is the storehouse
of Christ. Non memini me legisse mala morte Chrysostom.
mortuum qui opera charitatis libenter exercuit. And therefore whatsoever we
bestow upon them we lend unto the Lord, and lay it up in store for our selves
against the time of need. And this our Savior shows, when he says unto the
godly, Come ye blessed of my father, etc. For I was hungry, and you gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and you gave me drink, etc.

5. True repentance is not of least account with God, for the sacrifice of God
is a contrite spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, ^ God, will thou not
despise.

But here you must understand that true repentance consists not only in a
ba^e confession, I have done such a fault, and I am sorry for it, but it must
have also true contrition, a broken and a contrite heart, says the Prophet:
for it is most certain that vbi dolor finitur ibi deficit Aug. de verb.
poenitent. c. 13.
poenitentia; where there is no true grief and sorrow for sin, there can be
no true repentance, as Saint Augustine speaks.

And therefore I wish that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for my manifold sins
and transgressions, quia oration Deum lenit, lachrymae Ierom. in Esaiam.
cogunt, that as my prayers should move him, so my tears might compel him to
have mercy upon me.

These and such like are the true sacrifices that every Christian man, as a
true Priest, is bound to offer unto God.

3. As a Prophet every Christian man We should be expert in the knowledge of
God and of his will.
should dispell from himself the mist of ignorance, and increase in all manner
of knowledge and understanding, that he may know what the good and acceptable
will of God is, for there is nothing more unbeseeming a christian then
ignorance of those things that concern Gods will, and his own salvation.

The Philosophers indeed could pierce the secrets of nature, and the Jews had
wit enough, to make a large shekell and a small Epha; and so have we all to
know the things of this life. Yet all this can but with Adam teach us a way to
run away from God, to make us erie with the Babylonians, as the Prophet
speaks, thy wisdom o Babel has caused thee to fall, and in the end to
overthrow us, as the Poet says of himself,

Ingenio perij qui miser ipse meo.

And therefore Christ which is the way, the truth, and the life, that he might
bring us to eternal life, has given us his word, and anointed us with his
grace, and powered on us of his spirit, that we might in some measure,
understand his word and know his will, and edify our selves in our most holy
faith, and that we might know that this is eternal life, John 17.
even to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ.

This is nobilissima scientiarum, and scientia The excellency of divine
knowledge.
nobilissimorum, the most excellent knowledge in the world, and the fittest
knowledge for the noblest men of the world: Scientia Prophetarum Dei, a
knowledge that the Magitians of Egypt, the Philosophers of Athens, the Rabbines
of the Jews, and all the worldly wise men are ignorant of it, but the true
Prophets of Christ, the true Christians do only know it.

Now the only way to get this knowledge is, to search the scriptures, for they
testify of me, says our Savior, and by them says S. Jerome, plenam potes
Dei Ieron. ad Deme^. Idem in pr^^em. in Isaiam.
intelligere voluntatem, thou may understand the whole will of God. At
ignora^tia scripturaru^ est ignorantia Christi; but the ignorance of the
Scriptures, is to be ignorant of Christ, and to be folded and swadled in all
errors, as our Savior shows, Matthew. 21. 29.

And therefore if we would be true Christian Prophets, let us ever be
conversant in the word of God: and because the Scripture, licet omnibus
accessibilis, Aug. epist. 3. ad volus.
paucissimis tamen penetrabilis, though they be accessible unto all, all may
have them, all may hear them, yet are they understood but of very few, we
should pray to God that he would open the eyes of our understanding, that we
may Ps. 119. 18.
see the wondrous things of his law, and that we may thoroughly know the whole
will of God: and then we should pray for grace to do the will of God, while we
are in this mortal life, that we may live in peace with God in the
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is blessed for evermore.
Amen.

Iehouae Liberatori.

FINIS.
Christ says, God delights not in much babbling, and therefore I made these
prayers short, fitting all the chiefest occasions: they will neither burden
thy memory, nor hinder thy affairs.

Grace before meat.
Sanctify, good Lord, these thy creatures for us; and us for thy service: give
us grace, we pray thee, to receive them thankfully, and to use them soberly, to
thy praise, and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grace after meat.
BLessed be the name of our most blessed God, for these and for all other
blessings that we have received from him, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord save thy Church, preserve our King, give us thy grace, and send us
peace for Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer as we go to bed.
O Lord Jesus Christ, forgive me I pray thee, all the sins that I have
committed this day against thee, and preserve me this night from all dangers: I
go naked into my bed, but I beseech thee cloth me with thy righteousness,
that I may not go hence naked into my grave. Amen.

A prayer when thou risest from bed.
O Sweet Jesus Christ, I most humbly thank thee for the comfortable rest, that
thou have given this night unto my wearied body, I thank thee for this light
that shines upon me, and I beseech thee grant that the light of thy heavenly
truth may shine in my heart; preserve me this day from all evil, and guide me
in thy way, by thy holy spirit. Amen.

A prayer when thou go to hear a Sermon.
O Most sweet and blessed Savior, I do acknowledge and confess mine
ignorance, and I come unto thee to be instructed, Lord open mine ears that I
may diligently hearken unto the words of thy Preacher: and open mine heart, as
thou did the heart of Lidia, that the words which I hear with mine ears,
may be ingraffed in my heart, and embraced in my soul, to thy glory, and to
mine own endless comfort. Amen.

A prayer when thou go to the Communion.
O Eternal God, I see thy justice, and thy hatred against sin, and I see the
greatness of thy love to mankind, that for the washing of our sins and the
saving of our souls, thou gave thy only son, thus to be broken, and to shed
his precious blood. I pray thee good Lord make me partaker of all the benefit
of his passion, and let his death satisfy thy justice for all my sins and
transgressions. Amen.

A thanksgiving after the Communion.
O Most gracious God and loving father, as thou have given thine only Son
Jesus Christ to die for our sins, and to be the blessed food of our souls,
so we most humbly beseech thee to give us grace that we may die unto sin,
and show our selves truly thankful unto thee for these unspeakable blessings,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer to be said in afflictions.
O Most just and righteous God, thou always punishest man for sin, and I
confess O Lord that my sins deserve a great deal more punishment then thou
have laid upon me; for I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and I am
no more worthy to be called thy son: but thou desire not the death of a
sinner, and therefore I most humbly beseech thee to forgive me all my sins,
and to turn away thine anger from me, to give me grace that I may make good
use of this thy fatherly chastisement, and to deliver me from the same when it
pleases thee for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A prayer to be said in our sickness.
O Eternal and everliving God, I thy poor and wretched servant, do
acknowledge mine iniquity, I do see mine infirmity, I am not able to help
my self, and I do confess that thou art just and righteous, thou know
best what thou have to do, and it is best for me to submit my self to thy
will. And therefore I do most earnestly entreat thee to restore me my health,
if it be thy will, or else to give me patience to endure this sickness, to
strengthen my faith against all temptations, to make me most willing to forsake
this world, and most ready to come unto thee whenever thou call. Grant
this o gracious God for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A prayer to be said at the very hour of death.
O Savior of the world save me, forgive me all my sins, and receive my
soul into thy hands, o sweet Jesus come, even so come quickly. Amen.

Iehouae liberatori.

FINIS.

