ANTWERPES Unity. An Accord or Peace in Religion, and Government, concluded by
his Highness, and the members of the City, to the common weal and quietness
thereof there lately proclaimed the 12. of June Anno. 1579. Printed in French,
and Dutch, by the Kings Printer, and Englished by the Printer hereof.

AT LONDON. Printed by Richard Day, dwelling at Aldersgate. An. 1579. Cum
Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

GOOD Hope there was, and not a little, that through the pacification of Gaunt,
and the unity of ye Provinces there adjoining, this great and long turmoyle,
or rather miserable calamity of these Low Countries should have been ceased,
and so consequently public peace and tranquillity, as well in Religion as
otherwise, should have been established in the same indifferently, especially
in Antwerpe, for the full restoring thereof to her old flourishing estate in
trafique, merchandise, handicraftes, navigations, martial feats and all other
good, and virtuous practice or policy, wherein sometime she far exceeded any
other of the Provinces whichsoeuer.

But since it falls out so, that the aforesaid Pacification of Gaunt, (what
with ye intermedling of Spaniards and their adherentes, being professed enemies
to the country, and what with other occasions therhe^ce proceeding) has been
at the first plunge, and is at this present violated and infringed in diverse
points: and since that new suspicions, and hartburninges kindle again a fresh
between them of the Romish Catholic Religion, and them of the Reformed, and
so far forth that some towns and places of the Provinces, so pacified, do
inflame and burn again, as it is most manifest, with such great ra^cor,
grudging, and dissension as herafter without great slaughter and bloodshed can
not be extinguished: Therefore to prevent all such dissension, discord,
divisions, and effusi on of blood, his HIGHNESS and his EXCELLENCY by the advice
of the counsel of the Estates assisting him, has devised, and made certain
Ordinances, contaytayning diverse points, serving to the peace of the
Religions, and main tenance of public policy.

All which points so advised and concluded were by his Highness letters dated
the 14. of July last past sent to all united Provinces, craving upon the sight
and receipt thereof their asse^t, and consent therein.

After the same manner also were the said Articles of this Religious peace sent
to the Justices of the town of Antwerpe, who laboring in the same, as to such
a weighty matter appertains, have to that end assembled the whole body of the
said City then and there opening and communicating unto them the intent of the
foresaid letters, as also reading and examining the said Articles devised for
the Religious peace. Where, after long and good deliberation had, together with
the advice of the Colo nels, Deaco^s of the Companies and Captains of the
town, it was fully resolved and concluded, that the said Accord for the
Religions should be presently proclaimed in ye town, and well, and straightly
executed, and on the Justices and Magistrates of the said towns part from them
commanded and ordained, that all and every inhabitant thereof should hence
forth frame himself to this rule only, and keep the said Accord of Religion
in such order and manner as follows.

FIrst, since that Religion neither oght nor can be vpheld* or beaten into men's
hearts, by force or violence, but is a special gift of God, and at his hands
to be sought for, and receued: and for that it becomes all Christian people
of what Religion soever, to live mutually in peace, and quietness, ruling
themselves according to the lowable and politic ordinances of their
Governors: it is thought good that they of the aforesaid Romish Catholic
Religion, and they of ye Reformed, as also they of the Confession of Ausbourg,
shall freely every one remain at their own choice and liberty as they will, and
are minded, according to their understanding, to answer before God for the
salvation of their own souls, at the latter day.

Item, because there is such diversity of Religions, none shall be suffered to
disturb or hinder, or any way be a let to the other in their Ceremo nies,
Sermons, Readings, or other Exercises whatsoever: or otherwise attempt any
other thing the one against the other, whither it be within or without the
accustomed or assigned places of their Religion, in any kind of manner, but
suffer one another to use their Religion freely in peace and quietness: And
likewise to let them possess, hold, and enjoy all their goods so long, and
til such time as by the advice of the General Estates, or at least by a
provincial or national Assembly (echone being freely heard) it be otherwise
determined and concluded: upon pain of punishment of body and goods, without
delay, as disturbers of the common peace, and tranquillity.

And in the mean while to set good politic order, after some meet and
reasonable manner, for the security, and quietness of each part, it is ordained
that each of the aforesaid Religions shall hold them content with the Churches
which they presently possess: except ye the Churches of two of them, to weet,
of the Reformed Religion, and of the Aus bourgs Confession being to little for
their use, that then by the Magistrates of this City there shall be assigned,
and appointed unto the^ any other church or place for their commodity, there
openly and freely to exercise their religion. And as touching Burialles, the
professors, or maintainers of each Religion shall use thereto the Churches and
Churchyardes where they do exercise their Religion, each one following their
own Ceremonies: except that for want of room, distance, or other necessitye,
any one of the aforesaid Religions require to use each others Churchyarded,
which then they shall be suffered to do, provided that no Sermon be there made
or any singing, or other Ceremonye there used.

And for to avoid such inconuenices as are most commonly occurrent through the
wilful wantonness of seditious and quarreling mates, which hunt after nothing
but the overthrow of all good ordinances: It is ordained that echone shall for
bear and refrain themselves to come or to be found in place, whereas other
Religion is exercised than that they profess themselves, except that they so
guide, and rule themselves, according to the use and exercise of that church or
Temple, wherein they shall so happen to be found, upon pain as is aforesaid.

Likewise to avoid al iarring, rancor, and debate, and to repress the
inordinate liberty of some, spurning against diverse commandments, and
orders oftentimes taken, and published by us, we enjoin, and pro hibite any
song to be made, printed, sold, or to bring to light any difdaynefull or
injurious song, ballade, rymes, inuectiues, writings, Pictures, or Payntinges
whereby one or other of the religions, or any of the^ in particular, or
general should be disgraced, or defamed thereby, on the pain or punishment
aforesaid.

Moreover they of the aforesaid Religions shall be bound to present their
Preachers and Ministers personally before the Governors, and Justices of this
City, that their several names being regestred, they may with great
deliberation by the foresaid Governors, and Justices be admitted, and
received, and before them take an oath of their loyalty and obedience in these
politic cases, without doing any further act of jurisdiction, or meddling with
the authority of the Magistrate directly or indirectly, in what manner soever
the same might be.

The said Preachers, and Ministers so presented, and admitted, and sworn;
shall also be bound, as also al other persons, not to speak or preach or
otherwise to use speeches, or words, either publicly, or secretly, tending
to discord, tumult, and sedition, but to teach, and exhort the commons to
peace, love, and quietness.

Item none shall be suffered to carry any mark or token, through which occasion
might be given to another of offense, discord, and contention.

Item, the maintayners of each of ye aforesaid Religions (till that otherwise
it be provided by them, or the united Provinces) may contract marriages each
according to the use of his Religion, and the Children so borne, and begot shall
lawfully succeed, yea and enjoy the goods fallen unto them by the death of any
Person of a contrary Religion.

And to keep indifferency over al, so it is, that because of the foresaid
Religions, there shall be had good regard, and discretion in the receiving of any
Scholars, sick Parsons, or Poor men, into Schools, Hospitalles, or Alms
houses. Also all the the Alms, and devotions of good people shall be gathered
collected, and distributed according to the order already therein taken, and as
it is used at this present.

Item, that echone shall be bound to keep the accustomed Holy days, hereafter
specified, namely, the Sunday, Christmas Day, Thapostelsdayes, The Annu^ciatio^
of our Lady Ascension day, and Candelmas, and not be suffered upon the same
days to open their shoppes, or to work, or sell openly.

Item, upon such days as of ancient time served for the fast, no man shall
sell or eat flesh: and all flesh markets, or shambles shall be shut up, and
each one shall behave himself modestly, according to the ordinance or use of
the town.

Item, in election of any Officer, or Magistrate, and other politic calling
there shall be no special regard of any man's religion, but such a one to be
nominated, and chose^, as shall be thought and found meetest for the same, and
likeliest to execute such an office, with this condition, that such a one so
nominated, and chosen shall be bound to fulfill the oath, which of old time
appertayned to his office: and shall moreover faithfully and solemnly swear
this Accord of Religion, without using, or joining any other Ceremonies. And if
so be that in taking of any the said oaths, whether it be of Magistrates, or
any other public service, any clause be comprised therein repugnant to the
observation, or conservation of any the said Religions, that then the same
clause in taking and giving ye oath shall be omitted.

Furthermore each one shall be bound to bear dutiful obedience, and reverence to
the heads, and Magistrates of this City, and to assist the same in all places
to apprehend, and punish all manner of mutinies and seditio^s, especially of
the tra^sgressors of these ordinances now enacted.

And if so be it happen (which god defend) that any man do contrary to these
ordinances, or do oppose him self against the same, in all or in part, or do
disturb, offend, or abuse any manner of person by any iniurous mean, it is
ordained as aforesaid, that imediately they shall proceed to the apprehending
of the offen dor, according to ye ancient custom. And because that the
examination, and information shall be done without suspicion, or misdoubt, it
shall be lawful for them of the Religions a bouesaid jointly to choose and
assign two worthy discreet men, lovers of the common peace and tranquillity,
that in their presence the aforesaid information may be taken by the governor,
and such as by the law are appointed to that purpose, to the intent that what
is done may proceed and be ordained as it ought to be.

Under was written:

This ordinance being read in the Counsel Chamber of the Justices of Antwerpe,
was by them ordained to be proclaimed, and published, dated the 12. of June.
Anno. 1579.

Me praesente, Martiny.

Articles concluded by his Excellency and the town of Antwerpe for the
quietness, and peace thereof: the 12. of June. 1579.
BEcause that the 28. of May last past certain ill motions, and with no small
inconvenience did begin to rage, whereby more heaviness, and greater mischief
might have risen too the great hindraunce or hurt of the City, and the whole
Countries, and to the advantage and encouraging of the common enemy: So it is,
that after diverse communications had for to make and maintain peace and unity
among the Burgeses, and inhabitaunts of the said City, and to remedy the
aforesaid mischiefs, as much as is possible at this present, his Highness with
the advice of his Excellency, and ye Counsel of the Estates, but not without
the conference, and agreement of the Bourgmasters, Sheriffs, Deputies, and
Deacons of their mysteries, and the adherentes, or confederates of ye said
Sheriffs, Colonels, Deacons, and Captains of the said town, not only in
form and manner of a general counsel called (Breeden-Raedt, or bread
Counsel) but also with the particular members of every College, has
concluded and ratified these Articles following.

1 First his Highness does forget and forgive all that which is or has been done
before the date of these prese^ts, without searching, or apprehending any one
for the same matter: and every one shall likewise forget, and employ himself to
unity, love, and concord, living together without reproach or choking each the
other, without all malice, and suspicion. For by this means the common wealth,
and good estate of this town may be the better furthered, and our common enemy
jointly resisted. 2. Item, this Union shall be published in such order and form
as it was at Vtrecht, reserving the moderation of the Points different
between the Counsel of his Excellency, the Estates, and the said Union, for
to be decided by the general Estates of the Provinces associated and united,
and the rest which are to be associated and united, and the other Towns, in
their first assembly. 3 Item, a religious peace, irreuocable shall be
proclaimed, as by the members of this City was found expedi ent and approved:
reserving the moderation and restraynt of such things, as the articles of this
ordinance does contain. 4 Item, the Romish catholics shall return again to
their possessions, and the use of their churches of our Lady of S. James, and
of Borcht, where they shall freely do their exercise, observing the articles of
this Accord, or Religious peace: and in this consederation shall the secular
Priests, and those that have benefices come into the town again: those only
excepted, which are specified in a certain bill signed these presents, and
exhibited, the which for certain reasonable causes, especially for the more
quietness of the town shall as yet remain without. 5 Provided that the
spiritual persons shall not have any jurisdiction over the temporal: nor also
shall meddle with civil or politic affairs: but as touching the same they
shall be subject to the Magistrate: and further shall pay tole, impostes,
tenthes, and the hundred penny, and bear other Citizens charges, losing their
privileges, immunites, and liberties of their Cells, and Cloisters, and other
such places. 6 And to avoid all vprores and sedition, none shall henceforth be
received to the office of preaching, of what religion soever they be, before
they be first presented to the magistrate, and the nine men, who shall be chosen
for the execution of this ordinance, and before them also take their oath. 7
Item, to shun all inconveniences and offenses, they of the said Romish
Religion shall do their exercises only in their churches, neither shall they be
suffered to keep processions openly. 8 Item, they shall carry their Sacra me^t
without pomp, or other sound and covertly. 9 As touching the order of Mendia^s
(that is to say, the Carmelites, Augustines, and Iacubines, and the Minories)
they shall as yet stay without the City, with the others called Bogardes. They
of S. Michael, and Peterpots shall reenter, and they that will may tarry out
with reasonable maintenance: none shall receive in a ny other without
information first given to him who has the charge of this ordinance. 10 Item,
Cloister woomen shall tarrye in their old possessions, and enjoy their
cloisters, goods, and Religion. 11 Item, all Ecclesiastical persons shall
renounce all aliantes with whom they have had secret dealings or co^ferences,
whether it be among themselves, or with other of other provinces or strangers,
under what coulor, or pretense so ever it be: and shall promise never to
contract with any such again, nor to contrary, or resist this ordinance. 12
And to the assurance of every one (above the oath which is to be taken of each
party) the Magistrates, and other members of the Town, likewise the Colonels,
Deacons, Headmen, Captains, or Officers shall swear before his Highness, and
Excellency to maintain the decrees aforesaid, and to take to their protection
and sauegard, against all oppression, and outrage, the whole body of the City,
and all the inhabitauntes thereof, as well the Catholics, Reformed, and they
of the Confession of Ausburgh. And for the more firm assurance, likewise to
take away all mistrust, and to keep friendship, there shall out of each of the
aforesaid three Religions twenty of the worthiest men be nominated, and sworn
to take serious care, and diligence to observe, and cause to be observed
(as much as in them lies) these Ordinances, and General rest for the City.
13 And for better accomplishing of yt which is said, they of the Reformed
religion shall choose three men out of the Catholics, and the Catholics shall
choose three out of the Reformed who afterward shall together choose like wise
three of the Co^fes sion: which nine persons shall have charge of the execution
and maintenance of these ordinances. And if in case disagreement rise among
them they shall, if they can, pacify the same, if not, the^ to certify the
Magistrates, Colonels, and Deacons of the Companies of the Town, for them to
determine of the same, as the case requi reth, who^ his Highness by these
presents thereto authoriseth.
Yeauen the 11. of June 1579. Signed. MATTHIAS. Guillaume de Nassau.

Proclaimed by Cornelius de Mansdale under Bayliffe of Antwerpe the 12. of
June. 1579.



WHereas by the second Article of this ordinance, it is ordered by his Highness
and Excellency to publish this Union, or peace in the same form as it was done
at Utrecht, reserving the moderation of the points being different, between
the concept of the Estates present, and the aforesaid Union, to be decided by
the Estates general of the united Provinces, and by the rest of the Provinces
and Towns which are to be united, in their first assembly: So it is that we
give to understand to every one, that the Burgmaisters and Sheriffs according
to the resolution of the Members of this City do conform themselves to the
said union had, made, and concluded at Utrecht, on the 23. of January last past.

AT LONDON.

Printed by Richard Day dwelling at Aldersgate. 1579.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


