LIMBO-MASTIX: That is, A Canuise of Limbus Patrum, showing by evident places
of Scripture, invincible reasons, and pregnant testimonies of some ancient
writers, that Christ descended not in soul to Hell, to deliver the Fathers
from thence.

Containing also a brief reply to so much of a Pamphlet lately published,
entitled, An answer to certain objections against the descension etc. as
looks that way, and is personally directed against some writers of our Church.

PHILIP. 3. 15. Let us as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you.

Augustine de Trinitat. lib. 1. c. 3. Siquid erraueris, Deus tibi reuelabit,
sieve per occultas inspirationes and admonitiones, sieve per manifesta eloquia,
sieve per fraternas sermocinationes.

If thou have any where erred, God shall reveal it unto thee, either by secret
inspiration and admonition, or by manifest Scripture, or brotherly conference.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Man. 1604.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE SENATE OF THE LORDS SPIRITVALL AND Temporal, Knights,
Burgesses assembled in the high Court of Parliament, grace mercy and peace
from the Lord Jesus.
RIght Honorable Lords, and ye right Worshipful Knights and Gentlemen, I
feared at the first to present this short treatise to your view, remembering
what sometime I had read in Hierom: Vereor ne officium putetur ambitio, and
videamur sub occasion sermonis, amicitias potentium quaerere. ad Saluinam.
I am afraid least in doing my duty I be thought to be ambitious, and while
I pretend to write, should intend to seek great men's favor: But the Apostles
words did more imbolden me, than the others could draw me back: We cannot but
speak the things, that we have Act. 4. 20.
seen and heard: So neither could I contain my self, hearing of that
honorable resolution, which is in you all to further the cause of the Church
of Christ and true religion, but to rejoice in this common joy, and among other
welwillers of Sion to testify our inward joy, and outward thankfulness to God,
and you all for the same. It is written, that the Israelites gathering
themselves together against the children of iniquity the men of Gibeah,
assembled Hosh. 10 9. Judge. 20. 1.
before the Lord as one man: Such a Christian consent has well appeared in
this sacred assembly to promote Gods glory and his truth. The saying was wont
to be, The greater part has Mayor pars vicit meliorem.
overcome the better: but the contrary is now well seen: and that rule, which
Plinius Cecilius was wont to prescribe unto his school, that he had Sciamus
eum pessime dixisse, cut maxim sit applausum: Eras. praef. in 2. tom. Hieron.
worst spoken, which had the greatest applause, begins now to fail in this
great Consistory, where the best motions, we doubt not, but shall have the
greatest applause. I know not whereunto better to liken this Christian
harmony, than unto the Seraphims, that cried one to another, Holy, holy, holy
Lord of hosts; and to that heavenly song, wherein both the upper rank of Isai.
6. 1.
those four glorious creatures, and the nether order of the four and twenty
Elders consented Revel. 4. 9. 11.
to give glory and honor unto God: that I may say truly in his words; That in
this reverent Hieron. Paulin. tom. 3.
assembly, we have a pattern of the heavenly company.

Now we see performed that worthy saying of his excellent Majesty; A godly
King finds, Meditat in 1. Chron. 15. 2. part.
as his heart wishes, godly estates concurring with him: For as God has
endued his princely heart with a lively feeling and inward touch of true
religion; as he says, It was fit, that he, Necesse erat, vt qui potentior
cunctis fuerat deuotior fieret vniuersis: Ambrosserm. 40.
which was superior in power, should not be inferior in devotion: So your
Honors are (we trust) those godly states, which will be ready to concur
with his Majesty in establishing of godly laws. Among the rest of the
Parliaments in this land, one was called the Edward. 3. anno 29. Anno 1388. sub
Richard. 2.
good Parliament: another, the Parliament that wrought wonders: But we do all
hope that this honorable Session shall rather deserve to be so called. That
Parliament was of all other the most glorious, which in the beginning of
worthy Queen Elizabeth's reign restored religion: how can this be inferior,
which endeavors to establish and make better both Church and religion? One
says well; It is one Aliud est quaerere quod perdideris, aliud possidere, quod
nunquam amiseris: Hier. ad Demetriad.
thing to seek what thou have lost, another to keep that thou have. This
Church may count her self more happy in holding and increasing that she has,
than when she was forced to recover that which she had lost.

Well may we now say unto this noble company, as the Prophet to and of Sion:
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. We cannot Psalm. 87. 3.
but rejoice to hear of your Honors Christian consultation for the propagating
of the Gospel, in planting every where of good pastors, that the people may be
brought from the darkness of their ignorance to the light of knowledge: that
they be no longer children in understanding, 1. Cor. 14. 20, and as babes and
sucklings in religion. Ambrose herein thus pleasantly alludeth upon these
words, Woe to them that give suck: Lot us make haste to weane our Ambros Ergo
paruulos nostros ablactare properemus: ablactato Isaak epulu^ magnum sacit
Abraham; paruulum non ablactatum per temulentiam somnolenta nocte opprimit: in
Lu 6. 21.
little ones: when Isaak was weaned, Abraham made a feast, the child not weaned
was in the night by the drowsy mother ouerlaid. Your Honors then do right well
to provide good nurses, to weane the people from their ignorance, that they be
no longer ouerlaid with drowsy and negligent pastors: and that such be not
excluded from nursing, which have store of milk in the breasts, and seek in
peace and a good conscience to nourish the people of God.

But because the nurse cannot give milk that is not first fed her self; most
prudent and christian is that other care to provide for the maintenance of good
pastors: which as we hope will be by our Reverent Fathers in their grave
Synod devised, so we trust it shall by your Honorable favors be furthered:
for the Apostle says, The mouth of the ox is not to be musled. And Origene
well agrees; Nisi dederit oleum populus extinguetur lucerna in templo: If the
people minister not oil, the lamp goes out in the temple. Now among other
grave matters of deliberation, if it were not too great boldness, give me leave
I beseech you to interpose my petition: Saint Paul says in a case not much
unlike: Set up them 1. Cor. 6. 4.
which are least esteemed in the Church: and I trust you will not despise my
simple motion, even the least of the servants of Christ. Valerius says well to
this point: We know the noise of geese is contemned, according to the saying, a
goose Reprobata est fatui vox anseris tanquam anser inter olores, ea tamen
docuit senatores vrbem seruare ab incendio. Valor. ad Ruffin.
among Swannes; yet by the chattring of geese the city of Rome was saved from
burning. May it therefore please you to hear a fool speak unto wise men: That
whereas men have of late days taken unto themselves great liberty, in
Sermons, Lectures, writings, to set abroach strange and uncouth doctrines,
exorbitant from the current doctrine among Protestants, it might please this
honorable Court, that one uniformity of doctrine may be taught and held; and
seeing there are many unsound doctrines, which, because they are omitted, are
not opposite to the articles of religion established, that either it might seem
pleasing to his Majesty and you, to have those articles augmented, explaned
and enlarged, or else, that it be lawful for none to defend or maintain those
doctrines, wherein the professors of the Gospel in England consent with other
reformed Churches, and dissent from that of Rome, and which are both by our
domestical, and foreign writers among the Protestants, maintained against the
common adversary. And further, that concerning al such points, no inuectiues
be used of one against another in preaching or writing: that, as the Apostle
says, we proceed all by one rule, that we Philip. 3. 16. Uera illa
necessitudo, quam non vtilitas rei familiaris, no^ praesentia tantum corporum
non subdlo a adulatio, sed Dei amor, and diuinarum studia scripturarum
conciliant. Hier. Paulin. tom. 4.
may mind one thing: And this shall be true friendship and concord indeed
(as he well says) which not worldly profit, or bodily presence, or cunning
flattery, but the fear of God, and the love of the Scriptures does knit
together. Pardon my boldness Honorable Patrons, who out of the simplicity of
my desire to the peace of the Church, have presumed thus to move. I know you
can consider, that champions many times are stronger than their Athletae suis
incitatoribus fortiores sunt, and tamen neonet debilior, vt pugnet ille qui
fortior est. Hieron. ad Julian.
abettors, and the weaker does stir him up to fight that is stronger; as
Hierom well says. I am but a weak man, that have moved this, God shall make
your Honors strong to perform this and more for the good of his Church, and
glory of his name; to whom be praise for ever.

THE PREFACE TO THE TREATISE FOLLOWING.
THree special places are alleged by Bellarmine to prove the descent of
Christ into hell, where he imagines the souls of the godly to have been
before his coming: for this is his position; That the souls before Christ's
death were not Animas ante Christi mortem non fuisse in coelo, and proinde
Christum, qui ad locum animarum descendit, in infernum subterraneum
descendisse. lib. 4 de Christ. anim. cap. 9.
in heaven, but in hell under the earth, and therefore Christ, which descended
to the place of souls, went down to hell under the earth, These places are;
the first, Act. 2. 27. Thou will not leave my soul in hell; the second, 1.
Pet. 3. 19. 20, In the which spirit he went and preached to the spirits in
prison; the third, Ephesians. 4. 9. He that ascended, is he that descended first
into the lower parts of the earth. These places by Bellarmine first urged to
prove the local descent of Christ's soul into hell, to deliver and set at
liberty the Patriarks, have been seconded of late in a certain Pamphlet much
of that argument: In the which though the author do pretend only to revive
the opinion of Christ's souledescent into hell, which is the private opinion of
some learned men of our Church, yet in diverse places of the book he rubbeth
upon Limbus Patrum: as may be evident to the reader in these three: first, page
9. S. Peter mentions sorrows which were loosed at Christ's resurrection,
which could not be in the The author of (...) to be a (...).
sepulcher, where his body lay dead and senseless: Here he denies that
these sorrows, which Christ loosed, are to be referred to the death of his
body: but page 12. he directly by his death understands hell. Hence it
follows, that if Christ loosed the sorrows of hell (and I think he is not
so absurd to think, that he loosed them for himself, who was never in the
sorrows of hell after his death) then it will follow that he loosed them for
others, and for whom else, but for them which were there detained? The second
place is, page 36, where he strives mightily, that the place in S. Peter must
not be read; the spirits which are in prison, but which were: whereupon it
follows, that they were in hell, but are not, to whom Christ preached; or else
he strives about words: his opinion then seems to be this, that some souls
were in hell at Christ's coming thither, which now are not. The third place,
which I note, is page 52, where he has these words: In that Christ personally
descended into hell, it does more amplify and set forth his goodness toward
mankind, than his only coming down into the world: for, so much as the more
vile and loathsome the dungeon is, the greater is the love of that Prince, who
to enfranchise and set at liberty his captives there enthralled, disdaineth
not to enter into it in his own person. Now, who else can be imagined to be
set at liberty in hell, but the Fathers in Limbo Patrum? For out of the
nethermost hell of the damned, of each side it is confessed none can be
delivered.

Perceiving then, how cunningly the Answerer does seek to wind in an old
Popish error, setting his face one way, and going another: and as Hierom says
out of Plautus, To hold a stone in one hand, and Juxta Plautinam sententia^,
altera manu lapidem tenere, panem offerre altera. Hierom. Russin.
reach bread with the other: I thought good to uncase this masking Mummer, and
to pull off his vizard: not preiudicing hereby by this speedy reply, the more
mature and deliberate answer of those learned men that are by him taxed.

But before I enter into any particular defense, four things I would premonish
this secret Censor of: first, that if he be a professor of the Gospel of
Christ, what came in his mind to join with the common adversary, in
disgracing the defense of the Gospel by one undertaken in his Synopsis: may I
not say unto him with the Prophet, Would thou help the wicked, and love
them that hate the Lord? I may very fitly apply against him that saying of
Hierom; You that profess your self a Qui Christianum te dicis, Gentilium arma
depone, aut si tu de numero hostium es, often de te libere aduersarium, vt
Ethnicorum suscipias vulnera.
[Protestant] lay aside the weapons of [Papists] or uncase your self, that we
may know you to be an adversary, that you may receive the wounds of the
[Papists].

Secondly, it had bin much more commendable, if the Answerer had bent his force
against the common adversary. There are lately diverse Popish books come over,
which might have set him on work: what profit can it be to him, the field
being pitched against the Papists, to pick quarrels with his fellow soldiers?
He might have thought of Abraham's reason; Let there be no strife between thee
and me, for we are brethren. But this is no strange thing, for a man even
among his brethren and companions often to find an adversary: as Origin well
notes upon these words of our Savior, Mat. 26. 23. He that dippeth his hand
with me in the dish shall betray me: This is the use of many, that they lie
Haec est consuetudo hominum multorum, vt post salem and panem insidientur
hominibus: etiam cum quibus ad eandem me^sam corporis Christi, and ad e^ndem
potum sanguinis simal fuerunt. Tract. 35 in Matthew.
in wait for those, with whom they have eaten bread and salt; yea with whom
they have bin together at the same table of the body and blood of Christ.

Thirdly, it is against the rule of charity, to bring men's private acts into
public view, and to proclaim openly what is written secretly. Our blessed
Saviors rule is, If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone, Matthew. 18. 15. In my judgment then the
Replier had small cause to confute in print, a private letter written to a
Gentleman: It had bin a better course privately to have conferred with him,
than publicly to have censured him. Ecclesiasticus says; If thou (...)
have heard a word let it die with thee, for it will not burst thee. Hieroms
counsel here had bin good; Other matters which you desire to Quae de caetero
velis, praesens percontator praesentem, vt si quid forte nescimus. sine test,
sine iudice, in fida aure moriatur. De vest. Sacerd.
know, let us confer of together in presence, that if we be ignorant of any
thing, where is neither witness, nor judge, it may die in a faithful ear.

Fourthly, Christian policy would have required, that seeing we all hold the
foundation, The article of Christ's descension, we should not raise any
contention, or move questions about the manner, nor break the peace of the
Church, seeing there are most reverend learned men of both opinions. But the
Apostles resolution should stay us: Let us as many as be perfect be thus
minded, and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal it unto you, Philip.
2. 15. They which hold not the local descent of Christ's soul to hell, should
not condemn the other as Popish or superstitious men, that are so persuaded:
They which affirm it, ought not account them as enemies or adversaries of the
truth that dissent from them therein; they both holding the foundation. What
intemperate dealing then is this, for the Answerer in his Preface so
uncharitably to charge his brethren; irreligiously and unchristianly to call
the maine Preface to the Christian reader.
grounds and principles of our faith into question? saying further, to plant by
writing, or water by speaking, the cursed roots thereof; to prepare a way to
heathenish Paganism; terming them further, profane Anaxagorists, Masters of
error, adversaries of the truth? This is an hard course thus to censure men of
the same profession, because they concur not with him in the interpretation
of some places of Scripture. With how much greater moderation did the Reverend
Fathers of this Church, set down this article of Christ's descension, in their
Synod held anno 1562. that whereas the article was thus framed before, in the
Synod held anno 1552 in King Edwards reign: As Christ died for us and was
buried, so it is to be believed that he descended into hell: for his body lay
in the grave until the Resurrection: his spirit being sent forth from him, was
with the spirits which were detained in prison, or in hell, and preached unto
them, as testifies that place of Peter. The Reverend Fathers qualified it
thus: As Christ died for us and was buried, so also it is to be believed that
he went down to hell. Thinking it sufficient that we agreed in the substance of
the article of Christ's descension, though all consented not in the manner. And
I could wish that we might there hold us, and that men content themselves with
their private opinions, and seek not one to grieve another with their mutual
inuectiues either in speaking or writing. Augustine says well to Hierome: I am
N^^ ^^m stulius sum vt diuersitate explanationum in arum, melaedi putem, quia
nec tu laederis, si contraria nus senserimus.
not so unwise to think my self hurt by your explanations, because neither are
you prejudiced if we hold or expound otherwise.

As for my part I will not deal of purpose with this question, as it is
controuersed among our selves, nor revive any domestical strife, but only
justify those places, which are urged by some of our writers against the
Popish opinion of Christ's descending to Limbus Patrum, and are now by the
Answerer either by name, or by way of consequence excepted against. Neither
will I take upon me to defend others, whom he personally touches, they are
sufficient to speak for themselves: And I wish that from henceforth these
homebred quarrels may cease: and that one bond of faith, in the diversity of
some private opinions, may contain and keep us in peace: that same, vnum
fidei lintheum, quod vidit Petrus, quatuor Euangelijs alligatum: That sheet of
faith, which Peter saw, tied with the four Gospels in the corners: as Origin
applies it, Hom. 2. in Genes. Now I come to the particular examination of the
places.

CHRIST DESCENDED NOT in soul to Hell to deliver the souls of the Patriarchs.
The first place examined, Act. 2. 27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

The objections answered.
1. Ob. FIrst, where as our answer is, that the word ((...)) nephesh, which
the Septuagint translate (...), here signifies not the soul, but rather the
life, which is an effect of the soul: and the other word (...) sheol,
translated by the Synops. p. 1050.
Septuagint (...), betokens in this place the grave rather than hell: first
Bellarm. says, that these words properly Bellarm. c. 32. loc. 4.
do not signify any thing but the soul, and hell: and further it is added by
the Answerer; that the words of holy writ are always to be taken and
understood according to their native and proper signification, but only when
there follows some manifest absurdity. Ans. p. 6.

Ans. First, these words, as they do properly sometimes signify the soul and
hell, so also properly they do betoken the life, and the grave. First (
nephesh*) is so taken for the life: Genes. 37. 22. Let us not smite his life,
shed not blood: the word is naphesh, which the Septuagint translate (...):
Bellarmine says it signifies here Pro ipsa carne proprie accipitur. Bellar.
ibid.
the flesh: and yet a little before, not well remembering himself, he finds
great fault with Beza for translating of it, cadauer, a dead body. Again,
Exodus 22. 23. If death follow, he shall give soul for soul, that is, life
for life: where the same words both in the Hebrew and Greek are used in their
proper sense, and must needs signify life. But the Answerer here does ease us
of further labor, and ingenuously confesses, that the soul is taken for life
in diverse places of the Psalms, because it is the spring of life, page 7.

So like wise the other word (sheol) is sometime properly taken for the grave:
as Genesis 37. 35. I will descend H. (...)
mourning to my son into the grave or hell. Bellarmine says, the grave
cannot be here understood: and yet their own marginall note says, it does not
here signify Sept. (...). Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 10. Annot. marginal. in Genesis
37. 35.
the place of punishment. And he might have compared another place: Genesis 42.
38. Ye shall bring my gray head with sorrow to the grave (or hell): and 2.
King. 2. 6. Let not his hoare head go down to the grave (or hell) in peace. I
think the gray hairs lie with the body in the grave, they go not to hell.
The Answerer foreseeing this, confesses that the word is here to be translated
grave, and not hell; and in another place Psalm. 6. 4, 5. page 10. Then it
appears, by his own confession, that the word properly does signify the
grave. And indeed, if we consider the root from whence sheol is derived,
which signifies to crave or desire, this (...) to covet or desire.
word will more properly agree to the grave than to hell: for that is more
craving and insatiable, because more go to the grave, both good and bad, than
to hell, the place appointed for the wicked only: and therefore the Wise man
names sheol, the grave, as Arias and Tremellius well translate, to be one of
those four things that cannot be satisfied. Prou. 30. 16.

2. But if it were admitted, that these words properly could not be so taken
here for the life and the grave, as yet is proved before, and confessed by the
Answerer: yet in regard of the manifold inconveniences, that would ensue upon
the other sense, a figurative speech should be admitted. First, one
inconvenience The inconveniences which follow in understanding S. Peter to
speak of hell, Act. 2. 27.
is the contradiction of Scripture; because elsewhere Christ says, This day
shall thou be with me in paradise, Luke 23. 43. which must be understood of
Christ's soul, as shall be showed afterward. Secondly, seeing Christ commended
his soul into the hands of his father, it would follow, that descending into
hell, and to be among the infernal and damned spirits, should be a commending
of the spirit to God. Thirdly, this hell that Christ went to, he loosed the
sorrows of, Act. 2. 24, which had seized upon him, but could not hold and
detain him: but hell sorrows he never felt in that place of torment. Upon
these and other inconvenient and absurd consequents, we should be forced to
find out a figure in the use of these words, if their proper signification did
not bear that sense.

3. The inconvenience that he finds out, that taking Christ's soul here for
his whole person, it would follow that his body and soul should be in hell
together, page 6, they need not to fear that take the soul for the whole
person; for the one part only, namely the body is meant, that lies in the
grave, though the whole be named: as our Savior says, Our friend Lazarus
sleeps, Ioh. 11. 11, and yet his body only was asleep. But whereas I
rather take the other sense, that the soul here signifies life; this
absurdity is further off then before: for this phrase is usual with the
Prophet, to take his soul for the life; as Psalm. 7. 2. Lest he devour my
soul like a lion. Verse. 5. Let the enemy persecute my soul and take it, let
him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust.
Likewise Psalm. 88. 3. My soul is filled with evils, and my life draws near
to the grave.

Object. 2. First, the soul joined with the body may be taken (...), for the
whole man living, but being separate from the body, as in this place it is, it
cannot rightly be so taken. Secondly, David in other places speaks personally
of himself, here he sings prophetically of Christ only. Thirdly, there of
himself living, here of Christ dead and buried; there of his own soul joined
with the body, here of the soul of Christ separated from the body. Ans. page
7.

Ans. 1. We rather affirm that the soul is taken here (...) for the life, the
cause for the effect, than by a Synecdoche the part for the whole. And that the
soul is taken for the life separated from the body, is evident by these
places before alleged: Exodus 21. 23. The soul taken for the life.
He shall give soul for soul, that is, life for life: his life shall be taken
from him. So Numb. 23. 10. Let my soul die the death of the righteous. Here
the soul separated from the body is taken for the life: for the soul dies
not, nor yet the life cease not, as long as the soul is in the body.

2. Though David does prophecy of Christ, yet so, as he speaks in his own
person, as a type of Christ: so, that which historically was to be performed
in Christ, was typically true of David, as shall be even now showed more at
large.

3. David in this place, though specially prophesying of the death and
resurrection of Christ, yet also shows his own hope that he had, when his
flesh should rest in the grave, which he groundeth upon the power and virtue of
Christ's resurrection: neither does David, where he uses this phrase, speak
only of the soul joined with the body, but separated also from (...).
Septuagint.
it: as Psalm. 89. 48. What man lives and shall not see death; shall he deliver
his soul from the hand of the grave? Here this word nephesh, (...), soul,
even separated from the body lying in the grave, is taken for the life thereof.

Object. 3. First, the word sheol, is ordinarily taken for the infernal place
of souls; for the grave seldom or never: Bellarm. lib. 4. de anim. Christ. c.
10. Secondly, to the same purpose the Answerer alleges two places: Psalm. 9.
17. and Psalm. 31. 17. where sheol is taken for hell. Pro sepulchro raro
velnunquam.
Thirdly, he tells us further, howsoever some curious Linguists may wrangle
with the word sheol in the Old Testament, yet most certain it is, that the
Greek word (...), by the which S. Luke the Evangelist expresses it, can not
in the New Testament properly and truly be otherwise taken, than for the place
of the damned. page 12.

Ans. 1. Bellarmine in saying, that sheol is seldom or never taken for the
grave, does not show himself answerable to the opinion he would have conceived
of his great learning: for beside these places already cited; Genes. 37. 35.
Genes. 42. 38. 2. King. 2. 6. Psalm. 6. 4, 5. Prou. 30. 16. Psalm. 89. 48, where
sheol cannot be otherwise taken than for the grave: whosoever list to make
search, shall find this word in the Old Testament oftener taken for the grave,
than for hell.

2. The Answerer has made but bad choice of his two places: in both which the
best Interpreters simply of this age, Pagnin, and Arias Montanus, and
Tremellius do translate sheol for the grave: for thus they read; Psalm. 9.
17. The wicked shall be turned into the Of the diverse acceptions of sheol in
the Scriptures.
grave: Psalm. 31. 17. Let the wicked be put to silence in the grave: for in
hell, where there is weeping and gnashing of tecth, there is no great silence.
But to yield him these places: what has he gained? he fights but with his
own shadow: none that I know denies, but that sheol is sometime taken for
hell. Or if he will be thought to say somewhat; what kind of reasoning is
this, sheol in two or three places is taken for hell, Ergo in all other places
it is so taken?

3. And are they wranglers, that find sheol taken in the Old Testament for the
grave? See what a presumptuous censure he gives of all the learned
Interpreters both old and new: and he makes himself a wrangler also, who
finds fault with his Antagonist for reading hell, and not the grave, in these
two places Genes. 37. 35, and Psalm. 6. 5. But Hades is not taken in the new, as
Sheol in the old Testament. This word (...), in this text, being cited out of
the old Testament, must be understood according to the phrase of the old
Testament: otherwise who knows not, but that some words borrowed out of the
old Testament, are in the new used in another sense, than in the old? as the
word gehenna is taken in the new to signify hell, Mat. 5. 22. which in the old
is called the valley of the son of Hinnon, Iere. 7. 31. where they tormented
their sons, when they offered them up in sacrifice to their Idols: whence
they applied the name to signify the place of torment for the wicked.

And whereas he would prove, that (...) here signifies hell, because the
Apostle calls it death, Act. 2. 24, he has made a good argument against
himself: for if he make death and hell all one, then he will fasten upon
Christ the death of hell, which is the second death. Neither will it help him,
that the Syrian translator retains the same Hebrew word sheol: for we must
follow the authentike origin all, which is the Greek: and yet the Syrian
Interpreter reads in the same place, sepulchrum, which I think understood
the Tremell. and Iunius, Act. 2. 24.
Syrian tongue somewhat better than this our new Rabbin.

Is not this also a proper argument, S. Luke in another place, Luke 8. 31,
takes the word abyssus for hell, Ergo, (...) in this place signifies hell? He
that finds such fault with the private writer for loose conclusions, should
have remembered himself to have made better arguments.

Object, 4. In this place, the soul is opposed to the flesh, therefore two
distinct parts must be understood: Bellarm. ibid. To the same purpose the
answerer, when the Scripture divides the kinds, as the soul and the body, it
always notifieth unto us two distinct things. But here, by the holy one, the
flesh of Christ is understood, as S. Peter expounds Act. 2. 31. and the
Syrian does expressly call it body. page 14.

Ans. 1. Here we have another schollerlike argument: he would prove idem per
idem, the same thing by it self: the Scripture here divides the kinds of
soul and body: Ergo, it speaks of two distinct things of the soul and the
body.

2. Indeed as you translate, the soul and the flesh must needs signify the
soul and the flesh: but the word nephesh does not always signify the soul
but the life, when it is named with the flesh: as Genes. 9. 5. the flesh with
the nephesh, the life thereof, shall ye not eat: Leuit. 17. 14. the nephesh,
the life of the flesh, is the blood: and so is soul to be taken in this place
for the life.

3. The Syrian translator reads thus: verse. 31. he saw before and spoke of
the resurrection of Christ, that he was not left in the grave, nor his body
saw corruption. If ye will stand to your own text, you are gone: for here no
mention is made neither of his soul, nor of hell. The Latin text also reads,
for his soul, he, was not left in grave: wherefore these Interpreters by soul
understand himself, his person.

4. As the holy one, being the whole consisting of body and soul, is yet
taken for a part, that is the flesh; so by the same figure, why may not the
soul being but a part, be taken for his whole person?

Object. 5. Now that they are two distinct several clauses, is proved by the
two negative disjunctive particles, not and neither carefully retained: as may
(...)
appear Psalm. 16. 5. and 44. 19. etc. Ans. p. 13.

Ans. 1. His argument is weak, these words not and neither, in some places do
signify two distinct things, therefore in all. In the 89. Psalm verse. 22. the
Prophet says, the enemy shall not oppress him, nor the wicked hurt him: here
these two negatiues, lo, lo, are used, and yet there is no great difference in
these two clauses. So likewise Psalm. 31. 1. Mine heart is not exalted, nor mine
eyes lifted up. These negatiues iterated, show no great diversity of matter.

2. But be it admitted that these particles do infer a distinction in the
sentences, does it follow, These are two diverse clauses, Ergo, one must be
referred to the soul, the other to the body?

3. Neither do we say, that these words contain a superfluous repetition of
the same thing: for the latter sentence expounds the former: that although
the life of Christ seemed to be raked up in the grave, yet his life should not
so leave him, but that his body being preserved from corruption, should
presently be raised up again: the second clause therefore shows, how and in
what manner, Christ's life and person was not forsaken, in that his body by the
power of God was defended from corruption. And such are the objections, as we
have heard, against the exposition of the first place: our arguments follow for
the confirmation thereof.

REASONS APPROVING THE FORmer exposition: that this place serves not to prove
the descension of Christ in soul to Limbus Patrum.
GENERAL REASONS CONCERning the question it self.
ARgum. 1. First I urge that saying of Augustine: In ijs quae aperte in
scripturis posita sunt, inueniuntur Lib. 3. de doctrine. Christian. cap 9.
ea omnia, quae continent fidem, moresque viuendi: All those things which
contain faith and good manners, are found in those places which are plainly
set forth in Scripture. But this article, that Christ descended in soul to
deliver the Patriarks, is not found set forth in any plain and evident place
of scripture, but such as are obscure, and doubtfully expounded, both of
Protestants and Papists: Ergo, it is no article of faith so to believe.

Argum. 2. S. Luke, and so likewise the other Evangelists, did write of all
things that Christ both did and taught till his ascension, Act. 1. 1: But they
write nothing of Christ's descension in soul to hell, to set at liberty the
souls of the godly: Ergo, it may be doubted whether it were any of Christ's
works. And therefore as Master Beza well notes: I say that Dico igitur
nu^uquam praetermissuros fuisse Euangelistas istiusmodi historiam descensus
animae Christi ad inferos. Bez. annot in Act. c. 2. ver. 27.

Diximus, quod in Euangelio non legimus, ibi tamen quaeramus: nam si ibi non
inuenimus, vbi inueniemus: ego vobis fingere potero, and subito ero non certus
dispensator sed ineptus fabulator. August, in Psalm 92.


the Evangelists would not have passed over this history of the descent of
Christ's soul into hell. Then as Augustine says in another matter: I have told
you, that we have not read it in the Gospel, but let us seek it there, for
if we find it not there, where shall we find it? I may imagine unto you, but
then I shall not be a sure dispenser, but a foolish fabler. In like sort,
whence should we receive an histore of any of Christ's acts, but from the
Evangelists, that writ the story of Christ's life and death?

Argum. 3. The rule of faith out of the word of God is certain: Prou. 30. 6.
Put nothing to his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Thus was it concluded by the Fathers in the Council of Ferraria, sess. 10. It
is evident that it is not lawful by Patet, neutiquam licuisse ab Apostolorum
symbelo quicquam dimouere.
any means to depart a jot from the symbol of the Apostles. But this article
of Christ's descension was not of ancient time in the Apostles Creed.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that neither Irenaeus, nor Origin, or
Tertullian, in the exposition of Jren. lib. 1. c. 2. Orig. lib. de Princip.
Tertull. cont. Prax. Bellar. de Christi. anim. lib. 4. cap. 6.
the Creed, make mention of Christ's descension, but only of his sepulture.
Ruffinus says, that neither in the Roman symbol, nor in the East Churches it
is not added, He descended into hell. The Nicen Creed has it not, nor the
Constantinopolitane, the Sirmian, nor that of Carthage, as elsewhere is showed,
that it is omitted in Synops. p. 1034
ten several ancient Creedes. Therefore although we do with reverence
receive and acknowledge this The descent to Limbus no anciet article of the
faith.
article of Christ's descension, being expounded according to the Scriptures and
analogy of faith: yet it is evident that the ancient Church did not hold any
such descension of Christ's soul to Limbus Patram, as an article of the faith.
And therefore concerning this matter we may say with Leo: What reason have
Quomodo noua inducuntur, quae nunquam nostri sensere maiores. Leo epist. 97. c.
3.
they to bring in new things, that our elders never knew?

Argum. 4. That which Christ performed upon the cross, he needed not afterward
to go down to hell to perform: but he triumphed over death hell and the
devil upon the cross, and there wrought our deliverance: Ergo, he needed not
for these causes descend to hell. The assumption, or second part is proved by
the Scripture: Coloss. 2. 14. 15. He has blotted out the handwriting of
ordinances, which was against us, and fastened them to the cross, etc. and
having spoiled principalities and powers, has made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in the same. So reads and expounds Origin this place,
of Christ's triumph upon the cross: upon these words, Numb. 24. 9. He couched
as a young lion: He lay down like a lion, when hanging Requieuit vt leo, cum
in cruce positus, principatus and potestates exuit, and triumphauit eas cum
ligno crucis. Hom. 17. in. Numer.
upon the cross he put down principalities and powers, and triumphed over
them in the tree of his cross. Augustine also shows, that our deliverance
was fully wrought upon the cross, and the devil vanquished: sermon. 174.
Trophaeo suo diabolus victus est; seducendo primum hominem occidit, occidendo
nouissimum primum de laqueis perdidit: exultauit diabolus, quando mortuus est
Christus, and ipse morte Christi victus est: tanquam in muscipula escam
accepit; muscipula diaboli crux Domini; esca qua caperetur mors Domini: The
devil was overcome by his own device: he by seducing slew the first Adam; by
slaying the last Adam the first escaped out of the snare: the devil rejoiced
when Christ was dead, but by his death he was overcome: he took his bait as in
a trap: the cross was the trap, the bait that caught the devil was our Lords
death. Durand a Popish champion urges this very argument against Christ's
descension, because in the very instant of Christ's death the souls of the
faithful were delivered and made happy: and therefore Christ needed not to
descend for any such cause. Bellarmine is driven here to this shift: to grant,
that although the presence of Christ's Licet non esset necessaria praesentia
animae Christi, tamen congruum esse videbatur vt illa esset praesens. Bellarm.
lib. 4. de Christi. anim. c. 15.
soul were not necessary in hell, yet it was of congruitie it should be there
present. If the presence of Christ's soul in hell be not of necessity, how
have they all this while urged it as an article of the faith? for every article
of the faith is to be held as necessary.

Argum. 5. As the Saints dying commend their spirits unto God, so did Christ
commend his spirit, Luke 23. 46. using the Prophet David's words Psalm. 31. 4. he
keeps also his sense: but the souls of the faithful commended into Gods
hands, do presently go to heaven, as Stephen said: Lord Jesus receive my
spirit, Act. 7. 59. Can this be called a commending of the spirit into the
hands of God, to go down to hell, and to remain among the infernal spirits?
Again: if they that die in the Lord do after death rest from their labors,
Revel. 13. 14. much more the Lord himself rested from his labors after his
death: but if he had hell to conquer and the Patriarks to deliver after his
death, a great part of his labor remained: what then is become of that
consummatum est, all was finished upon the cross, Ioh. 19. 30. that is,
whatsoever appertained to Christ's sufferings, travail and labor, was now
accomplished: his glory victory and triumph only remained. Augustine
hereunto gives some light, thus applying these words of Christ, My soul is
heavy unto death: Tristis vsque ad mortem, propter affectum susceptae carnis,
non post mortem, cum beatitudinem spondet societas Deitatis: non initium
maeroris mors ista, sed finis. Cont. Felician. c. 15. Heavy unto death,
because of the affection and infirmity of the flesh, not after death, when
blessedness is promised by the society of the Godhead: this death is not the
beginning of sorrow and travail, but the end.

Argum. 6. Christ's soul went immediately unto heaven after the departure from
his body: Ergo, it did not descend to hell.

The first part is proved by the words of our Savior, Luke 23. 43. uttered to
the convicted thief: This day shall thou be with me in paradise: which words
Christ's words to the thief must be understood of the presence of his soul in
Paradise.
must be understood of the presence of Christ in heaven, not in respect of his
Godhead only, but of his whole person, as he was the Mediator. And that he
directly speaks of the presence of his soul in paradize, it may evidently
appear by these reasons.

1. Christ answers the thief according to his request: but he desires to be
remembered, when he as the Messiah should enter into his kingdom: Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: but Christ as God was never
out of his kingdom.

2. The phrase of speech gives this sense: Christ is said to be with us, in
respect of his Godhead: Mat. 28. 20. I am with you to the end of the world: but
we are said to be with him, as our Messiah: as S. Paul says, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23. Bernard notes this distinction
well: Christ us nobiscum est, etc. Bernard. ser. 16 in Psalm. 91.
Christ is with us, at all times to the end of the world: but when shall we be
with him? When we shall be taken up and meet Christ in the air.

3. That kingdom, whereof Christ promises to make the thief partaker, is not
that kingdom which belongs to him as God (for that is not co^municable to
any creature) but which is due to him as the Messiah. The thief reigned the
same day with Christ in Paradise, as Bernard says: That which was promised,
was done; the same day he suffered together with Christ, he Ipso die quo
compassit^ and corregnauit. in sol^nnit. sanctor. c. 5.
also reigned together with him. Therefore it is an erroneous speech of the
answerer: the performance of that promised presence with him in paradise, was
nothing else but the blisfull fruition of his Godhead, page 19: contrary to the
Apostle, whom never man saw, neither can see, 1. Tim. 6. 16. The Godhead is
incomprehensible; how then can there be a full fruition, whereof there can be
no comprehension?

4. I urge Augustines reason: who propounding this objection; Deitatis hanc,
non animae Christi, vocem credimus: We think that Christ spoke thus to the
thief, of his Godhead, not of his soul: makes this answer: Anima est, cui
hoc promisit, etc. But Christ promised this to the soul of the thief. Then he
thus infers: If the soul of the thief strait after the death of body Si
mortuo corpore ad paradisum anima mox vocatur, quenquamne adhuc tam impium
credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima saluatoris nostri triduo illo
corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae mancipetur. Contr. Felician. Arrian.
lib. cap. 15.
was called into paradise, shall we think any to be so impious that dare
say, that the soul of our Savior was three days kept in hell by his bodily
death? He reasons from the less to the greater, that if the thieves soul
went presently to Paradise, much more Christ's. For whereas our Savior says;
Where I am, there shall my servant be, Ioh. 12. 26. it must follow, that either
the soul of the thief must be in hell with Christ's, or that Christ's soul was
in paradise with the thieves: for it were a dishonor, for the servant to
prevent the Master: The servant is not greater than his Master, Ioh. 13. 16.
but now should the servant have the preeminence, if his soul should go to
paradize, and his Masters to hell.

5. But we are told, that these words, Ioh. 17. 24. Father I will that they
which thou have given me be with me, where I am: which words, with me, where I
am, cannot otherwise be understood than of his Godhead, do fully applicate
Christ's saying to the thief. Answ. p. 20.

Ans. 1. If this venturous expositor had considered, what went before and after
these words, with me, where I am, he would not have vented forth such an
uncertain gloss: for first our Savior says, I will, that they which thou
have given me be with me: were they given unto him as God? I think not, for
who can give unto God? then they were given unto him as the Messiah: he
therefore prays, they may be with him, as the Messiah.

2. It follows immediately, that they may behold my glory, which thou have
given me: does he not speak here also of that glory, which was given him as
the Messiah, for the which he prays verse. 5. and now glorify me, etc? I
trust, as he is God, he prays not for glory to be given him: for he that
prays, is inferior in that he prays: But Christ as he is God is not
inferior to his Father. Does he then pray as God, that they may be with him?
take heed of Arianisme, if you be too rash in this point: he prays then as
the Messiah.

3. If Christ* saying where I am, speak of his Godhead, his request was even
then fulfilled: for his Apostles were with him then present as God: for his
Godhead fills heaven and earth: But his request was, not then, but in his
kingdom of glory fulfilled: therefore he speaks not of his Godhead.

4. Though our Savior speak in the present tence, where I am; that is so
spoken, in respect of the assurance and certainty of his kingdom purchased
for his: which was as sure, as if already he were in it: and so does our
Savior with like certainty pronounce of those which believe in him, that they
have everlasting life, and are passed from death to life. Ioh. 5. 24.

5. Thus Origin expounds this place of the glory due unto our Lord as the
Christ and Messiah: which he imparteth to his faithful servants: Like Sicut
egregij bellatores non cum caeteris militibus in diuisione spoliorum ducuntur
ad sortem, sed optima quaeque and praecipua eis decernuntur: si^ Christus, quos
s^it abundantius laborasse, praecipuos and vt it a dicam, sibi similes decernit
honores: quales discipulis suis confer videtur; Pater volo vt vbi ego sum,
illi sint mecu^. Hom. 21. Numer.
as notable warriers do not with other ordinary soldiers divide the spoil,
but they have the best part: so Christ, to those that have labored more
abundantly decrees the chiefest honors, and like to his own: such as he
conferred upon his Disciples; Father I will, that where I am, they be with me.
These honors like unto Christ's, are not the honors due to his Godhead, which
no creature is capable of, but such which he received as Messiah.

6. But we are further certified: that Augustine epistol. 57. thus expounds
these words of our Savior spoken to the thief of his Godhead. Ans. p. 20.

Ans. 1. I will set Augustine against Augustine: whose judgment in his
writings against the adversaries of the faith, is to be preferred before his
private epistles sent to his friends: for these were indicted upon the sudden,
the other upon more mature deliberation; these were directed to friends, that
would take every thing in the better part, those intended against enemies,
that were ready to catch any advantage. But Augustine in his book written
against Felicianus the Arrian, cited before, expounds Christ's words vttred to
the thief upon the cross, of the soul.

2. And why may we not as well expound Christ's descending into hell with
Ambrose of the presence of his divine power, as with Augustine his ascending up
to heaven? Ambrose says; Abyssum opinione si penetres, Ambros. lib. 2. in Luc.
cap. 1. Ambrose refers Christ's descension to his divine nature.
illic quoque videbis Iesum operari: If you in thought will search into the
deep, you shall see Jesus also work there. But he has yet a more evident
testimony, writing upon these words, Psalm. 139. 15. Substantia mea in
inferioribus terrae: My substance was in the lower parts of the earth. Christ
to deliver the souls of the dead, Christus vt defunctorum animas liberaret etc
operatus est in inferno: and tamen quid obstat quo minus illam diuinam
intelligas substantiam, cum Deus vbique sit, etc. dewrought in hell: and what
lets, but we may understand his divine substance, seeing God is every
where? as it is said, If I ascend to heaven, thou art there; if I descend nique
ad substa^tiam diuinam deriuandum esse intellectum, sequentibus declarauit:
inoperatum meum, (...), i. inoperatum atque increatum verbum. lib. 3. de fide
c. 7.
to hell, etc. and that the divine substance is here understood, the words
following declare, Thine eyes saw mine unwrought substance, that is, the unmade
and uncreated word.

3. Ambrose thinks also, that Christ was present with the thief in soul the
same day: Abyssus ergo dixit non est in me, sed coelum non dixerat non est in
me, quem receperat resurgentem; paradisus non dixit non est in me, quem regnare
in se absoluto quoque latrone cognouerat, sicut ipse Dominus dixit, Hodie mecum
eris in paradiso: The deep said not, he is in me, but heaven said not he is
not in me, whom it received rising again; Ambros exhor. ad virgins.
Paradise said not, he is not in me, whom it knew to reign there, the thief
being also delivered, as the Lord said, This day shall thou be with me in
paradise. As hell said, Christ was not there, so Paradise said not, he was not
there, that is in soul: and as Paradise knew Christ that day to reign, so
Christ was there, but it knew him then first to reign there as the Messiah:
for as he was God he was known to the heavenly powers always to reign in
heaven. Therefore Christ in his soul was the same day with the thief in
Paradise. And thus much of the general reasons.

PARTICVLAR REASONS TAKEN out of the place of Scripture it self, Act. 2. 29.
ARgum. 1. That which is called hell, verse. 27. the Apostle expresses by the
name of death, ver. 24. God has loosed the sorrows of death. This cannot be
the second death: for these sorrows had no hold of Christ, and therefore they
needed not be loosed for him. And the Syrian Interpreter translateth, sorrows
of the grave: Christ then was only now being dead under the sorrows of the
first death; that is, in the grave: for so usually death and the grave are put
together in the Psalms: Psalm. 6. 5. In death there is no remembrance of thee:
in the grave who shall praise thee? Psalm. 88. 10. Shall the dead praise thee, or
shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave?

Argum. 2. Christ was under the sorrows of that hell, whither he descended, as
the Apostle says, ver. 24. Whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of
death, because it was impossible that he should be holden of it. But Christ
suffered not the sorrows of the lower hell, the place of torment, for all his
sorrows and travail was ended upon the cross, when he cried consummatum
est, it is finished. Ioh. 19. 30.

To the proposition Bellarmine answers: 1. That the sorrows of hell, as the
Latin text reads, and the Answerer approoueth, page 12, were loosed and
dissolved: non quibus teneretur, not wherewith he was held, sed ne teneretur,
but least he should be held of them.

Contra. 1. These sorrows of death had fastened of Christ, though they could
not still hold him, because Christ loosed not the sorrows of hell after his
death.
they remained to the resurrection: for this follows as a reason of Christ's
raising up: whom God raised up loosing the sorrows of death: if the sorrows
of the death and grave had not kept Christ a while, he should presently have
been raised up. 2. Again, Christ could not be held or detained of death: death
then had fastened upon him, but could not hold him. One cannot be said to let
go their hold, or not to be able to hold, unless first they lay on hold: but
hell sorrows did not so much as assay or assail Christ after his death.

2. He says that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell not for himself, but for
others. Our answerer also has the like saying: S. Peter mentions sorrows,
which were loosed at Christ's resurrection, which could not be in the sepulcher,
where his body lay dead and senseless. Ans. page 9.

Contra. 1. The Apostle speaks directly of Christ: the sorrows were loosed
for him that was raised up; but Christ only was raised up. The sorrows of
death were loosed only for him that could not be held of them; but Christ
only could not be held of them: Ergo, the sorrows of death here spoken of
were only loosed for the resurrection of Christ.

2. As for our answerers position, it does manifestly The answerer detected to
be a Limbist.
bewray him to be a Limbist: for if Christ loosed forrowes, and not for his
body which was senseless, then he must either grant, that the sorrows of
hell were upon Christ himself, of the which he was loosed at his
resurrection, or that he loosed them for others: and so he is detected to be
also an hell-harrower, for the souls of the Fathers delivered thence.

3. What then though Christ's body were without sense in the grave? We say not
it felt sorrows, but was under the sorrows or bonds of death: for it was a
time and state of sorrow, while Christ's body lay in the grave, till it was
raised up again.

Argum. 3. S. Peter says, verse. 31. he spoke of the resurrection of Christ,
that his soul should not be left in hell or the grave, etc. The Prophet in
these words speaks of Christ's resurrection: but the descending of Christ's
soul to hell belongs no ways to his resurrection, but the not leaving of
his life in the grave implies the resurrection: Ergo, the Prophet means no
such being or going of Christ's soul to hell.

Argum. 4. That which David prophecieth of Christ was wholly and fully
performed in Christ, and not in David: But the not being or leaving of the
soul in hell was as well performed in David, as in Christ, for his soul was
not at all in hell: Ergo, David prophesies not of the not leaving of Christ's
soul in hell.

First, for the proposition the Answerer tells us, that the true Antithesis
between Christ and David is only in his incorruption, resurrection and
ascension, and not in any thing else. page 17.

Contra. The whole prophecy of Christ, Thou shall not leave my soul, nor
suffer thy holy one to see corruption; is by the Apostle applied to Christ,
verse. 31, and denied to David, ver. 29. for the whole is a peculiar prophecy
of Christ: he spoke of the resurrection of Christ, verse. 31, in this whole
sentence, not partly of Christ, partly of them both. This prophecy then was
historically only true of Christ, though typically and in some similitude also
it agrees to David, who hoped in Christ to rise again, and not for ever to
dwell in corruption: but literally the whole prophecy is referred to Christ,
as S. Peter expounds.

THE SECOND PLACE EXAMINED: 1. Pet. 3. 18. which was put to death in the flesh,
but quickened in the spirit: in the which spirit he went and preached to the
spirits in prison, which were in time passed disobedient, when once the long
suffering of God abode in the days of Noe.

The objections answered.
WHereas the most approved interpretation of these words is this, that Christ
having suffered in his humane nature, yet was sustained and raised up by his
divine spirit, in and by the which he preached by ye ministry of Noe to the
disobedient of the old world, which now are damned spirits in the prison of
hell: this exposition shall be afterward warranted by the Scriptures, having
also the testimony of some ancient writers. But first a survey shall be taken
of the contrary objections.

Object. 1. If the meaning be that Christ dying in the flesh, was raised to
live by his divine spirit: it ascribes a foul error to the Apostle, as
placing Christ's resurrection befare his descension; whereas Peter speaks not
at all here of the resurrection, etc. Ans. p. 22.

Ans. First, here is no mention of Christ's descension at all: thus he beggeth
the thing in question, and builds upon that which is most doubted of.
Secondly, if the Apostle had treated of Christ's descension before his
resurrection; is this such a foul error, in the narration of things, not to
observe the order of time? Does not S. Paul as much, that first speaks of
Christ's ascension, Ephe. 4. v. 8. and afterward of his descension, verse. 10?
Thirdly, how can he say that in this place he speaks not all of the
resurrection of Christ's body, when he makes direct mention thereof, verse. 21.
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, etc?

Object. 2. Here is no opposition between the humanity and divinity of
Christ, because he speaks of the death and passion of Christ, which touched
his humanity only. Ans. p. 24.

Ans. First, is not here now a good argument: the Apostle speaks of that
which concerns Christ's humanity only: Ergo, he touches not his divinity?
To make it a good argument, he should have said, he speaks only of the
death and passion etc. Secondly, but then had he said untruly, for the Apostle
makes express mention of his quickening in the spirit, which is no part of his
death or passion.

Object. 3. The two parts of Christ's humanity are here directly set one
against the other, that is, the soul against the body. Ans. p. 24.

Ans. 1. Thus he still commits the same fault, which is called petitio
principij, the begging of the question: for this is the point controuerted,
whether by the flesh and spirit, Christ's body and soul are understood. 2.
Though the Syrian Interpreter read body, yet so does not the original, which
we are to follow. 3. And though by flesh, Christ's body be understood, yet it
follows not that the spirit signifies the soul: for the like opposition is
used by the Apostle, Romans 1. 3, between the flesh and the spirit, where, by
the spirit, the divine nature is manifestly expressed.

Object. 4. You must then read thus, Christ was mortified in his humanity,
and quickened in his divinity, which is both absurd and impious. p. 24.

Ans. 1. The answerer much contendeth, page 25, to have the preposition (...)
supplied, which though it be A bold and dangerous charge and imputation upon
the Apostle.
not in the original, nor vulgar Latin, yet we willingly yield him: but what
has he gained by it? 2. Is it impious to say he was quickened in his divine
spirit? And do ye know what you say? Does not S. Paul use the same phrase,
he was justified in the spirit, 1. Tim. 3. 16; that is, in and by the power of
his divine spirit? for there not his soul, but his divine nature is signified.
And what difference between this phrase of S. Peter, quickened in the spirit,
and that of S. Paul, Romans 1. 3. declared to be the son of God, (...),
according to the spirit of sanctification: that is, by the power thereof?

Object. 5. If by flesh you understand the whole humane nature, that is, his
body and soul, then it will follow that he was done to death both in body and
soul. Ans. p. 24.

Ans. First, there is no more necessity here, by flesh What is understood by
this word flesh.
to understand the whole humanity of Christ, his soul and body; than in that
place of S. Paul named before Romans 1. 3, Christ was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh. Here the flesh, that is Christ's humanity, is set
against the spirit, his divinity: and yet if the soul should necessarily be
comprehended under the name of flesh, it would follow that Christ received his
soul from the seed of David, and so anima should be ex traduce; be derived
from the parents, as the flesh is: whereas the Scripture says, that God
forms the spirit of man within him, Zachar. 12. 1. Secondly, yet if the soul
be here conceived, no great absurdity will follow: for either by being
mortified according to the flesh, all other sufferings are implied: as S. Paul
setting down a brief sum of the Gospel, that Christ died for our sins, was
buried and rose again, etc. 1. Cor. 15. 3. by dying understands all other of
his sufferings: as S. Peter says, he has suffered for our sins, 1. Pet. 2.
18: or else such a death of the soul may be understood, as Christ's soul was
subject unto, neither by sin, nor damnation, but in respect of his inward
afflictions: in which S. Paul says, I die daily, 1. Cor. 15. 31. But I rather
insist upon the first point.

Object. 6. The word which the Apostle here uses, (...), he went and
preached, cannot properly be applied to the divinity, but the humanity of
Christ, as the Apostle uses it, ver. 22, gone into heaven. Bellarm. So
likewise the Answerer quoteth almost twenty places out of the Gospel (much
glorying, as it seems, to paint his margin with Greek letters) to show how
this word is used of Christ's going and coming as he was man. p. 31.

Ans. First, as though it were not an usual thing in How the divine nature of
Christ is said to go and come.
Scripture to apply unto God such words as signify motion, for our better
understanding: so it is said, that the spirit (...), was carried upon the
waters, Genesis 1. 1. God (...), ascended up from Abraham, Genes. 17. 22. The
spirit of God (...), leaped or came upon Saul, 1. Sam. chap. 10. The word of
God (...), runs very swiftly, Psalm. 148. 15. Secondly, yea this very word
here given in instance, is otherwhere so used. As Matthew. 4. 4. Man lives not
by bread only, but by every word (...), which comes or goes forth of the
mouth of God.

Object. 7. The word (...), spirits, you shall never find where it is given to
men living in the world, Bellar. and Ans. p. 34. and these spirits are said to
be in hell, how then could they be living men in the world? and if Noah
preached to spirits in hell, both the preacher and auditors must be shut up in
hell. p. 38.

Ans. 1. These are but ridiculous objections, and easily In what sense men
living are called spirits.
answered: for those to whom Noah preached, were then living in earth, but now
spirits in hell, when Peter thus wrote: so that by the figure Prolepsis, which
is usual in Scripture, he describes them by their present state, not as they
were at the time of the preaching. So in the next chapter he says, the Gospel
was preached to the dead: now dead, but then living when the Gospel was
preached: as Augustine well expounds: It appears by the circumstance of Ex
circumstantia loci apparet eum intelligere eos, qui nunc mortuisunt, sed olim
in vita Euangelium audiuerunt. in epist. ad Roman.
the place, that he understands such as were now dead, but in former time
heard the Gospel when they were alive. By the same figure Christ is said to
be the judge of the quick and dead, 1. Pet. 4. 5, which are now dead, but
shall be alive at the coming of Christ.

Object. 8. To deny the word spirit in this place, as also the word soul in
the prophecy of David to signify the humane soul of Christ, justifies those
wicked heretics which denied Christ to have an humane soul, and consequently
condemns those good Catholics, which by these testimonies of holy Scripture
convinced them, as Athanasius, Epiphanius, Fulgentius, Theodoretus, etc. Ans.
p. 48.

Ans. 1. The argument is denied: for thus the reason is framed; if the spirit
here do not signify Christ's soul, then the heretics are justified that say
Christ had no soul: as though there were no other place of Scripture to prove
that Christ had an humane soul. 2. But diverse Fathers convicted the heretics,
that so thought, by these places. They might dispute against them, but confute
them they could not by a place of Scripture mistaken: to overthrow one error by
another, is but to establish error. Augustine has a good saying to this
purpose: It were less danger Tolerabilius in suis foueis delitescerent vulpes,
qua^ propter illas capiendas in erroris foueam inciderent venatores. De mendac.
lib. 2. 9.
for the foxes to lie lurking in their holes, than that the hunters to take
them should fall into the pit of error themselves. 3. The Fathers have found
out more pregnant places to prove that Christ had a soul, than this. As that
scripture was commonly alleged against the Monothelites, to show that Christ
had two wills, an humane and divine will, by Athanasius, Origin, Agatho,
Chrysostom, as they are alleged in the sixth general Council assembled
against the Monothelite heretics. Matthew. 26. 39. Not my will, but thy will be
done. Verse. 38. My soul is heavy unto death. Augustine against Felicianus the
Arian urges that place Luke 19. 10. The son of man is come to seek and save
that was lost: concluding thus: that if Cont. Felician. Arian. c. 13.
Christ came to save all that was lost, and man was lost both in body and
soul, then Christ took both body and soul to save both. 4. Rather this
sense of the An heresy to hold that any in hell believed in Christ.
place, to interpret it of the descending of Christ to hell, where the
disobedient persons and unbelievers were, gives way, and opens a wide gap to
a most gross heresy: whereof Augustine makes mention: Another heresy there
is, that thinks that Alia Christo descendente ad inferos credidisse
incredulos, and omnes inde existimat liberatos. August. haeres 79.
by Christ's descending to hell the incredulous persons believed, and all were
delivered thence. Unto which error Origin seems to incline: writing thus: Non
legunt, quid scriptum sit de spe illorum, qui in diluuio perempti sunt? 1. Pet.
3. Do Peri arch. lib. 2 cap. 5.
they not read what is written of their hope, which perished in the flood? 1.
Pet. 3. He seems to think that they were saved and delivered by Christ's
preaching after Origens error.
they were dead. These heresies may rather be feared, by the Answerers
exposition of this place, than the other, which he imagines: for to what
purpose rather should Christ be thought to preach to the spirits in hell,
(...), immorigerous sometime and disobedient, than for their comfort and
deliverance?

Object. 9. Lastly, for the credit of this exposition, a great sort of authors
old and new are named: as Clemens, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Cyrillus, Hilarious
with others: and of the new, Erasmus, Bullinger, Caluinus, Marloratus, Aretius,
Vitus, Theodorus: all which with one consent have interpreted these words of
Peter, of Christ's descension into hell. Ans. p. 47.

Ans. 1. There is none of the ancient Fathers, whereof a great sort more are
cited by Bellarmine, which Lib. 4. de Christi. anim. c. 14.
speaks of the descension of Christ's soul to hell, but adds also, that it
was to this end to deliver the souls of the Fathers from thence which if the
answerer hold to be the error of that time, as he seems to grant, page 44.
to what purpose then does he allege them? Is their authority good for the
descension of Christ's soul, and is it not as strong for Limbus Patrum? Will
you receive them for the one, and refuse them in the same place and sentence
for the other?

2. It shall be even now showed, that all the Fathers do not thus expound S.
Peter in this place, as Augustine, Bid.

3. Concerning the new writers: some are misalledged: who told him that Calvin
applies this place to Calvin misalledged.
the descension of Christ's soul into hell? His opinion, as Bellarmine reports
and confuteth it, was this: that Christ preached to the spirits of dead, not
that he went thither by the presence of his soul, but made them to feel the
Bellar. lib 4. de Christ. anim. cap. 13.
effect and power of his death and passion: and so Calvin himself writes upon
this place: Vim spiritus ad mortuos penetrasse: That the power and virtue of
his spirit did pearce even unto the dead.

As for the rest of the new writers, howsoever they expound this place: we may
oppose as learned and grave writers on the other side: and beside the
particular judgment of some, we have the consent of whole Churches, as of
Scotland, Geneua: But we stand not upon men's opinions for the sense of
Scripture, which is the best expounder of it self: therefore as Bernard well
says: Ad Euangelium appellasti, ad Euangelium ibis: You have appealed to the
Gospel, and to the Gospel shall ye go.

REASONS CONFIRMING THE FIRST exposition, that this place of S. Peter proves
not the descension of Christ's soul into hell to deliver the souls of the
Fathers.
ARgum. 1. We can have no better arguments, than Augustine has pressed before
to this purpose: Augustines objections, that S Peter speaks not of Christ's
desce^t into hell in soul.
who shows first, that where S. Peter says: was viuified, or quickened in
the spirit, not Christ's soul but his divine spirit must be understood: The
soul of Christ (says he) was neither mortified with sin, nor punished with
damnation: therefore in respect of his Anima Christi nullo mortificata peccato,
vel damnatione punita est, ideo non secundum ipsam dici potuit viuificatus
spiritu. epist 99.
soul he cannot be said to be quickened in the spirit. His reason stands
thus: A thing cannot be quickened except it die: Christ's soul was not subject
to death either by sin or damnation: therefore it cannot be said to be
quickened.

Object. 1. Bellarmine here and the Answerer (for it seems they have joined
herein hands of fellowship) do answer, that a thing may be said to be
viuified, though it die not, in being preserved or kept alive: and here the
answerer heapeth up many unnecessary places to show where the word (...) is so
used: as Exodus 2. 17. The midwiues saved the men children alive, and in other
such places. 2. He seems much to insult and triumph upon that place Ezech.
13. 18. You have profaned me before the people to kill the souls, that should
not die, and to give life to the souls, that should not live: Where the Reader
may observe, that the soul, which can not die, is said to be quickened, and
therefore it is untrue that A. VV. in his Synops. Papis. 351. of the last
edition. Nothing can be said to be quickened, that is not apt to die.
some say, that no example can be produced out of Scripture where this word is
applied to the soul. p. 26. 29.

Ans. 1. What have we to do in this place with (...)? the Apostles word is
(...). The first signifies to bring forth, or save alive, or to preserve
life, muchwhat answerable to the word (...): but the other word properly
signifies to make alive that which is dead, as S. Paul uses the word, 1. Cor.
15. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: he
(...).
should not then have contended with his own shadow about (...), and other
Greek words, but held him to the point, that (...) is taken in such sense, as
he would bear us in hand. Again, he gives instance in all those places, of
such things which are said to be viuified or kept alive, which are capable of
death: but so is not the soul of Christ by any means, and therefore these
allegations are altogether impertinent.

2. First, the word used by Ezechiel in the place noted, is (...) which is to
preserve: and does our Graeculus (let no man mistake me, I do not say Graculus)
think that there is no difference between (...), and (...), to preserve and to
make alive. Secondly; and was he so blind, that he could not see, that the
Prophet here speaks in the same sentence, as well of killing of souls, as
preserving souls alive? how then is he so forgetful, to say, that this place
proves, that the soul, which cannot die, is yet said to be viuified?
Thirdly, he misreporteth his words, whom he blazeth in his margin: for it any
list to see the place the words are these: Secondly the examples are not alike,
for they are said to be The Answerer misreporteth the writer of Synopsis his
words.
revived, because they might die, though they died not; but the soul cannot
die: wherefore unless he can show out of scripture, that some thing is said to
be revived, or quickened, that neither does nor can die, he faith nothing; but
neither has he nor can produce any such such example out of scripture. Is not
the sum of the words evidently this, that nothing is said in scripture to be
quickened, but that which also may die, either a natural or a spiritual
death? The soul as it may spiritually live, so it may spiritually die: as the
Prophet speaks both of killing and saving of souls in the same place. He
shall never be able to show out of scripture any such example or place, that
affirms anything to be quickened, which is not apt to die in the same sense.
Christ's soul then being not subject to any spiritual death, either by sin in
this life, or by damnation in hell, cannot be said to be quickened. Fourthly,
therefore Augustines exposition remains sure and sound: He Viuificatus
spiritu, quia illo spiritu operame in quo ad quos veniebat praedieabat, etiam
ipsa caro viuisicata surrexit, in qua modo ad homines venit. Epistol. 99.
was quickened in the spirit, because by the working of that spirit, in the
which he preached to whom he came, his flesh being quickened did rise again,
in the which erst he came unto men. This exposition, by the flesh to
understand Christ's humane nature, by the spirit his divine, by the which he
was raised agame, is strengthened by other places of Scripture: as Romans 1. 3.
made of the seed of David after the flesh, declared to be the son of God
according to the spirit of sanctification by the resurrection from the dead: 1.
Tim. 3. 16. Being justified in the spirit. And Saint Paul gives the sense of
this place in other (...).
words, 2. Cor. 13. 4. He was crucified of weakness or infirmity, and lives of
or by the power of God. And so Bernard to the same purpose says well: All
Singula eius opera ad hanc sieve illam necesse est pertinere naturam, ad hanc
scilicet miseria, ad illam pertinet potentia. Sermon de verb. sapient.
the works of Christ do necessarily belong to one of his natures; to his
humane his misery, to his divine his power and Majesty. Wherefore as the
mortification of Christ's flesh being a work of infirmity belonged to his
humanity: so his vivification and being made alive again, being a work of
power appertained to his Deity.

Argum. 2. Whereas Peter here says, In the which spirit he went and preached;
this may be expounded by the like place, 1. Pet. 1. 11; Of the which salvation
the Prophets have inquired, etc. searching when or what time the spirit of
Christ, which was in them should testify, etc. The Prophets were endued with,
and spoke by the spirit of Christ: so that by them as instruments, as here by
Noah Christ went and preached in his spirit.

Object. 1. Thus you erroneously confound the distinct persons of the Trinity:
turning the humane soul of Christ first into his divinity, and then again
into the Holy Ghost. Ans. p. 33.

2. So upon these or like absurdities, our late general surueyer of the
controversies etc. thought it better to forge a new figure: Christ went in the
spirit, etc. that is, says he, Noe went in the spirit of Christ and preached:
which what else is it, then wilfully to correct, or rather to corrupt the text
of holy scripture to set the Apostle to school, as not knowing to speak
properly, etc. page 33.

Ans. 1. This is an unlearned cavil: for while he fears the heresy of
Sabellius, that confounded the persons of the Trinity, and made them all one,
August. haeres. 52. he comes nearer a Tritheist, in dividing Christ and his
spirit. When Mark says, It is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost, Mark.
13. 11. and Matthew thus rehearses the same place: It is not ye but the spirit
of my father that speaks in you, Matthew. 10. 20: The Answerer herein be
wraieth great ignorance.
does the Evangelist confound the persons of the Trinity? Is not the Holy
Ghost as well the spirit of Christ as of his Father? does he not proceed
equally from them both? This objection then either sauoureth of error, or
bewrays ignorance. Augustine could have given him a solution of this doubt,
if he had consulted with him: For both the son is a spirit in Et ipse quidem
filius in substantia Deitatis, spiritus est, and quid facit filius sine spiritu
sancto vel sine patre, cum inseparabilia sunt opera Trinitatis? Epist. 99.
the substance of his Deity: and what does the son without the holy spirit
or the father, when the works of the Trinity are inseparable? Either of these
answers might have satisfied him.

2. You still misreport him, that seems to be a great mote in your eye: one
may well return Hieromes words upon you: You are toward others as blind as a
mole, toward him as sharp sighted as a goat: you Ad caeteros talpae, ad illum
caprearum ocules possides.
with disdain call him our late surueyor of the controversies: if his leisure
would serve him, he might soon survey more slippes and gross ouersights in
this three penie book, then you shall be over able to find in that great
work, which you so much carpe at. But Hieromes words are here most true: They
do bite me with an envious tooth, deprauing Canino dente me rodunt, in publico
detrahentes, legentes in angulis, ijdem and accusatores and defensores, cum in
alijs prob^^t, quod in me reprobent: quasi virtus and vitium non in rebus sit
sed cum authoribus muletur: Praefat in Paralipp.
publicly what they read in corners, the same men being both accusers and
defenders, approouing in others, that they reprove in me, as though virtue and
vice were not in the things themselves, but were changed with the authors. But
he neither corrects, or corrupts Scripture, but you corrupt his words,
which are these: This phrase is neither strange Synops. p. 350.
nor unusual, to say that Christ went in spirit, or the spirit of Christ went,
seeing Noah went in the spirit of Christ: Here is nothing added or altered in
the text, but only the meaning explained. When our Savior says, It is the
holy Ghost that speaks in you, Mar. 13. 11; but S. Peter, How Noe preached in
the spirit of Christ.
holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 21; does S.
Peter corrupt or correct Christ's words? As then for the Holy Ghost to speak in
men, and men to speak by ye Holy Ghost in scripture is all one: so to say yt
Christ's spirit preached in Noe, or Not preached in or by Christ's spirit, I pray
you (sir) what difference? If any here corrupt the text, it is your self, that
forge a sense (to use your own term) that by Scripture cannot be justified:
and so you are of those of whom Hierom speaks: Non voluntatem legi, sed
Micron. Oceano.
legem iungunt voluntati: They do not conform their fancies to the Scripture,
but the Scripture to their fancies. This exposition of ours is not new, but
approved long since by Augustine: Before Christ Priusquam veniret in came pro
nobis morit^ru^, quod semel secit, sape antea veniebat in tu spiritu, ad quos
volebat, visis eos admonens sicut volebat. Epistol. 99.
came in the flesh to die for us, which he did once, often before he came in
spirit to whom he would, speaking to them in visions, as it pleased him.

Argum. 3. In the which spirit he went and preached: Augustine further
reasons, that this cannot be understood of Christ's going to hell: for if
there were preaching there, it will follow there should be a Church and that
some may believe that are in hell; for Christ's preaching was not without
fruit. And if it were thus, that any might be converted in hell, men would
neglect the hearing of the Gospel while they live: to this purpose Augustine
epist. 99.

Object. 1. Bellarmine says, that Christ's preaching in hell was not to convert
the infidels, but to bring tidings of joy to the godly souls.

Cont. S. Peter says contrary, that the Gospel was preached to the dead,
that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh, but might live
according to God in the spirit, 1. Pet. 4. 6. what is this else but to preach
unto them for their conversion?

Object. 2. The word (...), he preached, does properly import in Scripture an
action of the ministry of the word performed always by Christ in his humane
nature: but when the operation of the godhead is intimated, the common phrase
of Scripture is, (...), he spoke by the mouth of the holy Prophets, Luke 1. 70.
Ans. p. 31.

Answ. 1. And is there not now great difference between he preached, and he
spoke by the Prophets? Is the divinity of Christ said to speak, and not to
preach? as though preaching were not an excellent kind of speaking, and so
more proper to the divine spirit of Christ. 2. But what aileth this man to be
so confident, to say Christ said in Scripture to preach in his divine nature.
that the scripture always refers preaching to Christ's humane nature? It
seems he never read the first of the Proverbs, verse. 21. Wisdom preaches
in the high ways, or streets of the city. Who else is this wisdom; (...).
but Christ as he is God? 3. And that the Apostle means, that Christ preached
in his spirit by Noah, S. Peter else where shows, where he calls Noah, the
preacher (...). 2. Pet. 2. 5.
of righteousness: and so Augustine says: Arcae fabricatio, quaedam
praedicatio fuit: The making of the Arc was a kind of preaching.

Argum. 4. The text is not to be read: to the spirits (...).
which were in prison: but the words are, the spirits in prison: where the
greek participle to be supplied (...), being of the present tence, is rather
to be translated, are, than were: It cannot then be understood of any, which
were in the prison of hell, and are not, and so makes nothing for the
harrowing of Hell.

Object. 1. The participle (...) is translated by the Latin and Syrian
interpreters by the time past, which were. 2. And it oftentimes does implie the
time past, as Ioh. 13. 1. which were in the world. Luke 6. 4. he gave to them,
that were with him: where (...) and (...), must be supplied. 3. The Greek
participle here to be supplied, as appears by some ancient Greek copies, is
not (...) being, but (...), enclosed, or shut up, which is a participle of the
time past, Answ. p. 36. 37.

Ans. 1. How Translators do interpret, we are not so much to respect, as how
the original reedeth: therefore because in the autentike Greek there is no
word to express were, we are not bound to receive it. 2. The places are cited
without cause, where (...) is expressed: which often serves for a participle
of the pretertense, because the verb is defective, and has no other
participle to express the time past: but where it is to be supplied and not
expressed, it is seldom or never taken for the time past, but where the
necessity of the sense enforces it: as in those two places given in instance,
we must of necessity read: he had loved his, that were in the world: and
so Luke 6. 4. he speaks of David, that entered into the house of God, and gave
to those that were with him: otherwise this participle to be supplied,
betokens the time present: as Matthew. 4. 6. 9. (...)
Our father which art in Heaven: Matthew. 24. 18. He that is in the field, John 5.
28. (...): They which are in the grave. So then this article of the present
tense being here to be supplied, and the sense not enforcing a change of the
time, does rather give to be translated, are, than were. 3. What though some
coppies have that participle, enclosed or shut up, we must follow Augustines
rule: Si codices variarent, plures paucioribus aut vetustiores recentioribus
praefera^tur. cont. Faust. lib. 11. c. 2.
If the coppies differ, the more books must be preferred before the fewer, and
the older before the newer: and so has reverend Beza done in translating this
place: and yet if this participle of the preter tense be yielded: as to say,
the spirits shut up in prison, will it follow they were shut up, but are not? I
think not, as John 20. 19. when the (...)
doors shut up: though the doors were shut up before Christ came, yet they
were so shut up in the very instant of his entrance. Hebr. 12. 23, the Apostle
says, Ye are come, etc. to the company of the first borne, which (...).
are written in Heaven: yet the participle is of the time past: and so in this
place, the word would well enough bear to be translated: which are shut up in
prison, etc. 4. But what means the Answerer so mightily to strive, for this
word were: does he think that these disobedient spirits were in hell and are
not: if he do not, he trifleth, for the word were will nothing help him: if
he do, he either must think with the Papists, that Christ descended to empty
Limbus Patrum: or if he think that this place is understood only of the
damned, as he seems therein to approve the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, then
holding, that these spirits were there, and are not, he falls into a worse
error, that they which are damned may be delivered out of hell contrary to
the Scripture, Luke 16. 21. They that would go from hence to you cannot,
neither The Answerer put to an hard choice to be a Papist, an Heretic, or a
trifler.
can they come from thence to us: and this opinion by Augustine is counted an
heresy, to believe that any can be delivered out of hell, Haeres. 79. Now let
him make his choice whether he will be thought a Papist, an Heretic, or a
trifler; one of these he cannot avoid.

Argum. 5. Augustine again makes this objection: If Christ preached to the
spirits in Quo modo ille non praedicauit, sed illis tantum, qui in diebus Noe
increduli erant? aut si omnibus praedicauit, cur illos solos commemorauit,
praetermissa multitudine tam innumerabile ^aeterorum Epist. 99.
hell, how comes it to pass that he preached not to all that were there, but
only to those which were incredulous in the days of Noe, or if he preached to
all, why does Peter only make mention of those, omitting such an innumerable
multitude of others. The argument may be framed thus: If Christ preached to
the spirits in hell, he preached to all: for they being all in the same place
and in the same state of damnation, could not be severed: But Christ preached
only to those spirits in hell, which had been sometime disobedient in the
days of Noe: whereas there were many there beside: for Saint Peter makes
mention of no other preached unto: Ergo, he preached not, etc.

Bellarmine here shuffleth up an answer, by retorting Augustines objection:
Neither (says he) does the reason appear, why Christ should be said rather
to preach in the days of Noe, rather than of Abraham and other Patriarchs.

Contra. 1. Then he grants thus much, that he cannot yield us a reason
why S. Peter makes mention only of those spirits which were disobedient in
the time of Noe: why then does he obtrude a senseless exposition, whereof he
can give no reason? 2. We can give him many reasons, why Christ is said to have
preached in the days of Noe, rather than in any other time. 1. Because he
only was in those days in all the world, the preacher of righteousness, 2.
Pet. 2. 5. and the like example cannot be showed again in all the scriptures.
2. Because this example was most fit for the Apostles purpose: who before,
verse. 14. 15. exhorted, Why S Peter makes mention only of the preaching in
the time of Noe.
that we should be content to suffer for righteousness, and not to be ashamed
of the profession of our faith: then he strengthens his exhortation by
certain reasons: as from the effects, the confusion of those, that speak
evil of our conversation in Christ, 16; from the efficient cause, the will of
God, verse. 17: then he does illustrate his doctrine by two examples; first of
Christ, who suffered as a just man, and was sustained in his sufferings and
quickened again; secondly of Noah, whom the Lord vpheld in his preaching and
profession, against all the professors of the old world, condemning them, and
saving him. 3. Because this example of Noah's deliverance by the Arc did
minister just occasion to the Apostle to speak of Baptism, where of the other
was a figure, of the which he intended to speak. Thus our exposition is found
every way suitable to the Apostles purpose, so is not the other: and this might
serve for another reason of this sense and interpretation given of this place.

Argum. 6. The dead to whom S. Peter says the Gospel was preached, chap. 4.
6, were not then dead but living, when the Gospel was preached: for the Apostle
adds, that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh. And
Augustine infers well: Quo modo iudicantur in carne quam non habent si apud
inferos sunt? How shall they be judged in the flesh, which they have not if
they be in hell?

But the spirits here preached to in prison, are the same there called the
dead: and this Bellarmine confesses, Bellar. lib 4. de Christ anim. cap 13.
resp. ad 1. object. Aug.
that this place is expounded by the other: Ergo, the spirits here preached
unto, were not then dead.

Bellarmine answers thus to the reason of the proposition: thus expounding
the words; that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh, that is,
seem to be damned in men's judgment, because their bodies were killed in the
water; yet their spirits may live, that is, may be saved before God.

Contra. First, if the souls of them which died in the flood were saved, then
they which die in infidelity and What it is to be condemned according to men
in the
wickedness may be saved: for S. Peter says, that God brought the flood upon
the ungodly, 2. Pet. 2. 5. Secondly, this condemning in the flesh and living in
the spirit, follows as an effect and sequel of the preaching going before:
(...), for this cause was the Gospel preached, etc: but according to his sense:
the effect must go before, the condemning of the flesh; and the preaching
followed above two thousand year after, when Christ descended to hell.
Thirdly, the Apostle by being condemned in the flesh, and living in the spirit,
understands the two parts of regeneration; mortification in putting off the
old man, and renouation in putting on the new: as S. Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 5.
5, Let him be deliueuered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. This was not meant of the death of
his body, for the party lived after, and was reconciled to the Church, 2.
Cor. 2. Wherefore this mortifying of the flesh and vivification of the spirit
must be performed in this life: as Augustine well expounds: That they may be
judged Hoe est, in diuersis tribulationibus, and in ipsa morte carnis, etc.
viuant autem secundum Deum spiritu, quia and in ipso erant mortificati, cum
morte infidelitatis and impietatis tenerentur. Epistol. 99.
according to men in the flesh: that is, in diverse tribulations, and in the
death of the flesh, etc. but may live according to God in the spirit, because
they were mortified and dead therein, while they were held in the death of
infidelity and impiety. Here Augustine by being condemned in the flesh and
living in the spirit, understands the dying unto infidelity and impiety.

Argum. 7. This place serves not at all to prove the deliverance of the
fathers out of Limbus, by Christ's descension thither.

1. Those to whom Christ preached, are said to be He preached (...): to the
spirits disobedient sometime or incredulous.
incredulous persons or disobedient: such were not the Fathers: Ergo: whereas
Bellarmine says that some of them might repent before their death, and so
their souls might be saved; he speaks without book. For although I think
not that al which perished in the waters were damned, as infants, and such as
heard not of Noe his preaching (if any such were) and so were not disobedient:
yet such as believed not and were disobedient, were condemned to hell. The
Apostle makes no distinction of them, but calls them disobedient, and the
world of the wicked: how then dare he say some of them repented before their
death, and so were not disobedient, nor wicked?

2. The hell that Christ descended unto, he loosed sorrows in: for so the
Latin text reads, Act. 2. 24. having loosed the sorrows of hell; and the
Answerer approoueth this reading, page 12. But the Fathers were not in the
sorrows of hell, but in Abraham's bosom, a place of rest: as Augustine calls
it, Memorabilis quietis, and faelicitatis sinus: A famous place of rest and
felicity. And he further says: How Abraham, Quonam modo intelligatur Abraham,
in cuius sinum pauper ille susceptus est, in illis suisse doloribus, ego quidem
non video. Epistol. 99.
into whose bosom the poor man was received, can be understood to have bin in
these sorrows, I cannot see. The conclusion is this, that the believing
Fathers were not delivered out of hell: neither yet were unbelievers: for, Si
omnes inde The Fathers were not in the sorrows of hell.
soluit, exinaniuit inferna: For if he delivered all from thence, then hell was
emptied. August. It follows then, that if Christ descended in soul to hell
to loose the sorrows thereof, and yet they were neither loosed for believing
Fathers, that were in no sorrows; for Abraham's bosom was a place of comfort,
Luke 16. 25: nor yet for unbelievers that cannot come out of hell, ibid. 26.
They cannot come from thence to us: Then it remains, that he descended not at
all in soul to hell, for any such end.

3. The Patriarks were not in hell at all, therefore were not delivered thence:
they were in Abraham's bosom, which is no part of hell. Augustine proves it
by three reasons. First, Ne ipsos quidem inferos vspiam August. epist. 99
scripturarum locis in bono appellatos reperire potui: I can not find in any
place of scripture hell to be taken in any good sense or the better part. But
Abraham's bosom is taken in the better part. Ergo. Secondly, Sinus ille Abrahae
secretae quietis habitatio pars aliqua inferorum Abraham's bosom no part of
hell.
credenda non est: A place of rest and comfort can be no part of hell: but so
is the bosom of Abraham, a place of rest. Ergo. Thirdly, between Abraham's
bosom and hell is a great gulf and distance, Luke 16. 26. whereupon he
concludes: Apparet non esse quandam partem and membrum inferorum tantae
faelicitatis sinum: It appears that a haven of so great happiness, can be no
part or member of hell.

Argum. 8. The preaching of Christ to the spirits in prison, sometime
disobedient in the days of Noe, is a form and figure of the state of the
Church under the Gospel: for so S. Peter seems, not only to make the Arc a
figure, but the whole story: for the word that signifies the Arc, (...), is
of the feminine gender, but the article following, (...), is of the neuter: so
that the meaning is, to the which (not Arc) but to the which thing, Baptism
agrees, etc. So Augustine: Illa quippe res gesta fuit forma futurorum etc.
That thing done was a figure of things to come: ad hanc formae similitudinem
caetera de incredulis coaptemus: According to the similitude of this figure,
let us make that of the incredulous persons agree.

But Christ's descending in soul to hell has no figure or form of things to
come: for Christ is the body, not the shadow, Coloss. 2. 17: yet the preaching
of Christ by Noah to the disobedient world, and the saving of him and the rest
in the Arc, is a lively form and pattern of the state of the Church now: as
Augustine expounds; They which now believe Ii modo qui non credunt Euangelio,
illis intelliguntur esse similes, qui tunc non credideru^t cum fabricaretur
ar^a. Epistol. 99.
not the Gospel, are understood to be like them which then believed not, when
the Arc was in preparing: They which believe and are saved by Baptism, are
compared to them which were saved in the Ark by water: Ergo, this place
concerns not Christ's descending in soul to hell to any such end.

Argum. 9. Lastly, it shall appear that this exposition which we urge of this
place, wants not the approbation of some of the grave ancient Fathers.

First, whereas the Prophet Esaias thus prophesies of Christ: I have given thee
for a light to the Gentiles, etc. that thou may bring out the prisoners from
the prison, and those that sit in darkness from the prison house, Esai. 42 verse.
7: which words have some agreement with this of Peter: Hierom upon this place,
and Cyrill both, lib. 4. or. 2, understand this prison of the bonds of sins
and errors.

Chrysostom says, The bosom of Abraham was the poor man's paradise: Hom. de
diuit. Tertullian against Marcion says, Hell is one thing, Abraham's bosom an
Diverse ancient Fathers expound not S. Peter's words of Christ's descending in
soul to hell.
other: lib. 4. cont. Marcion. In their opinion then Christ went not into hell,
but into Paradise a place of rest.

Athanas. apud Epiphan. haeres. 77. says, That the word himself went and
preached to the spirits. It was his divine nature, not humane soul.

But Beda, as he is cited by reverend D. Fulke, is among other a most pregnant
witness: for thus he expounds this place: He which in our times coming in
the flesh, preached the way of life to the world, even he himself also came
before the flood, and preached to them which were then unbelievers, and lived
carnally: for even by his holy spirit he was in Noe, and the rest of the holy
men which were at that time, and by their good conversation preached to the
wicked men of that age, that they might be converted to better manners. It is
evident then, that this exposition is not newly devised, but such, as many
hundred years ago was approved and received by that reverend Father Beda,
and others.

Lastly, Augustine (as we have seen before) will by no means have this place
expounded of Christ's going in soul to hell.

Object. 1. Augustine in one maine point dissenteth from you: for by hell he
understands not the place hell, but the mortal body and darkesome
ignorance. Ans. page 43.

Ans. It is sufficient for us, that Augustine overthrows the proof out of
this place for the descending of Christ's soul to hell: Considera ne totum
illud, etc. Consider lest all that which is said of the spirits shut up in
prison, omnino ad inferos non pertineat: do not any thing at all belong unto
hell, but unto those times rather, etc. Though Augustine dissent from our
exposition in one point, he in all the rest agrees with us, and dissenteth
wholly from you: he understands the spirit of Christ for his divine nature;
his going in spirit and preaching, he applies unto his divine inspiration and
preaching by Noe; by the spirits, he implies living men in Noah's time: what
if we lose one point, and gain all the rest, and you lose all? If he speak
for us in many points, and against you in all, what are you helped?

Object. 2. Augustine notes him for an Infidel, that denies Christ's
descension into hell. Ans. ibid.

Ans. Augustines words are these: Quis nisi infidelis negauerit fuisse apud
inferos Christum? Who but an infidel will deny that Christ was in hell? And
who I pray you denies this article? We hold him no less, that believes not
that Christ descended: but how and in what manner, that is the question.
Neither does Augustine call him an insidell, that denies the descension of
Christ's soul into hell to deliver the Patriarks: for he reasons against it
himself, as we have seen before.

Object. 3. Augustine determines no certainty touching this matter, but
leaves it doubtful to the consideration and judgment of others. page 42.

Ans. Augustine concludes his epistle thus: Haec expositio etc. This
exposition of the words of Peter, if it dislike any, or if it dislike not but
satisfies not, let him seek to understand them of hell: qui si valuerit illa
quibus me moueri supra commemoraui, it a soluere, vt eorum auferat August
epist. 99. in fine.
dubitationem, impertiat and mihi etc. who if he be able so to dissolve all
these objections that move me, so that no doubt remain, let him impart it
unto me: this being done, those words may be understood both ways. Augustine
is contented, when all his reasons and objections are fully answered, to
hearken to another exposition, and so are we: but until such time, which will
never be; as it appears not that Augustine changed his mind concerning the
sense of this place; so till we be satisfied in all our reasons, which we
think no man can undertake to perform, we must remain of Augustines mind
and judgment for this matter.

THE EXAMINATION OF THE THIRD place of Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 9. Now in that he
ascended, what is it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the
earth.

Objections answered.
WHereas reverend Beza expounds this place of Christ's coming down and
descending into the earth, which compared to the world is pars mundi infima,
the lowest part: and learned D. Fulk does apply it to the extremest and lowest
degree of Christ's humiliation and abasement: annot. in hunc loc. which was to
the death and grave: This exposition is thus objected against.

Object. 1. The word used by the Apostle, (...), the lowest parts of the earth;
in Hebrew tachtijoth arets, signifies the place appointed for the damned: as
Ezech. 31. 14. and 32. 24. Ans. p. 50.

Ans. 1. The words of the Prophet in the first place are these: They are
delivered to death in the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the
children of men, among them that go down to the pit: And in the other thus:
They are gone down with the uncircumcised to the nether parts of the earth etc.
with them that go down to the pit, etc. Now, although we deny not but that
these places The lowest parts of the earth not always taken for hell.
may be expounded of hell, as Hierom does: yet the circumstances of the place
will rather lead us to take it for the grave: First, because there are two
words added, which are properly so taken: as (...) bhor, which signifies a
pit, and is translated by the 70: sometime (...), sometime (...), to descend
into the pit or cave: and (...) cheuer, also which properly signifies a grave
is joined with the rest: whose graves are made in the side of the pit, Ezech.
31. 23. Secondly, the phrase of speech also gives this sense, Ezech. 31. 18.
Thou shall sleep in the midst of the circumcised with those that are slain
by the sword: and Ezech. 31. 27. They are gone down to the grave with their
weapons of war. Now in hell men sleep not, neither is that a place for the
slain, for the soul dies not: neither do men carry their weapons thither.
Thirdly, Iunius in these places interprets sheol, sepulchrum, the grave.

2. Though we admit, that in these places it may be taken for hell, yet it is
not so always taken: as Psalm. 63. 9, They that seek my soul to destroy it,
shall go down into the lowest parts of the earth: then it follows verse. 10.
They shall be a portion for foxes; but they that go down to hell are no pray
for foxes: so likewise the Prophet David says, Psalm. 139. 15. Thou have
fashioned me in the lower parts of the earth. I trust they will not say he was
borne in hell. It is evident therefore that the Answerer more boldly than truly
says; that by these words, the lowest parts of the earth, Hell, the place of
the damned, is always signified: for unless he be able to prove that, he
does but trifle.

Object. 2. The more vile and loathsome the dungeon is the greater the love of
the Prince, who to set at liberty his captives there inthralled, disdaineth
not to enter into it, in his own person, etc. Ans. p. 52.

Ans. 1. You have well reasoned for Limbus Patrum: you would dissemble your
fancy that ways, but you cannot: I pray you what captives were enthralled in
hell, that Christ by going thither set at liberty? Let the indifferent Reader
judge, whether these words do The Answerer detected to be a Limbist.
not smatter of Limbus Patrum.

2. It is denied, that Christ's descension in soul to hell does more set forth
his love and favor, than his cross and passion. Saint Paul notes this as the
lowest point of Christ's humiliation: He humbled himself, and became obedient
unto the death, even the death of the cross, Philip. 2. 8. And herein the
Scripture does chiefly set forth the love of Christ in dying for us: who loved
me, and gave himself for me, says S. Paul, Galath. 2. 20. And in this
consists the favor of our Prince, because he has visited from an high and
redeemed his people, Luke 1. 68. What greater favor can we expect, than that
our Prince should come from heaven down to earth, and vouchsafe to dwell among
sinful men, to die the death, and go into the grave for them? Bernard tells
us as much: There are degrees Sunt gradus in ascendendo and descendendo: primus
gradus in descendendo a coelo vsque ad carnem, secundus ad crucem, tertius ad
morte: ecce quousque descendit, nun quid amplius potuit? poteratiam certe
dicere rexnoster, quid vltra ^ebui sacere and non feci. ser. Paru 18
in ascending and descending: the first degree in descending is to the flesh,
the second to the cross, the third to death: behold how far he descended;
could he do any more? might not our King say, what ought I do more, which I
did not? Bernard goes not beyond Christ's death, nor finds any further degree
of descension needful after that.

Object. 3. As ascending and descending are opposed one to the other, so there
must be a manifest antithesis between the places to the which the motions
tended: which cannot be of heaven and earth as directly opposite one to the
other, but of heaven and hell: which are often found in the Scripture set
opposite one against the other: as Psalm. 139. 8. If I ascend into heaven, etc.
if I lie down in hell, etc. Ans. p. 53.

Ans. 1. In the place alleged, there is neither the opposition between
ascending and descending: neither do some of the best Interpreters read hell
but Iun. Stratum ponerem in se pulchra(...)zang.
the grave: for the true reading of the place is, and make my bed in the grave,
not in hell: so is it taken Job. 17. 13 the grave (sheol) shall be my house, I
shall make my bed in the dark. 2. The heaven and earth are as often To lie
own in the grave is not to be in hell.
opposed one to the other in Scripture, as heaven and hell, which are set one
against the other, not so much in respect of the distance of place, as
different quality. Psalm. 103. 11. the Prophet says: As high as the heaven is
from the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Here the
Prophet had occasion to allege the places of greatest distance, to set forth
the greatness of Gods mercy by way of comparison: but he opposes not hell, but
the earth against heaven.

Object. 4. Christ before his ascension, led captivity captive, as it is in
the Psalm: but his conquest over his enemies, was not obtained by his coming
down from heaven, but by his passion on the cross and his descending to hell:
therefore that is the descending here spoken of. Ans. p. 54.

Ans. I will help you a little to gather your argument into form: that
descending is here understood, whereby Christ obtained conquest over his
enemies: but this was done by his descension into hell, not by his coming
down from heaven. Ergo.

1. The proposition is granted: the assumption is not proved: for it does not
follow, Christ did not get this victory by his descending from heaven: Ergo,
by descending to hell: for he obtained it by his death. Coloss. 2. 14. He put
out the handwriting of ordinances which was against us, and fastened it to the
cross, and has spoiled principalities and powers, etc. Which words Origin
expounds thus: Sicut bona quaeque scripta dicuntur non atrame^to sed spiritu
viui Dei, ita mala quaeque scribuntur atramento and calamo diaboli; propter
quod Dominus deleuit chirographum peccatorum nostroru^: Hom. 2. in Psalm. 38. As
all good things are said to be written not with ink but by the spirit of the
living God; so evil things are written by the ink and pen of the devil;
therefore the Lord rased out the handwriting of our sins.

If the devil were conquered, when the handwriting of our sins was blotted
out, then he was subdued Christ's conquest upon the cross.
upon the cross, to the which this handwriting was fastened. But yet the
Apostle more evidently says, That he might destroy through death, him that
has power over death, that is the devil, Heb. 2. 14. The devil was then
destroyed and perfectly conquered by Christ's death: the conquest being once
obtained, he needed not again to be conquered.

Object. 5. The Apostle speaks of that descension, which was next before his
ascension; but that was not his descending into the world, being so many years
before: Ergo, he means not that descensio^. Ans. p. 54.

Ans. 1. Does it follow, he means not Christ's first descending to the earth,
Ergo, he speaks of his descension to hell? what loose conclusions are these?
2. Why may not the Apostle join that first descension, and his ascension
together; as our Savior does, Ioh. 3. 13. No man ascended up to heaven, but he
that descended from heaven, the son of man which is in heaven? 3. But there
came another descension between, which went immediately before his descending
to death and the grave.

Object. Then ye will make many descensions: as some of you expound his
descension of his base and mean estate in a earth, as to be borne in a
stable, etc. living a A. Hume. b A. W. Synops. page 1056.
in poor estate, etc. Some b of his humiliation to the last and lowest point,
that is to say, to death and the grave: some of his descending into the womb
of the Virgin: but as his ascending was but one exaltation, so his descending
was but one humiliation. Ans. p. 55.

Contra. 1. Concerning the descending of Christ into the Virgins womb, I know
none that does now much urge it. Reverent Beza does demurre upon it, saying, I
leave it to the Reader to consider. 2. The other Lectori expendendum reliaquo.
Beza in hunc locum.
two expositions may well agree and stand together, and he that affirms the
one, denies not the other. Further, in making but one degree of Christ's
humiliation, you cross S. Paul, who makes two degrees as Diverse degrees of
Christ's descension.
we do, his taking upon him the form of a servant, and obedience to the
death of the cross, Phil. 2. 7. 8. Bernard also makes the same degrees of
Christ's descension which we do, as he is cited a little before: his descending
to the flesh, to the cross, to the grave. 3. As erroneous is your other
assertion to make but one degree of Christ's exaltation: for he was exalted,
first by his resurrection out of the grave, then exalted by his ascension into
heaven. 4. You and your cosine germans do make many descents of Christ:
first, into the grave: secondly, into Limbus, in the brimme of hell: thirdly,
then into hell in the lower parts of the earth.

Object. Christ was not interred properly in any part of the earth, but in a
tomb of stone: and the article (...), added here to (...), does particularize
and distinguish the parts of the earth in general, from those notorious
infernal parts. Ans. p. 55.

Ans. 1. It is an absurd and preposterous speech (to use his own words) and a
ridiculous cavil, to say that Christ was not properly buried in the earth, but
in a rock: as though rocks are not to be counted part of the earth. Our
Savior says, he should be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth, Matthew. 12. 40. then surely he was properly in the earth: for it was his
body not his soul that was so long in the earth: his soul I hope they will
not shut up in hell three days and three nights, seeing the Scripture says in
their sense, his soul should not be left there: and to say that Christ's soul
did not enjoy his fathers presence in heaven all the while it was absent from
the body, is contrary to the Scripture: Thou will show me the ways of life,
and shall make me full of joy with thy countenance, Act. 2. 28. Origin makes
Christ's soul but one day in hell upon these words: He shall raise us after
two days; prima dies etc. the first day to us is the passion of our Savior;
secunda qua descendit etc. the second wherein he descended to hell; the third
of the resurrection. Hom. 5. in Exodus

2. Further, the grave that Christ was laid in, was wide and deep: for at once
three women went down Mark. 16. 5. compared with Ioh. 20. 12.
into it, and two Angels were seen at once in it; with what sense then can ye
exclude it, from being part of the earth.

3. Your article (...), will not help you a rush: for (...).
both Psalm. 63. 9, and Psalm. 139. 15, the article is added: and yet neither of
these places are understood of hell: as is showed before, Ans. to object. 1.
The parts then of the earth are not compared with it self, but considered as
parts of the world, in respect whereof they may be called, lower or lowest
parts.

Object. 6. Bellarmine to prove this place to be understood of the descension
of Christ's soul into hell, urges these words that follow, that he might fill
all things, verse. 10. and so visit all parts of his kingdom Bellarm. lib. 4.
de Christ. anim. cap. 13.
in earth hell and heaven.

Contra. 1. If you will have Christ to fill all places with his local
presence, what differs this opinion from the Vbiquitaries, that make an
omnipresence of Christ's flesh? 2. Christ fills all places with his gifts How
Christ fills all things.
and benefits, as the Apostle shows afterward: He has given some to be
Apostles, etc. 3. Augustine shows how Christ not by any local presence, but
by his divine power fills all things: Nec tamen Dei localem fingimus
praesentiam, non mundum dimittens ad coelos ascendit, nec coelum deserens ad
terram venit, sed vno eodemque tempore totus totum impleuit. Act. cum Felic. c.
17. Neither do we imagine a local presence of God, he left not the world to
ascend to heaven, neither for sooke heaven and came to the earth, but at one
and the same time filled all in all. And such are their objections.

REASONS CONFIRMING THE right exposition of this text.
ARgum. 1. First, our Savior says, Ioh. 3. 13. No man ascends to heaven,
but he that descended from heaven, the son of man which is in heaven: and S.
Paul says, in that he ascended, what is it, but that he had descended first
into the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4. 9? one of these places expounds
the other: to descend then into the lower parts of the earth, is to descend
from heaven to the earth: for our Savior and Paul speak of the same
descension, not of diverse.

Argum. 2. Where Christ visited, thither he descended: but he did not visit
hell, therefore he descended not thither. The proposition cannot be doubted of:
the assumption is thus proved. Where Christ visited, he visited to redeem;
Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and
redeemed his people; he visited them, to the end to redeem them: but he
redeemed none in hell: Ergo, he visited not hell: therefore the Apostle
speaks of no descension thither.

Argum. 3. The lowest point of Christ's humiliation, was the lowest point of his
descension: this is confessed: His ascension being but one exaltation, proves
that his descending likewise was but one humiliation: Ans. p. 55. So long then
as he descended, he was in his humiliation: if Christ should be exalted in his
descension, it were as much to say, he ascended in descending. But this were
absurd, as Origin notes: Si diligenter consideremus, inueniemus quia nunqua^
quis in sanctum locum descendisse, neque ad vituperabilem conscendisse
praedicatur. Origin hom. 15. Genes.
If we diligently consider, we shall find, that never any is said to descend
into an holy place, or ascend to an unnoble place. Christ then did not begin
to be exalted, while he was descending: But the death and passion of Christ and
suffering upon the cross, and so consequently his grave, was the lowest point
of his humiliation: Philip. 2. 8. He humbled himself and became obedient unto
the death, even the death of the cross. Ergo, Christ descended no further,
then to the cross and his grave.

Argum. 4. Christ ascended from that place whether he descended, but he
ascended not in soul from hell: Ergo, he thither descended not.

The proposition is grounded upon the Apostles words: now in that he ascended,
what is it, but he descended first, verse. 9.

The assumption is thus proved: Of the nativity, life, death, resurrection,
ascension and all other actions performed by our Savior, the Apostles were
witnesses. Act. 4. 20. We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard. 1. John 1. 1. That which we have heard, seen with our eyes, and our
hands have handled of the word of life, declare we unto you: But the Apostles
neither saw nor heard of Christ ascending out of hell, but only from the
earth, Acts 1. 9. while they beheld he was taken up, Ergo, etc.

Argum. 5. To descend into the deep, (...), and to descend into the lower
parts of the earth, with S. Paul speaking of Christ are all one: this is
granted, Ans. p. 12. out of Luke 8. 31.

But to descend into the deep, is nothing else but to be among the dead, which
are in the grave, and not in hell. Romans 10. 7. Who shall descend into the
deep, that is, to fetch Christ again from the dead. Thus Origene expounds
this place: If any man in mind Si quis mente and cogitatione descendit in
abyssum, putans ibi tantum co^tineri Christum, quasi simile sit reuocare
Christum a mortuis: in 10. ad Roman.
and thought descend into the deep, thinking Christ there only to be
contained, as though it were all one and a like to call him from the dead, etc:
He says, that it is a like phrase, to descend into the deep, and to fetch
Christ from the dead: Ergo, Christ's local descension was but to the grave.

Argum. 6. How (...), the lower parts of the earth and in what sense it is to
be taken, that place shows, Psalm 139. 13. Thou have fashioned me in the
lowest parts of the earth: (...): the Septuagint read in the superlatiue: but
here the Apostle in the comparatiue: if the lowest parts of the earth do not
signify hell, the lower shall much less.

Object. To use the comparatiue for the superlatiue, is a phrase and form of
speech very usual among the Grecians: so that here it may very well be taken
for the superlatiue, to signify the lowest parts. Ans. p. 51.

Ans. 1. We do not much stand upon this point: for the Syrian and Latin
translator, do read here, ad inferiora, to the lower or inferior parts:
Beza, ad infimas parts, to the lowest parts: for whether we read lower or
lowest, the sense is the same: for the earth compared with other parts of the
world, may be said to be the lower, or lowest part. 2. Yet who can be ignorant,
but that, where the necessity of the sense urges not to expound the
superlatiue by the comparatiue, as it does in all these places by the Answerer
alleged, Matthew. 11. 11. and 23. 11. Mark. 4. 31. 32. and in the rest: yet
where the sense so urges not, as in this place it does not, and especially
where the common dialect is used, as in Scripture most an end, the comparatiue
degree is to be translated properly by it self? And whereas the Answerer
finds not fault with the Latin translator for expounding the superlatiue
(...), in Greek Psalm. 139. 13. by the Latin comparatiue inferiora, lower: how
much fitter is it, to translate the comparatiue by the comparatiue, as the
Latin text does here?

Argum. 7. I will now lastly adioyne the exposition of some of the Fathers.
Origin says: Paulus quoniam descensionis Christi mysterium praedicat profundum
nominauit, quasi de superioribus ad inferiora venientis. Homil. 2. in Genes.
Paul because he preaches the mystery of Christ's descension into hell, he
named the deep, as of one coming from the higher to the lower parts. And
again the same Origin thus writes: Descendere Deus dicitur quando curam
humanae fragilitatis habere dignatur: quod specialius de Domino and saeluatore
nostro sentiendum est; descendit ergo, neque enim alius ascendit, quam qui
descendit: descendit ergo Dominus non solum curare, sed and portare, quae
nostra sunt. Hom. 4. in Genes. God is said to descend, when he vouchsaseth to
take care of humane frailty, which more specially is to be thought of our Lord
and Savior: he descended therefore, for none other ascended but he that
descended: the Lord therefore descended, not only to care for, but to carry
our nature.

Augustine also thus witnesses: Est quaedam coelestis habitatio Angelorum,
illae pars rerum superna est, haec terrena vita vbi caro and sanguis si illi
comparatur inferna est, cum enim and his sunt mortui, ne mireris si infernum
dicitur. In Psalm. 85. There is a certain heavenly habitation of Angels, that
is the higher part of things; this earthly life, where flesh and blood is, if
it be compared to that, is the lower part: for seeing there are dead here,
marvel not if it be called hell. Although Augustine in the words following
seem to incline to the opinion of Christ's descension to deliver the
Patriarchs, thinking notwithstanding that Abraham was not in hell: yet in this
sentence he shows this to be no strange sense, to expound the earth in
respect of heaven to be the lower parts.

Theodoret upon this text thus writes: His descending does not signify any
passing from place to place, but teaches the greatness of his dispensation,
that when he was most high, he abased himself so much, and endured so great
abasement: He interprets as we do of Christ's humiliation and abasement here
in earth.

Bernards opinion we have seen before that he makes three degrees of Christ's
descension: ad carnem, ad crucem, ad mortem: to the flesh, to the cross, to
death Ser. Paru. 18.
and the graus.

Now whereas diverse fathers are produced, as Irenaeus, Athanasius, Ciprianus,
Epiphanius, Hierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom with others, as witnesses
of Christ's descension in soul to hell, p. 56: First, all these are alleged by
Bellarmine with twenty more, to prove that Christ descended into hell in soul
to deliver the Bellarm. lib. 4. de Christ. anim. cap. 4.
Patriarks from thence: wherefore unless he therein concur with them, they
are no fit witnesses to speak in his cause.

Secondly, neither did all the Fathers agree in judgment, that Christ descended
into hell to redeem the souls of the Fathers. Origin says, that where
Abraham's bosom was, there were Angelorum chori; regnum Christi: The companies
of Angels, the kingdom of Christ: in 1. cap. Job. Chrysostom calls Abraham's
bosom Paradise: Hom. de diuite. Augustine denies it to be a part or member of
hell: Epist. 99. In the opinion then of these Fathers, if Christ went to
Abraham's bosom, where the Fathers were, and that is not in hell: it follows
that the Fathers were not in hell, and so not delivered by Christ's descending
thither.

Thirdly, whereas he also produces diverse new writers of his opinion: 1.
Seeing they are but dumb witnesses, (they are only named, but speak nothing) a
labor may be well spared in examining such silent testimonies. 2. But herein
he can have no advantage against us: for beside that we can oppose against
him as many new writers and more, that hold not the descension as he does, as
In 1. Pet. 3. 19.
Calvin, In 1. Pet. 3. 19.
Beza, In 1. Pet. 3. 19.
Iunius, with others; we have the consent of whole Churches, as of Scotland,
Geneua, with other reformed places.

Fourthly, it is not to be omitted, that even many chief pillars and writers
in the Popish Church, have misliked such local descent of Christ's soul into
hell, the place of the damned; understanding that place in Peter of the
operation of his divine power in hell: this the Answerer himself denies not
to be the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, p. 4. confessing that, which he goes
Sum. p. 3. 9. 52. ar. 2.
about to confute. Andradius also agrees, that the place in Peter does not
pertain to hell: and that, infernum, Andr. lib. 2. defens fid. Triden. fol.
172. ser. 43.
hell, Act. 2. 27, is rather to be taken for death and the grave: and that the
descension into hell, is not expressly taught in Scripture, but a tradition of
the Church. All this also is by the Answerer acknowledgest, p. 45. 46. Beside
these, Durands opinion is, Christi Durand. in 3. d. 22. qu. 3.
animam descendisse ad inferos non secundum substantiam suam, sed per effectus
quosdam, etc. That Christ's soul descended to hell not in substance, but by
certain effects* and for this cause Bellarmine takes pains to confute him.
Yea Bellarmine himself confesses, that, Licet non Bellarm. lib. 4. de Christ.
anim. cap. 15.
esset necessaria praesentia Christi, etc. tamen congruum esse videbatur: That
although Christ's presence should not be necessary in hell, yet it is of
congruitie etc. he doubts Bellarm. ibid.
of the necessity of such local presence of Christ in hell. Wherefore seeing
neither out of Scripture, such local descent of Christ's soul into hell can be
proved, neither were the ancient writers of one uniform judgment herein, and
both the professors of the Gospel do disallow it, and Popish writers doubt of
it: with what face can the Answerer affirm that his opinion, concerning
Christ's descension into hell, stands as mount Sion, which cannot be removed?
page 58.

He says not untruly, that whosoever seek to discredit this article of
faith, corrupt and deprave the holy Scriptures, and fall into diverse
absurdities and impieties. For who denies the article of Christ's descension?
We believe that Christ even upon the cross suffered the pains of hell: as
Reverend D. Fulk thus writes; What may rather be called hell, than the anguish
of soul, which (...) suffered, when being God he complained, that he was In 2.
Act. sect 11.
forsaken of God? We also confess, that Christ by his death overcame hell,
and shaked the powers thereof: that he humbled himself to the ignominious
death of the cross, and descended from thence into the grave, and there
continued in the state of the dead till the third day, and whatsoever else may
be comprehenhed in the article of Christ's descension, having warrant out of the
word. But to receive such a sense as an article of our faith, which is not
grounded upon the Scriptures, we dare not presume so far without a warrant,
nor be so bold where we have no such commandment.

To conclude then, I wish that from henceforth all such domestical contentions
may cease: that we content our selves to believe as the Scripture teaches us:
and that no man obtrude his private sense as an article of the faith. The
common adversary will afford us work enough, though we one provoke not
another: and so I end with that holy saying of S. Paul: Let us follow the
truth in love: and to the Christian Reader I will commend that wise sentence of
Augustine: Quisquis Ephesians. 4. 15.
haec legate, vbi pariter est certus, pergat mecum; vbi paeriter haesitat,
quaerat mecum; vbi errorem suum agnoscit redeat ad me; vbi meum, reuocet me. De
Trinitat. lib. 1. c. 3 whosoever reads this book, where he is resolved, let
him proceed with me; where he doubts, let him search with me; where he
sees his own error, let him return to me; where he sees mine, let him
revoke me.

FINIS.

