AN HARMONY UPON THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMVEL, WHEREIN ACCORDING to the Method
observed in HEXAPLA upon GENESIS, and EXODUS, but more compendiously abridged,
these special things are observed upon every Chapter:

The diverse readings compared, doubtful questions explaned, places of
Scripture reconciled, Controversies briefly touched, and moral collections
applied.

Wherein above four hundred Theological questions are handled, with great
brevity and much variety, by the former Author of Hexapla on GENESIS.

Printed for L. GREEN of CAMBRIDGE. 1607.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Sun by Richard
Bankeworth.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, VIRTUOUS, AND RIGHT Noble Prince; HENRY by the grace
of God, Prince of Wales, and heir apparent to the most famous Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.
MOst Noble Prince, I had not presumed to present these few lines to your
Highness view, but that I remembered that wise saying, unto the which your
Princely nature will subscribe: (...).
Although thou art borne a King, yet hear as a mortal man: which sentence is
much better expressed in Scripture, Psalm. 82.7.
I said ye are gods, and ye are all children of the most High, but ye shall
die as a man, etc. Which place is thus interpreted by our blessed Savior, If
he called them gods, to whom the word was given: Ioh. 10.35.
because they heard and received the word, they are so called: Nothing makes a
mortal Prince more like in earth to the immortal Prince and great King in
heaven, then to be willing to hear, as Gods ears are open unto the complaints
and suits of all: So your princely humility and humanity being apt to
receive and regard, what is presented and exhibited, has emboldened me thus to
write, and to offer unto your Highness this simple gift, as a testimony of my
service and duty. Ex histor. Aeliaen.
One writes that Socrates that grave and wise Philosopher, seeing Alcibiades
very insolent, and much lifted up, because of his grounds and possessions,
which he had gotten about Athens, brought him to a place of the city, where he
showed him a map of the whole earth: wherein having found out Athens, he was
bidden by the Philosopher, to point out his own grounds: which being not
there noted, he further said unto him, Why art thou proud for those things,
which are not extant in any part of the earth. (...).
But herein your Highness is much unlike, who, though this famous Island of
Great BRITAIN, wherein your Hon. lot lies, be no small or obscure part in
the terrestrial Globe; yet does, and must rather affect the euer-during
kingdom of heaven, then the transitory glory and pomp of the world: as that
kingly Prophet David, having a goodly earthly portion, even that famous and
flourishing kingdom of Israel, yet rejoiced more, that he had his part in Gods
kingdom: thus sweetly singing, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup, Psalm. 16.7, 8.
etc. the lines are fallen to me in pleasant places: I have a fair heritage.

Of this worthy Prince David this first book of Samuel treats, setting
forth his princely virtues, and worthy acts, his anointing and inauguration to
the Crown, being yet but very young, his ouercomming of Goliath, his patience
in trouble, faithfulness in his service to Saul, his meekenes, even in sparing
his enemy: which with other his excellent virtues, are thus elegantly
described by Ambrose: Quam mitis David, humilis spiritu, sedulus cord, facilis
affatu, etc. fortis in praelio, Lib. 2. offic. c. 7.
mansuetus in imperio, patiens in convitio. How mild was David, humble in
spirit, careful in heart, affable and gentle: valiant in battle, mild in
government, patient in reproach. Again, the same father thus further commends
the worthy acts of David: Facta sancti David consideremus, quomodo Goliam
interfecit, Apolog. Dav. c. 6.
Sauli pepercit, convitiantem Shemei sustinuit, etc. Let us consider the acts
of David, how he slew Goliath, spared Saul, endured railing Shemei. The first
of these is most for your Highness imitation, that as he in his young years
encountered with Goliath, slew him, and cut off his head: So your Highness
following the worthy example of our David the Kings sacred and Christian
Majesty, oppose your self, even in these your tender and springing years to
that Goliath of Rome, and profess your self an adversary to the whole body
of Popish and Antichristian superstition: your princely youth is no let to your
religious profession: as Ambrose says of Honorius the Emperor being yet but
a child: Non moveat aetas, principis perfecta aetas est, est enim perfecta
aetas, vbi perfecta est virtus: Honorius iam pulsat adolescentiae fores,
provectior aetate, quam Josias. Let not his age move you, a Princes age is
perfect: for age is perfect, where virtue is perfect: In obit. Theodes.
Honorius is at the next door to a young man, elder somewhat then Josias.
Democrates among the Athenians being very aged, going up to the top of the
tower panting and breathing, but of no strength, said, that all the city of
Athens was like him: for they breathed (that is, (...).
attempted much) but prevailed little. But God shall give unto your Highness
strength, not only to attempt, but to accomplish great things for the service
of his Church: that Deborahs prophecy shall be verified in you, to be as the
Sun, when he rises in his strength: Iud. 5.31.
and Iaakobs blessing take place, pronounced upon Judah: Thine hands shall be
in the neck of thine enemies: Genesis 49.8.
thy fathers sons shall bow down unto thee: So that, when His excellent
Majesty has finished his faithful service to God here in earth, and run
out his happy course, which God grant he may hold out long, we may say of
your Highness, as Ambrose of Honorius the Emperor, after the death of
Theodosius: Theodosius tantus Imperator recessit a nobis, In obi^. Theodos.
sed non totus recessit, reliquit enim nobis liberos suos, in quibus debemus
eum agnoscere.

Your Excellent Highness bounden in all duty and service, ANDREW WILLETT.

Certain aduertisements to the Christian and courteous Reader.
IN this Commentary upon the first book of SAMVEL, I have followed a more
compendious course, then in my larger Treatise upon Genesis, and in the like
upon Exodus, which is now ready to come forth. And hereunto I was moved by
these reasons: first, in regard of the Readers, who as they are delighted with
variety of questions, so the same is more welcome when it is accompanied with
brevity: short treatises also are more easily purchased, every one cannot
reach unto the price of larger volumes. Beside, in respect of my self, I saw,
that a man's whole life sufficed not to go thorough all the books of the
Scriptures in that large and ample manner. And further, whereas in these
Theological discourses, published in the vulgar tongue, the profit of the
unlearned is chiefly intended, whereas the learned may help themselves with
treatises in other languages, I thought it not needful curiously to handle
obscure and difficult questions, but in such familiar and plain manner, as
might best serve for the instruction of all. Some are too large in the
discussing of questions, and resolving of doubts: and some again are too
short: of the first sort, were some of the ancient writers, Hieron. advers.
Joan. Hierosol.
who as Hierome says, Vix singulas quaestiones explicare multis voluminibus
potuerunt: could scarce handle several questions in many volumes. And of the
other sort he thus writes, Repertus est nostris seculis haud grandis
homunculus, qui de cunctis quaestionibus vno linguae rotatu sole clarius
coruscaret: A certain fellow is found in our age of no great account, which
with one turn of the tongue can make any question as clear as the Sun. I
have labored in this book to take a course between both, neither to be
superfluous in unnecessary prolixitie, nor obscure in affected brevity.

Those several points, which in the larger Hexapla I severally handled, I have
for brevity sake, intermingled together: namely touching the diverse readings,
the explaning of questions, the deciding of controversies, and applying of
moral places* The capital letters every where used, show the authors names,
A. Arias Mont. C. Chalde. S. Septuagint. L. Latin text. I. Iunius. V.
Vatablus. B. the Bish. transl. G. Geneva. Pell. Pellicane. Bor. Borrhaius. Mar.
Martyr. Osiand. Osiander.
as is here expressed in the margen: whether this method which I have here
propounded to my self, or that in my former works shall prove more
profitable, or beneficial to the Reader, I leave to the blessing of God, and
the judgment of the judicious Reader. In this course, which I am entered into
to profit my self and others, many rubbes and lets I have had to hinder me,
virulent pens, and invectiues, foreign suits and troubles in law, beside
some domestical cares: some of which God has given happy issue unto, and so
he will, I doubt not in his good time to the rest: that (to use the Apostles
words) I may fulfill my course with joy, Act. 20.24.
and the ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. Amen.

I. Sam.
Chap. I.
Quest. 1. v. 1. Of Ramathaim Zophim.
1. SOme read of one of the two Ramathaims. B. Genev. but one is referred
rather to the word going before: erat vir vnus, or, quidam, there was a
certain man; because the Hebrew preposition min, of, is put before Ramathaim,
not before achad, one. 2. Some because Ramathaim is put in the dual number,
think that there were two cities of that name, and that here that Ramath is
meant, which was situate in mount Ephraim. G.V. but it seems rather, that
this Ramah is put in the dual number, being one and the same city, yet
consisting of two towns as two parts. I. the one opposite to the other. Pell.
for afterward, v. 19. it is simply called Ramah. Osiand. yet were there two
other Ramaths, one in Benjamin, and an other in Nephthali. Iun. 3. Now Zophim
is added, not so called, because there the Prophets dwelt, which were called
Zophim, speculatores, watchmen, Seers, or beholders, Chald. or because it was
situate in an high place, tanquam in specula, as in a watchtower or looking
place, Pelican. but because it was situate in the country or region of Zuph,
c. 9.5. Iun. which might have the name also of Zuph of whom Elkanah was
descended, as this verse shows, called also Zophai. 1. Chron. 6.26. Bor.

2. Quest. Why Elkanah is called an Ephrathite.
1. Some think that he was of the tribe of Ephraim, Vat. but that cannot be:
for he was a Levite, and descended of Kohath. 1. Chron. 6.22. 2. He was then so
called, because he dwelt in mount Ephraim, among the Ephramites, as the
beginning of this verse shows. Iun. So Josephus says, that he dwelt in sort
Ephraimitarum, in the lot of the Ephramites: and the Chald. he was, ex monte
domus Ephraim, of the mountain of the house of Ephraim: for unto the
Kohathites, which descended of Kohath (but not by Amram) were allotted certain
cities in mount Ephraim. Josh. 21.20. Pelican. Borr. 3. This term also of
Ephrathite in an other sense belonged to Judah: Reconcil.
as Ishai the father of David of Bethlehem is called an Ephrathite, 1. Sam.
17.13. and Bethlehem is called Ephrathah, Micah 5.2. that is, of Judah, which
was called Ephratha, of Ephrath the wife of Caleb. 1. Chron. 2.19. Iun. in
Micah 5. But in that sense is it not taken here.

3. Quest. v. 2. Of Elkanah his two wives.
1. This Polygamie of the Fathers under the Law in marrying one or two wives,
was not simply lawful or dispensed with, which is the opinion of (...) and
Durandus, with others of that side: but that cannot be, for our Savior says
in the like case, See more of this question Hexapla in Genes. c. 16. confut. 1.
c. 25. qu. 23.
from the beginning it was not so, Matthew. 19.8. So also the Prophet Malachie,
Did not he make one? yet had he abundance of spirit: and wherefore one? because
he sought a godly seed, Malac. 2.15. 2. Wherefore the truer opinion is, that
this was an humane infirmity in the Fathers, to take unto them two or more
wives: and such marriages were not without great inconveniences: for there was
continual emulation between them, as between Sarah and Hagar, Leah and
Rachel, and here between these two wives of Elkanah. Pelican. And the first
that brought in bigamie was Lamech of the cursed seed of Came: yet because then
the temporal promises of that nation depended upon their carnal generation,
it pleased God to wink at this infirmity, and tolerate it in them, till the
Messiah came, when no longer the Church of God should be tied unto the people
of the Jews: but spiritual children should be begotten unto God from all
nations even among the Gentiles. Osiand.

4. Quest. v. 3. Of Elkanah his yearly sacrifice.
1. Whereas it is said, this man went up from year to year; it is to be
conceived, that he with all the males of his house went up thrice every year,
at three solemn feasts, of the Pasch, Pentecost, and the feast of
Tabernacles, according to the law, Deuteronomy. 16.16. Borr. 2. But he for his part,
being a Levite, went up oftener to do his service at the Tabernacle, unless
in those corrupt times the worship of God were neglected. Pelican. 3. But he
with all his family, not the males only, but with his wives also, went up but
once in the year, Vatab. as v. 21. he is said, to go up with all his house
to offer the yearly sacrifice: which it seems by that place to have been
offered but once in the year. 4. He dwelt not in Shiloh, either because he was
dismissed from service by reason of his age: for, which is more like, because
the Levites were dispersed among the people to instruct them. Mar.

5. Quest. v. 5. Of the portion which Elkanah gave to Annah.
1. Some read, he gave her one double part. Iun. but these words then should
implie a contradiction, to give her one part, and yet double. 2. Some read, he
gave her a portion with a sad countenance. L. V. and they make this the sense,
because she had no children, to whom he should give portions likewise, and so
she had but her single part: he gave it her with an heavy cheer, because
she had no greater portion. Osiand. Borr. But though she had no children, it
was in his power to give her (that notwithstanding) as large a portion, as it
pleased him: and again in this sense, there should be small coherence in the
next words, because he loved her. 3. Therefore the phrase in the Hebrew,
signifying a gift of the face, it is better interpreted, a worthy gift, such
as men use to look upon with a cheerful face, Pelican. or such as may be
set before an honorable person. Vatab. so also B. G. And in this sense the
next words follow well: he gave her a worthy portion, because he loved her: as
Joseph gave unto Benjamin a greater portion, then to his other brethren,
because he loved him more.

6. Quest. v. 9. Of whom it is meant, after they had eaten in Shiloh.
1. The words are, after the eating, which some understand of Annah, that she
rose up, after she had eaten and drunk. Lat. Chald. Vatab. but it is said
before, v. 7. she did not eat: and though the word achlah have a feminine
termination, yet that is supposed to be paragogically added. 2. Some do
reconcile the places thus: that she did eat with them, though she had drunk
no wine, nor strong drink with them, as she says to Eli, v. 15. Osiand. but
yet the contradiction remains still, because v. 7. it is said, she did not
eat. 3. Some therefore apply it unto Elkanah, Anna arose, after he had eaten.
Iun. 4. But seeing the rest of the family went up also with Elkanah, and they
did all eat before the Lord, it is better understood, after they had eaten.
sic Pellic. and B.G. so also the Septuag. (...), after they had eaten: so
reads also Pagnin. And yet it is like that Annah by the persuasion of her
husband v. 8. might have eaten somewhat to comfort her. Borr.

7. Quest. v. 11. Of Hannahs vow.
1. A vow is properly of that, which is not otherwise in that particular
strict manner due without a vow, and therefore, whereas the Levites were
without vow or special profession made, to serve in the Tabernacle, Hannah
does not vow that her son, for whom she prays, should be in that general
manner holy unto God: but whereas the Levites began not to serve before
thirty, and their service ended at fifty, she voweth to give her son unto
God all the days of his life: and not to redeem him with money, which
liberty was granted by the law: Mart. and beside he should be a Nazarite,
neither to drink strong drink, nor to suffer a rasor to come upon his head:
which strict profession generally the Levites entered not into. Osiand. And
extraordinary grace appeared in this child, as in John Baptist, and therefore
they did specially consecrate him unto God, and that not without Gods special
direction. Pelican. 2. Beside, whereas the wife could not make a vow to stand
in force without her husband, Reconcil.
Numb. 30. as appears in the story of Sampson, Iud. 13. it is like that
either she had her husbands consent before; Iun. or else he agreed to it
afterward and ratified it: Borr. because it is called his vow, v. 22. and he is
said to have lent him unto God. c. 2.20. for the verb shaal, he lent, is of
the masculine gender there. 3. This vow, which Hannah lays upon her son,
is not like the superstitious Popish vows, Controversy of Vows.
when parents do consecrate their children to Monkerie: 1. for the vow of the
Nazarites has the warrant of Gods word, so has not the other: 2. that vow was
possible enough, so is not the other, but to those that have the gift of
continency: 3. and they have an opinion that Monastical life is meritorious,
which conceit was not then had of the Nazarites vow. Osiand.

8. Quest. v. 16. What a daughter of Belial is.
1. This word Belial, is generally taken for one exceedingly wicked: the
Septuag. translate, (...), a pestilent woman: which some think to signify
one, absque iugo, without a yoke, Lat. Pelican. void of all fear of God.
Bor. But it seems rather to be derived of these two words, beli, which
signifies without, and jagnal, which is to be profitable, or to prosper. Mont.
Page And so Belial notes such an one, as is altogether unprofitable, and which
shall not prosper: the very child of the devil. Osiand. 2. Where we see what
account this holy woman makes of drunken persons, and of drunkenness: she
counts them the sons and daughters of Belial. Drunken persons the sons of
Belial.
And in deed unto them fitly agree all the significations of this word: 1.
they are licentious and lawless, without any yoke, or bridle to keep them in:
2. they are altogether unprofitable, they neither do good to others, nor
themselves: but wast their patrimony with riotous living; as the parable of
the prodigal child shows: 3. and such do neither prosper in this world,
but consume both their goods, and their flesh, and besides without repentance
do exclude themselves from the celestial inheritance. 1. Cor. 6.9.

9. Quest. v. 20. Of the name Samuel, or Shemuel.
1. This name is commonly read Samuel, but in the original it is Shemuel; but
because use and custom has so obtained, and the Septuag. so read, whose
pronouncing of the name the Apostle follows, Hebr. 11.32. it is fittest
(because of the novelty of sound) to be so retained. 2. And the etymology of
this name is this: it is derived, some say, of two words put together, Iun.
some of three: rather of four, of the word shaal, which signifies to ask,
whereof it keeps only the first letter, and of the preposition min, of,
retaining the first letter also, of a pronoune affix, which signifies him, and
of eel, God: that is, I have asked him of God. Pelican. Mart. 3. This teaches
us, that good names should be imposed upon children, whereby both the parents
and the children should be put in mind of their thankfulness toward God. Pellic.

10. Quest. Of Elkanah and Hannah their offering.
1. Whereas they brought three bullocks, and yet slew but one, v. 25. R. Ben
Gerson thinks, that one was sacrificed the first day, the other the two next:
some, that one was for a burnt offering, the other for peace offerings. Mar. But
the other two (it is more like) were given unto the high priest Eli, for he
with the rest of the priests lived of the oblations and sacrifices. Reconcil.
Osiand. 2. And whereas they brought an Ephah of flower, that is, ten gomers,
or tenth deals, that was according to the law, which prescribed three tenth
deals to be offered with a bullock, Numb. 15.9. and the tenth, which was
overplus, was either for their diet, Bor. or given over and above of their
liberality. Pelican.

11. Quest. v. 24. At what age Samuel was brought to the Tabernacle.
1. The Hebrew interpreters think, that Samuel was weaned at 24. months, that
is, after two years, and then brought up to the Lord: and they commend Hannahs
piety therein, that would not defer to pay her vow unto God. 2. Lyranus
thinks that Samuel was six or seven year old, when he was presented unto
God: which opinion P. Mart. rejects, because she should have then deferred
too long to have paid her vows unto God. But it seems to me, to be the more
probable, for these reasons: 1. because Samuel immedia^ly after his coming
ministered unto the Lord, c. 2.11. which a child of two year old could not do:
2. she never having had child before, would not so soon weane him from the
breasts: as it is thought Sarah weaned not Isaak till he was five year old;
for at the time of the feast, when he was weaned, Ismael mocked him. 3. It had
been a great trouble to bring children so young to the Tabernacle, unless a
nurserie had been appointed for them there. 4. Neither did she defer the
paying of her vow, seeing she kept him but until such time, that he should be
fit for the Lords service.

12. Quest. v. 27. What things are to be prayed for, and how they are obtained.
1. Some question is here moved, whether it be lawful to pray for things
temporal and indifferent, as here Hannah prayed for a child and obtained him.
Chrysostom hom. 8. in Timoth. is of opinion, that only things spiritual are
to be prayed for: things temporal not in particular, but in general, as we
pray for the^ under the name of bread in the Lords prayer. Contra. But it
appears by the examples of holy men, in the Scripture, that it is lawful to
pray for things temporal, as Abraham prayed for Ismael, Moses for victory
against Amelek: but here two conditions are required, that we should pray for
transitory things, transitory, transitorily, not with such feruencie and
desire, as for things spiritual: secondly, we must propound unto us a good
end to use them to Gods glory. 2. But yet we must not think, that we are
heard for the merit of our prayer: God hears us in mercy: yet prayer is
appointed as the way and the mean, wherein we must walk; it is not the cause
of granting our requests. Mar.

13. Quest. v. 28. Who is said to have worshipped God.
1. Some read, they worshipped the Lord there. L. Osiand. but the word
ijshtachu is put for ijshtachaveh, and is of the singular number, as Genesis
4.47.31. in the same word Iakob is said to have bowed himself: but when it is
put in the plural number, it is ijshtachavu: as Exodus 12.27. 2. They which
read in the singular number, some understand it of Samuel, Iun. but he was at
this time a very child: some refer it to Elkanah. Borr. Mar. But the
communication is here between Heli and Hannah: Elkanah is not here mentioned:
therefore it is best understood of Heli, V. Genevens. that as he blessed Hannah
before, and prayed for her, so now also he gives thanks unto God, seeing the
fruit and effect of his blessing.

CHAP. II.
1. Quest. v. 1. How Hannah is said to have prayed, giving thanks.
1. BEcause giving of thanks is a kind of prayer, and in giving of thanks,
prayer also is included; as the Pharisie is said to have prayed, when he gave
thanks, Luke 18. she is said in giving thanks also to have prayed. Genev.
2. And further as she gives thanks for Samuel her son, whom she had
received, so also she further commends him by her prayer to the blessing of
God. Vat. 3. As also this song being prophetical concerning the Messiah, and
the increase of Gods people, and the destruction of their enemies, she prays
also, that in good time the Lord would effect all his gracious promises toward
his Church. Bor. 4. By Hannah, let women learn to lay aside all wanton and
unwomanly songs, and sing only to the praise of God. Pelican. 5. R. Ben
Gerson otherwise dissolueth this doubt, that this song of Hannah consists
partly of thanksgiving, and partly of a prayer: as v. 10. she prays that God
would thunder upon the wicked, which came so to pass, chap. 7. but this
seems somewhat curious. 6. Now whereas the Apostle forbids a woman to
speak in the congregation, 1. Cor. 14. this example of Hannah was
extraordinary, as likewise of Deborah, Iud. 5. as of the prophet Huldah in
Josias time: the Apostle means, that ordinarily women should not speak in
the Church: Reconcil.
but extraordinary prophesying is not forbidden unto them: as 1. Cor. 11. he
shows that a woman should not prophecy or pray bare-headed: which is to be
understood of the extraordinary gift. Mar.

2. Quest. v. 3. Of the meaning of those words, actions are not directed, etc.
1. Some read these words affirmatively, by him enterprises are established:
Genevens. which some apply unto God, his purposes shall come to pass. B. Vat.
some to the actions of men, which are ordered, disposed, and directed by God.
Bor. Pellic. and thus affirmatively read Lat. Septuag. Page 2. But seeing the
word in the text is lo, with aleph, not lo, with vau, it properly signifies
not: and so the words must be read negatiuely, actions are not directed: that
is, without him: Iun. Osiand. Mont. He overthrows and disappointeth the
enterprises of the wicked, as the next verse shows, the bow is broken, etc.

3. Quest. v. 6. Of these words, the Lord brings to the grave, or hell.
1. The word sheol signifies first the grave, the place of bodies, when they
are dead and lie in darkness, and fall to corruption: secondly by a metaphor, it
signifies the state of adversity and misery in this world, when men are
deprived of outward comfort, and sit down as it were in darkness mourning, as
Anna was continually afflicted and perplexed of her adversary in the house:
thirdly, it signifies the forlorn estate of those which are deprived of Gods
favor, and of inward comfort, and feel the wrath of God, whether for a time,
as our blessed Savior upon the cross, when he complained he was forsaken: and
for one to feel himself for the time as forsaken, what is it else, quam
inferni cruciatum sentire, then to feel the torment of hell? or when they are
utterly cast off, as Cain despairing of forgiveness, and Saul forsaken of Gods
spirit, did feel as an hell in their conscience: fourthly, it signifies the
very state of the damned tormented in hell. Bor. 2. But in this place, though
most read, ad infernum, to hell: (...). Sept. L. Chald. Ar. Page yet it more
properly is interpreted the grave, Iun. B. Genesis as the words next before going
do show: the Lord kills, and makes alive; then it follows, the Lord
brings to the grave, and raises up.

4. Quest. v. 15. Of the sin of Eli his sons in robbing the offerings.
Their sin committed toward the offerings of the Lord, was not of one sort,
but diverse. 1. They were guilty of theft and robbery, that whereas the breast
only and right shoulder belonged to the priest of the peace offerings, Leuit.
7.31. they took more, (being not contented with their ordinary portion) even
whatsoever the fleshhooke brought up. Vat. Iun. 2. They also committed
sacrilege: for whereas the Lord was first to be served, and the fat first
burned, Levit. 7.31. they would exact their fee, and more, when as yet the Lord
had not his due. Bor. Iun. 3. They did it with rapine and violence, not staying
to receive it at the offerers hand, but being their own caruers. Osiand. 4.
They offended also in the sin of wantonness, catching the flesh being yet
raw, that they might dress it to the Priests liking. Pelican. 5. So the sin
of the young men was very great: 1. in respect of themselves that committed it,
who being priests should have given a good example unto others: 2. in regard
of God, against whom they were presumptuous: 3. in respect of the great hurt
and inconvenience, which did arise hereof; they caused the people to abhor
the sacrifices of the Lord.

5. Quest. v. 18. Of Samuels linen Ephod.
1. Samuel being a child, not above 12. year old, as Josephus thinks, by
special dispensation, ministered before the Lord, and ware a linen Ephod,
whereas the Levites ordinarily did not minister before they were thirty year
old, Numb. 4.3. Pellic. 2. There were two kind of Ephods belonging to the
service of the Tabernacle, one peculiar unto the high Priest, wrought with gold
and blew silk; an other of linen only, which was common to all the Levites
and Priests: as Saul is said to have slain 85. priests that did wear a linen
Ephod: and of this sort was Samuels Ephod. Bor. Mar. 3. Yet was there a third
kind of Ephod, which was a civil garment, of white linen, used in the time of
mirth and joy: such an Ephod David put on, when he daunced before the Arc, 2.
Sam. 6.14. whereupon the preacher says, At all times let thy garments be
white. Eccles. 9.8.

6. Quest. v. 20. Of the meaning of these words, for the asking which he lent
or bestowed upon Jehovah.
1. Some read, which she asked of Jehovah. B. G. but the word shaal is of the
masculine gender, and therefore can not agree unto Hannah. 2. Some read, which
he asked, V. A.C. but Elkanah asked not the son of God, but Hannah his wife.
3. Therefore the best reading is, which he lent or bestowed upon Jehovah, P. as
the word is taken, c. 1.28. 4. Some read in the second person, quod commodasti,
(...). S. have lent or bestowed: but the verb shaal is of the third person, so
also Iun. exoratum restitueras, which being asked thou have restored: but here
the word restitueras, restored, is supplied: now whereas the person is changed,
Jehovah appoint thee seed, and then it follows, for the asking, which he
bestowed: these latter are the words not of Eli to Elkanah, but of the author
concerning Elkanah. Iun.

7. Quest. v. 22. Of the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle.
1. Some read, which watched, V. L. B. or warfared. A. some, which came. S. C.
rather, which came in troops or armies, I. were assembled. G. P. so is the
word taken Exodus 38.8. 2. Some think they were such women, as came in troops
to be purified according to the law, V. Genesis yet not they only, but other
devout women came flocking in troops to the Tabernacle, to serve the Lord in
fasting and prayer, Osiand. such was Hannah, Luke 2. Mar. so we read Exodus
38.8. of women that came thither of devotion, Iun. so they were as in the Lords
warfare, as the same word is used of the Levites, Numb. 4.3. Borr. 3. Wherein
appears the abominable sin of the sons of Eli, who being of a sacred
calling, committed uncleanness in a sacred place, with religious women: if they
having the remedy of marriage fell into this sin, Of forced single life.
what may be thought of the forced single life of many Popish shauelings, that
were denied this remedy? Pelican. L. Ben Gerson to extenuate the sin of the
Priests, says that they did not commit adultery with them, but only
neglected their sacrifices, and so caused the women to wait still at the door
of the Tabernacle; and he gives this reason, because Eli reprooueth them not
for this sin, nor yet the man of God, that came unto Eli. Hierome in his
traditions shows an other conceit of the Hebrews, that they persuaded the
women to lie with their husbands before they were purified. Contra. The text is
evident, that they, that is, Eli his sons lay with the women: for the word is
put in the masculine gender: Eli only touches their sins in general: and
it was sufficient for the man of God to show that by their prophannesse, they
were worthy to be put from their priesthood; though no mention be made of
their sins. Mar.

8. Quest. v. 25. Of the greatness of the sin of Eli his sons, upon these
words, Who shall plead for him?
1. Some expound thus; that whereas in trespasses committed between men, the
Magistrate may intercede, and take up the matter: in sins committed against
God, there is no mediator, but only Christ: Osiand. but this is not the
meaning, as may appear c. 3.14. where the Lord says, that the sin of Eli
his house shall not be purged with sacrifice for ever: therefore the
difficulty of forgiveness of such sins is here showed: for even other sins
also, are remitted by the mediation of Christ. 2. Wherefore here is a
distinction of sins set down, which are committed either against man, or
against God: and of this sort is that sin, which is called in the new
Testament, sin or blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Bor. 3. For if any
wilfully and maliciously do sin against God, contemning his word, there is
no mediation or intercession left for him, how much more, if the Priest
himself, who uses to pray for others, shall with an high hand sin against
God. Of this sin of obstinacy and malicious contempt speaks Moses, that,
he that does any thing with an high hand, and blasphemeth the Lord, should be
cut off from among his people: Numb. 15.30. that is, without redemption. Such
are said to provoke the Lord to anger, Ier. 7.18. for such the Prophet is
forbidden to pray, Ier. 11.14. and 14.11. Of sin against the holy Ghost.
And this is that sin, which the Apostle calls a treading under foot the
son of God, and a despiting of the spirit of grace, Hebr. 10.26. Iun. for
which the Apostle would not have one to pray: 1. Ioh. 5.16. which sin shall
never be forgiven, Mark. 3.29. not that it is therefore irremissible because
God is not able to forgive it, but because the grace of God has no place in
them that are indurate in their sins, and their hard and impenitent heart is
incapable of grace. Pelican. 4. In this sin three things are specially to be
observed, 1. the object, it must be in such things as concern God, it is a
sin in matters directly tending to the dishonor of God: 2. it must be
committed by such as have knowledge, and so sin against their judgment and
conscience: 3. the manner must be respected: they sin with an high hand, of
malice, obstinacy, and contempt: in all these three were the sons of Eli
found guilty.

9. Quest. v. 25. Of the meaning of these words, they hearkened not to the voice
of their father, because the Lord would kill them.
1. Some refer this to the absolute decree of God, whereby he had ordained
the sons of Eli to destruction, which went before their rebellion and
obstinacy; and they add further, that as of salvation, so of condemnation,
there are two causes: the first, which is the decree and will of God: the
second, of the one faith, and the grace of God, of the other, contempt and
disobedience: and that herein no reason can be yielded of Gods will, which is
most just: but he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.
Bor. Pelican. But this seems not so to be taken of Gods absolute and
eternal decree: 1. because here mention is made not of their everlasting
damnation, but of their violent death: 2. it would be inferred, that Gods will
should be the cause of their hardening, which in no wise is to be admitted: Of
the decree of reprobation.
3. because the positive and actual decree of reprobation and destiny unto
damnation, is not without respect unto man's final impenitencie, howsoever the
reiection of them, in not electing them, is the act only of Gods will: in
which sense it is said, that God will not the death of a sinner, neither does
he desire that the wicked should die. Esech. 18.23. God out of his own will
electeth whom he will, and rejects the rest: and those so rejected, he
ordains unto condemnation, but justly for their sins. 2. Wherefore the will
of God is here rather referred to Gods settled and determinate purpose, arising
from their obstinacy and impenitencie, whereby he had set it down with
himself to punish them by death, and so to deny them grace of repentance, as
being given over to a reprobate sense. sic Iun. Osiand. 3. And further,
whereas it is said, Esech. 18. that God will not the death of a sinner: and yet
here, that God would kill them: first, it may be answered, Reconcil.
that the Prophet speaks of penitent sinners, whose death indeed the Lord
will not, neither shall they die: but here of obstinate and impenitent sinners:
secondly, Augustine distinguishes between the simple and absolute will of
God, and voluntas retribuens, his recompensing will: simply God wills not
death, neither made he death: but it was brought in by sin: yet God as a just
judge wills it, as it is a punishment of sin. Martyr.

10. Quest. v. 25. Whether any may be said to sin with the will of God.
This question is moved by occasion of these words; they obeyed not the voice
of their father, because the Lord would slay them: as though God should be the
cause, why they obeyed not the voice of their father. 1. First, here the
Manichees did most impiously affirm, that there were two beginnings, and two
chief princes, one of light, and an other of darkness: from the one proceeded
good, from the other evil: but this is directly contrary to the Scriptures,
Psalm. 135.6. That God does whatsoever pleases him in heaven, and in earth:
therefore there is no contrary power against God. 2. Some think, that God
suffers sin to be done only in the world, and otherwise concurreth not,
then in leaving and suffering sinners, which was the opinion of Julian the
Pelagian against whom Augustine writ: but if God be said to permit and
suffer, as he does (for by his absolute power he could hinder, that no sin
should be committed) he either suffers sin against his will, which cannot
be said, for nothing can resist his will; or with his will: if he willingly
permit, then there is more then a bare suffering: likewise, the phrase of
Scripture, when he is said, to harden Pharaohs heart, to bid Shemei curse
David, to give over to a reprobate sense, do show more then a permission. 3.
Therefore, although sin may be said in some respect to stand with the will
of God, as shall be showed, yet God is no way the author or cause of sin: but
every man is tempted and lead aside of his own concupiscence, Iam. 1.14. but
how sin stands with the will of God, it now follows to be declared.

1. God concurreth in every action as a general cause: for whatsoever is
wrought by the second causes, proceeds originally from the first cause: for
in him we move, we live, and have our being, Act. 17. but the euilnes of the
action issues from the second causes: as the rider is the efficient cause of
the going of the lame horse, but his lame going is of himself.

2. God also concurreth in subtracting and denying his grace: where he gives
grace, it is of mercy; where he withholdeth, it is just: for none are deprived
of his grace, but the unworthy, and such as refuse: but why God gives not
like grace to all, there is no other reason but his good pleasure.

3. Sin as it is sin, stands not with Gods will, but as it is the
punishment of sin.

4. God is willing sin should be done, because he knows how to use it to
his glory; as the fall of Adam was the occasion of the redemption of the world.

5. God concurreth in the actions of sinners, as a supreme judge, and
ouer-ruler: sometime staying sin before it be done, by punishing it, when it
is done, and in the wicked by drawing forth their malice, and causing it to
appear, as in this sense he is said to have hardened Pharaohs heart.

6. Yet Gods will is to be considered two ways: there is his secret, and
revealed will: as when he bid Abraham sacrifice his son, his revealed will
was that he should slay him, his secret will, that he should not: so Gods will
revealed is against sin; but it stands with his secret will, as is before
showed. Martyr.

11. Quest. v. 30. Of these words, I said, that thine house, and the house of
thy father, should walk before me for ever: when this promise was made
concerning Eli his house.
1. Some think, that whereas Eli came of Ithamar the son of Aaron, in the
time of the Judges, the sons of Eleazar, in whose posterity the high
Priesthood was settled, abusing themselves and their place, their office was
taken from them, and given conditionally unto the sons of Ithamar, Reconcil.
if that they faithfully would execute the same. sic Borr. Osiand. Mar. But
seeing no such conditional promise made to the sons of Ithamar, is mentioned
in Scripture, it is hard to conjecture it; and beside, seeing the Lord had
promised unto Phinehes and his seed the high Priests place for ever, Number. 25.
how could this promise stand, if that office were afterward assured unto an
other: it is like then, that in those disordered times under the Judges,
especially the posterity of Phinihes being unfaithful in their office, they
of Ithamar took occasion to usurp the Priests place, without any such
assignment from God. 2. Therefore the more probable opinion is, that here
reference is had to the first election of Aaron and his seed to the
Priesthood, Exodus 29.9. that his whole seed should have enjoyed that
privilege: but now part of Aarons house, such as came of Ithamar, for the
sin of Eli his house, are cut off. (...).

12. Quest. v. 30. Upon these words, but now it shall not be so.
Here arises a great doubt, seeing Gods promises are most certain, and his
decree immutable; how the Lord here is brought in, saying and unsaying again.
1. The answer is, that Gods promises some are absolute without any condition,
as was the promise of the Messiah; some are propounded unto us conditionally:
especially the temporal promises made unto the Israelites, depended upon the
condition of their obedience, so was the Priesthood promised to this family of
Eli: Mar. so now life everlasting is promised to the faithful and believers.
2. But will some say, does then Gods election depend upon our works, or
belief? No: in no wise: for God as he has promised the reward, so also, to
those whom he purposes to make heirs of his promise, he has likewise
ordained the means, to give them faith, and all other graces, to apprehend and
lay hold of the promises: which are denied unto those, that are deprived of the
promises. 3. Gods promises then are only effectual to those, which by a
lively faith, do apprehend them: the rest, which by their disobedience do
fall off from Gods promises, do not work any alteration in the purpose of
God, who foresaw both their disobedience, and that his promises belonged not
unto them.

13. Quest. v. 27. What man of God it was that was sent unto Eli.
1. Diverse opinions there are of this matter: some think it was Elias, some an
Angel appearing in humane shape* some that it was Elkanah, or some other of
Phinehes race. ex Vat. 2. But it is more probable, that it was Samuel himself,
who thus speaks modestly of himself: so that this is set down by an
anticipation or prevention of the story; which is more fully declared in the
next chapter. sic Iun. Josephus. The reasons are these, because it is said
there was no manifest vision in those days, c. 3. v. 1. that is, no prophecy,
as the Chald. and consequently no Prophet. 2. In the next chapter v. 3.
relation is made to this commination, as being in effect all one, and the
same. 3. Samuels unwillingness to tell, what he had heard, and Heli his patient
hearing of it, in the next chapter, shows that it had not been told him
before.

14. Quest. v. 34. Of the sign, which the Prophet gave, and generally of
signs.
1. Because that there were few Prophets in those days, there was no manifest
vision, c. 3.1. it was therefore necessary, that this Prophet should confirm
this prophecy by a sign: which kind of demonstration by signs, of it self
does not give credit and authority to the prophecy, but as the spirit of God,
working by the sign as the instrument, persuades the heart. 2. The sign is,
by the accomplishment of a part of the prophecy, to show the certentie of the
rest: so because whatsoever God has heretofore promised to his Church is
performed, as concerning the incarnation, passion, resurrection, ascension of
Christ: we thereby are assured, that God will perform the rest, as of the
destruction of Antichrist, the general resurrection, the day of judgment. 3.
Now because signs also may be wrought by the operation of Satan, as the
Egyptian sorcerers did, and Satan may sometimes foretell things: these
differences are to be observed, between true and false predictions. 1. The
signs, which the true Prophets gave, did always take effect, and never
failed: Satan sometime speaks true, but more often lies: 2. the
prophetical predictions were propounded manifestly and plainly, the oracles of
Satan were doubtful and ambiguous: 3. the prophetical tended to a good end,
for the maintenance of true religion: the diabolical to the advancing of
superstition and false religion: which is the true mark to discern true
prophetical signs from false. Deuteronomy. 13.2. Mar.

15. Quest. v. 32. Of the punishment threatened to fall upon Eli and his
posterity.
1. The first judgment is, that the house of God shall be distressed, thou
shall see the distress of the habitation of the Lord, the Arc being taken:
Iun. the most read, thou shall see thine enemy in the habitation of the Lord:
but, that is spoken of afterward, v. 35. and it is not like, that this great
judgment of taking the Arc should be omitted, seeing the Lord says, c. 3.12.
he will bring upon Eli his house, all things which he had spoken, and when I
begin, I will make an end: it is like therefore that all, which afterward
befell Eli his house, was before spoken of.

2. The second calamity is, that for a long time there should not be an old
man left in Eli his house: for he and his sons dying in one day, they left
behind them but two young sons, Ahitub and Ichabod, whereof mention is made,
c. 14.3.

3. The third calamity is, that all the rest of his house should die, when
they are men, which some understand, that before they come to be thirty year
old, fit for the service of the Tabernacle, they should be taken away by death:
Osiand. But rather here is particular reference to that lamentable accident,
when Saul put to the sword 85. of the priests, which did wear a linen Ephod;
being then men grown of thirty year old at the least: all of them were put
to the sword, saving Abiathar, who lived to see greater sorrow: for beside the
afflictions of David, whereof he was partaker, he survived to see himself
displaced, and Zadok put in his place: and therefore it is said, to cause thine
eyes to fail: Heli in his posterity grieved to see an other not of their
family preferred to the priesthood: the like phrase when one is said to see or
fail in his posterity, see 2. Sam. 7. v. 16. where the Lord says to David,
thy kingdom shall be established before thee for ever: that is, in thy
posterity.

4. The fourth misery, is the death of his two sons, Ophni and Phinehas,
both in one day, v. 34. where the rest of the calamities shall take beginning.
Iun.

5. The fifth, the substituting of an other high priest in his place, which was
performed by Solomon, who set Zadock in Abiathars room. 1. king. 2.

6. The sixth is, the poverty and bare estate of his posterity, which should
humble themselves to the priest for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread:
which came to pass afterward, when Abiathar was sent to Anathoth to live of
his own patrimony, which was not sufficient to maintain him and his, without
some relief from the altar: Iun. As the sons of Eli sinned before in
wantonness and excess, so their posterity shall be punished with want and
penury. Mar.

16. Quest. v. 36. Of these words, he shall walk before mine anointed for
ever.
1. Some understand it of Solomon the anointed king, that Zadock should
execute his office under him. Vat. But because it is added, all the days, or
all times, that is, for ever, it must not be restrained to Zadocks time only:
for the Lord said before, he would make him a sure house, that is, the
priesthood should be continued in his posterity. 2. Some therefore understand
it not of Solomon only, but of his successors also the anointed Kings: Borr.
but the word is put in the singular, before mine anointed, and therefore must
be understood of one. 3. Therefore, this anointed is Jesus Christ the high
priest of Gods people, before and under whom Zadock executed his office,
being a type and figure of him* whose priesthood was to continue even until
the coming of Christ, who should succeed in the true priesthood for ever.
Iun. 4. D. Kimchi here well observes, that the priest is said to walk before
the King the Lords anointed: the King came not before the priest, but when he
consulted with God by Vrim and Thummim, as Ioshuah stood before Eleazar, Numb.
27.21. otherwise the priest was to go unto the king: Controv. Princes not to
be conuented before the Pope.
but the practice of the proud Prelate of Rome is contrary, who has used to
convent Emperors and Kings before him. Mar.

CHAP. III.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of these words, there was no manifest vision, etc.
1. GOd for the sin of his people brought upon them a famine, not of bread or
water, but of his word, as he threatens by his Prophet Amos, 8.12. Osiand. 2.
Although there might be some private and particular visions and revelations, as
to Manoah, Iud. 13. yet the public office of Prophets was ceased and
intermitted: for this is not to be understood of the written word, for they had
the books of Moses, but of the word of prophecy. Iun. 3. And if any such
visions were they were dark, hid, and obscure: Pellic. as the Septuag. read,
there was no (...), no distinct vision: that is, opened, unfolded, and applied.
4. Christ Jesus the word of God, by whom the Lord spoke to Samuel, v. 21. and
to David, 2. Sam. 7.21. did sparingly reveal and manifest himself to his
servants the Prophets.

2. Quest. Of the light of God, which burned in the Temple.
1. This light was the candlestick with seven lamps, which was appointed for
the use of the Tabernacle. Osiand. 2. Some expound these words, yer the light
went out, of midnight, when the lamp began to wax dim: Pelican. but the
lamp was watched all night, and kept burning till the morning, and continually
supplied with oil, Exodus 27.20. and so not suffered to go out of it self. 3.
It was rather toward the morning: for the lamp was to burn from the evening
to the morning, Exodus 27.21. 2. Chron. 13.11. Iun. 4. Now in that they used not
to burn the lamp by day, but it served for the use of the night; Against the
superstitions use of candles.
herein the superstition of the Romanists appears, who do use to burn
tapers upon their altars by day, therein exceeding the ceremonious observations
and prescripts of Moses law.

3. Quest. Of the place where Samuel slept.
1. The usual reading is, Samuel slept in the Temple of God: B. Genesis but
beside that in the Tabernacle; the Levites had no cabbines appointed them to
lie in, the distinction athnah coming between, does hinder the joining of
these two clauses together: so that in the Temple of God, must rather be
referred to the first branch of the sentence, yer the light went out in the
Temple of God, etc. sic Iun. Vatab. 2. But Samuels place was among the Levites,
not in, but near unto the Tabernacle, as the priests also had their celles
without the Tabernacle, but somewhat nearer: Iun. so the Chalde expresses the
sense, that Samuel lay in atrio Levitarum, in the Levites ward or court. 3. It
seems that Samuel was appointed by Eli to keep the lamps, and to tend them
in the night: Pelican. for the Levites continually kept the Lords watch. 2.
Chron. 13.11.

4. Quest. v. 7. In what sense Samuel is said, not to have known the Lord.
1. Some read, Thus did Samuel before he knew the Lord. P. Genesis S. but the
sense is more perfect, to read thus, Samuel yet knew not Jehovah, or the Lord:
as I.C.Ar. V.B. the word teres signifies both, not yet, and before that: but
the first is more proper here, which makes the sense full without any other
addition: but in the other reading something must be supplied. 2. Now there is
a double kind of knowledge of God, ordinary, and extraordinary; that common
to all the servants of God, this peculiar to the Prophets, when the will of God
is revealed concerning things to come: Samuel was not without the other before,
but the latter he had not experience of till now: as the next words show, the
word of Jehovah was not revealed unto him, which the Chalde interprets of the
word of prophecy: Bor. therefore Heli gives him instruction, and informs
him, that it was the Lord that spoke unto him. v. 9. Iun.

5. Quest. v. 13. Of these words, they brought a curse upon themselves.
1. Some read as though this were referred to the scandal and offense, which
they came into: indigne faciebant, they did unworthily. L. they ran into
slander. G. they despised or abased themselves. P. 2. Some understand it of
the people, that they cursed them. Bor. 3. Some refer it unto God, that they
cursed God: (...). S. and so some think, that first the Hebrews, for lahem,
to them, did read li, to him, meaning God. Vatab. Kimchi. 4. But the true
reading is, maledixerunt sibi, they accursed themselves: A. that is, brought a
curse upon them. Iun. and as the Chald. they provoked to themselves: 1. the
wrath of God.

6. Quest. v. 13. In what sense Heli is said, not to have restrained or stayed
his sons.
1. Some read, he corrected them not: L. B. others, he admonished them not: S.
he did not make them sorrowful: V. but it is better read, he did not restrain
them: I. or stay them: G. or forbid them: A.P.C. cahah is so taken, Isa. 61.3.
spiritus contractus, a restrained or contracted spirit. 2. The meaning is,
Reconcil.
that although he did admonish them, c. 2.25. yet it was out of season, he did
it not soon enough, he suffered them to have their will too long: he dealt not
with them, till they were grown impudent in their sin, and all Israel rang
of them: Bor. neither was his admonition severe enough, according to his
authority, being both their father, high Priest, and Judge: Iun. yea, it
seems that he gave them not (...) angry or frowning look; as the word cahah
also signifies, to frown, to wrinkle. Osiand. And howsoever it was, he did
not correct them for their sin, and so stay them by punishment from sinning
further. Pelican. 3. A good example for domestical discipline, that parents
take heed, least by too much lenity, they spoil their children, and incur
the heavy displeasure of God, as Heli did. Borr.

7. Quest. v. 14. How the Lord is said to swear.
1. The most read here, I have sworn: and all the rest of this speech which
the Lord had with Samuel, they read in the preter tense, as having relation
unto the former prophecy, c. 2. as v. 12. I have spoken, v. 13. I have told
him: so here, I have sworn: but because there is no such oath mentioned
before, c. 2. it is better interpreted in the present tense, I do swear. Iun.
2. Now the Lord swears upon two occasions, either for the confirmation of his
promises, as he swear to Abraham, Genesis 22.16. or for the more certentie of his
judgments, as Numb. 14.28. upon the people, that murmured against the Lord
after the return of the spies; as also in this place. 3. And the Lord having
not a greater to swear by, swears by himself, Hebr. 6.13. which form of
the Lords oath sometime is expressed by these words, I swear by my self,
Genesis 22.16. sometime thus, as I live, Numb. 14.28. sometime it is not
expressed, but understood, as in this place. 4. Now, whereas the words are, I
swear, if the iniquity etc. here must be understood the other redditiue part:
as let me not be God, or let me not be true, or such like. Mar.

8. Quest. v. 14. Of these words, if the iniquity of Helies house shall be
purged, etc.
There are three several readings of these words: 1. some do express them
negatiuely, the wickedness etc. shall not be purged, as L.V.B.G. but the Hebrew
particle im, signifies si, if; it is not taken for non, not. 2. Sometime im is
an interrogatiue particle, as it is taken 2. Sam. 19.35. and so sometime Iunius
reads c. 14.46. as Jehovah lives should one hair of his head fall. 3. But
the best reading is, if the wickedness etc. and then the form of the oath must
be supplied, as let me not live, or let me not be God, if etc. Iun. so also
S.C. A. P. This reading I prefer for these reasons: 1. because the Apostle so
expresses the Lords oath, Heb. 3.11. I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter
into my rest. 2. As also in other the like oaths made by men, the like clause
is supplied, as God do so and so unto me, if etc. which clause is sometime
expressed, as in this place, v. 17. and 1. king. 20.10. Benhadad swears by
his gods, the gods do so and so unto me, if etc. 3. Unless some such clause
be here supplied and understood, it has not the form of an oath: but seeing
the Lord is said to swear, the form of an oath must be conceived.

9. Quest. v. 14. How it is said, the wickedness of Elies house shall not be
purged with sacrifice for ever.
1. Some of the Hebrews think, that though their sin could not be purged
with sacrifices, yet they might by prayer, alms deeds, and keeping of the
law: but sins are not purged or redeemed by good works, which
notwithstanding are pleasing unto God, as proceeding from a lively faith: but
sins are only purged by faith in Christ's blood, who was prefigured in the
sacrifices. 2. The sacrifices then if they were not offered in faith, did not
purge the conscience: they might be thereby externally purified, and by that
outward rite continued in the society of the people of God: but inwardly they
were not purged, but by faith in Christ. 3. And that Christ's death was shadowed
forth in the sacrifices, it is evident: for the sin of man deserving death,
could not be satisfied by the death of any inferior unto man, as were the
bruit beasts: therefore it was necessary, that thereby should be shadowed
forth the death of him, that should make a full and perfect sacrifice. 4. And
this was the faith of all the holy men under the law, who urging so often the
promise and covenant made to Abraham, looked unto the Messiah: but such as were
carnal, saw not this mystery. Mar. 5. Now two ways the sin of Eli his
house is said not to be purged: in respect of the personal sin of his wicked
sons, which was a sin of that nature, that their impenitent heart could
find no remission, as is showed before, c. 2. q. 8. Iun. and in regard of the
punishment, that howsoever his posterity upon their repentance might be
forgiven, yet the sentence of God concerning the loss of the Priests office
should never be reuersed. Mar. Genevens.

10. Quest. v. 15. What doors of the house of Jehovah Samuel opened.
1. Some think, that whereas yet the Tabernacle consisted of courtaines and
couerings, and so had vailes in stead of doors: that the house of God, and the
Tabernacle were not the same, as the Arc was in one place, and the Tabernacle
in an other in the time of David and Solomon, before the temple was built:
Pelican. and hereunto this gives some probability, because it is called here
not the Tabernacle, but the Temple of the Lord, v. 3. and the house of the
Lord, v. 15. But this is not like: for the Tabernacle was set up in Shiloh in
Ioshuahs time, c. 18.1. and so it had continued in the time of the Judges, Iud.
21.19. and there it was now in Helies time. c. 1.9. 2. Therefore it is more
like, that though the Tabernacle, while it was in the desert, for the better
transporting and carrying from place to place, had vailes only hanging in the
entrance in stead of doors: yet now being settled in a certain place, it might
also be made sure with doors. Osiand. 3. These were the doors only of the
outward court, whether the people might come in to worship, Iun. and the charge
whereof belonged to the Levites. 1. Chron. 26. Osiand.

11. Quest. v. 19. Of the prerogative and excellency of Samuels calling.
Three things are expressed, wherein the excellency of Samuels gifts, and the
prerogative of his calling appear. 1. The certentie of his predictions, and
prophesies, that they all came to pass, none of them were spoken in vain: so
that Samuel needed not any other signs or miracles for the demonstration of
his calling, the effect and accomplishment of his prophesies being a
sufficient approbation. Pellic. 2. He was faithful, without any partiality or
accepting of persons, in delivering the word of God to Israel: Osiand. as Moses
is said to have been faithful in the Lords house, Numb. 12.3. After the Lord
had thus begun to reveal himself to Samuel, he proceeded still and added
further to reveal unto him his will, and to appear unto him, v. 21. Iun. 4.
Samuel therefore was an honorable Prophet, because in him the word of
prophesying decayed, was revived: and therefore it is said, 2. Chron. 35.18.
that there was no passover like unto that of Josias, since the time of Samuel
the Prophet; who restored religion, being then greatly corrupted. Mar.

CHAP. IIII.
1. Quest. v. 1. How Samuels word came to all Israel.
There are four expositions of these words: 1. some thus interpret: the word
of Samuel was known to all Israel: C. Pellic. and so refer it to the latter
end of the former chapter, v. 20. how all Israel knew that faithful Samuel
was the Lords Prophet. But here, the word known is added, it is not in the
original. 2. Others expound it of Samuels speaking to all Israel, that the
war should be undertaken by the commandment of Samuel: sic Vat. Genev. but
the Philistims, as it appears, first provoked the Israelites to battle: and
it would have somewhat derogated to Samuel at the first, if he should have
been the perswader of such an unfortunate battle. 3. Some then understand it
of Samuels admonitions and preachings to the people, to draw them to
repentance. Osiand. 4. But this, going before the lamentable event of the
battle with the Philistims, as a preface unto it, rather signifies, that the
word of Samuel came to pass in this manner to all Israel: for he had
prophesied not only against Helies house, but had showed, that all Israel
should taste of the same judgment: their ears should tingle, when they heard
the heavy news. c. 3.11. And by the event of these prophesies Samuel got
credit and estimation with all Israel. Iun.

2. Quest. v. 3. Of the Israelites sending for of the Arc into the camp.
1. Their presumption appears, in commanding as it were the Ark of God to be
brought unto them, causing it to be fet without any pomp, or due reverence, by
the ministry of the profane and ungodly priests the sons of Heli. Pellic.
2. Further, they did it presumptuously, in aduenturing thus to do of their
own head, never consulting with Samuel, nor having any such warrant, or
commandment from God. Osiand. 3. Their carnal confidence is manifest, in
trusting to the Arc of wood, having God their enemy, who, as Josephus says,
was greater then the Arc, which was to be reverenced for him: they seek not
to amend their manners, nor to be reconciled to God by repentance, nor to
remove the wicked priests. Pellic. Osiand. 4. Much like hereunto was the
superstitious practice of the Papists, who in the time of common calamities, as
of the pestilence, and unseasonable weather, would go about in procession, in
the streets, with their pix and the host: as though there were virtue in such
ceremonies, to appease the wrath of God. Osiand. Mar. And much like also are
carnal Christians to these superstitious Israelites, Controv. Not to repose
any trust in ceremonies.
who are confident upon their baptism, and the receiving of the Eucharist, and
such other badges of their profession: which are but witnesses against them,
and means to provoke the wrath of God the more, while they are not answerable
to their profession in their life: like as the Israelites, at the presence of
the Ark, had a greater overthrow then before. Borr. 5. David carried an other
mind, who sent back the Arc again to Jerusalem, when he fled from Absalom,
2. Sam. 15. persuading himself, that there was more force in true humility
and repentance, then in the sight and presence of any ceremony whatsoever.

3. Quest. v. 7. Of the fear of the Philistims.
1. This was no true fear of God proceeding of love, but from a servile mind,
being terrified with the expectation of Gods judgments: such a fear was in
Pharaoh, and in the Cananites, at the coming of the Israelites: so the Devils
do fear also and tremble. Bor. 2. These Philistims had no knowledge at all of
the true God, but a superstitious imagination, that he was like unto their
gods: and therefore they speak of the only God, as of many, calling them
gods, v. 8. These are the gods that smote the Egyptians: because they
themselves worshipped many gods. Iun. 3. They, as all Idolaters have no sure
confidence in their idols, but speak as desperate men, not knowing which way
to turn them. Osiand.

4. Quest. v. 8. How it is said, which smote the Egyptians with plagues in the
wilderness.
Whereas the plagues, which were laid upon the Egyptians, were sent upon them
in Egypt, and not in the desert: to remove this doubt, 1. some insert a
conjunction copulative, Reconcil.
and in the desert. Sept. Vatab. 2. Some do understand it of the wonders,
which the Lord wrought for his people in the desert: sic Chald. Osiand. but
then many words must be supplied, which are not in the text. 3. Some do give
an other interpretation, and would have midbar here not to signify the desert,
but the word: for by the word of God in the mouth of Moses, were all those
plagues brought: so is the word taken, Cantic. 4.3. Thy speech (midbar) is
comely: ex Borr. but it is not like, that the blind ignorant Philistims, had
such understanding of the power of Gods word. 4. Wherefore, having made mention
of all the plagues wherewith the Egyptians were smitten, and forced to let
Israel go, as they are declared in Exodus unto the 11. chap. they add also in
the desert, because, in the overthrow of the Egyptians in the red sea, which
joined to the desert of Etham, there was a consummation of all the former
plagues: Iun. and it was the last, and most grievous plague of all. Genev. So
that the first solution comes nearest to the point, to understand the
plagues, wherewith they were smitten, partly in Egypt, partly in the desert.

5. Quest. v. 12. Of the man of Benjamin that came with the heavy tidings, and
of his behavior.
1. Some of the Hebrews without any ground do imagine, that this should be
Saul, that ran from the battle, and had taken out of the Arc the tables of
stone. ex Pelican. But this is not like: for then Saul, when he was anointed
by Samuel, should have been past a young man, as he is there called, c. 9.2.
which was above twenty year after this battle, as may be gathered, c. 7.6.
for the Arc abode after this 20. years in Kiriathiearim before Saul's election
to be king: and D. Kimchi uses this reason, that seeing the Lord struck Vzzah
for touching the Arc, Saul could not have gone unpunished, if he had opened
the Arc to take out the Tables of stone. It was then some messenger of the
tribe of Benjamin, some ordinary person, of no great account, because he is
not expressed by name. 2. He uses two ceremonies to show his grief: the
rending of his garments, which argued a mind rent, and perplexed with grief:
and the earth upon his head showed their mortal and casual state, that must
go to the earth again: Borr. see the like Josh. 7.6. Iun.

6. Quest. v. 18. Of the causes of the sudden death of Heli.
1. The principal cause was the justice of God, in punishing by this temporal
judgment, the negligence of Eli and remissenes, in not correcting his sons:
that as he bowed not the necks of his sons to the yoke, so his neck as a
just recompense, is now bowed and broken. Borr. 2. The subordinate cause, was
the lamentable report of so many calamities, which fell out together, Israel
fled, his sons slain, and the Arc taken, at the which he grieved most of
all: the messenger makes no pause at all, but utters all his heavy news at
once, as it were of purpose, to oppress and ouerload him with grief; whereas,
if he had taken time, to tell it by degrees, his grief might have been
somewhat allaied. 3. The isntrumental cause, was his falling from his seat:
which was not a low stool, but an high throne, as Josephus, as meet for the
person of the high priest, and chief Judge: so he fell high: and he was also
very old, almost, of an hundred years, and so his body was gross and
quarrie, and he not nimble to shift for himself. Vatab. Add also hereunto,
that he was very dim sighted, and so could not see which ways to help
himself.

7. Quest. v. 18. What is to be thought of Helies case before God.
1. Temporal corrections, though they be unto the death of the body, are not
signs that a man is cast off and forsaken of God: as Jonathan and Josias were
cut off suddenly in battle, yet both of them good men. 2. Neither yet is
sudden death to be taken always as a forerunner of everlasting punishment:
Moses died in his strength, and without sickness: Sampson ended his days all
at once, when he pulled down the house upon his head and the Philistims:
sudden death to the children of God, is but as the translation of Henoch and
Elias, which was in a moment: therefore Heli is not to be condemned, because
this judgment of sudden death fell upon him. 3. But it may rather be gathered,
that Heli was (notwithstanding some infirmities) a good man: and though he
could not escape this temporal punishment, which for example sake, the Lord
had purposed to bring upon him; yet it may safely be thought, that he died in
the state of grace, in respect of everlasting life. 1. This may be gathered by
his innocence, and honesty of life, who misliked the sins of his children,
as it may appear by his reprehension of them, though it were too mild and
favorable: neither does the Scripture object any crime of note unto him, but
that of negligence and remissenes toward his children. 2. His patience is
evident, that when Samuel had declared unto him the purpose of God, in judging
his house, he meekely made this answer, as submitting himself to the will of
God, v. 18. He is the Lord, let him do what seems good: as comforting
himself in God, though he could not avoid that outward chastisement. Osiand.
Pelican. The like patient resolution was in David: But if he thus say, I have
no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good in his
eyes, 2. Sam. 15.26. 3. Further, his zeal and love unto religion appears,
who took more grievously the loss of the Arc, then the death of his sons,
and desired no longer to live, the Arc being taken. 4. Lastly, that saying of
Ecclesiasticus may be applied unto Heli: Concerning the Judges, every one by
his name, whose heart went not a whoring, nor departed from the Lord, their
memory be blessed: Ecclesiast. 46.11. for of this number was Heli, one of the
Judges, who is not found to have misled the people unto Idolatry or false
worship.

8. Quest. v. 21. Of the death of Phinehes wife, and of her son Ichabod.
1. This woman grieuing more for the loss of the Arc, then rejoicing that
she had gained a son, and for very grief giving up the ghost, and making no
great account of the death of her father in law and husband, in regard of that
dishonor, which by the taking of the Arc would redound unto God, therein
shows her zeal and love unto religion, which her husband wanted. Pelican.
2. She thereupon named her son Ichabod: which is compounded of two words,
ee, which signifies vae, woe: Osiand. or, where: Pelican. rather it is put
for even, not, or no, Iun. the other word is cabadh, glory: Ichabod then is,
where is the glory: or rather, no glory. Josephus thinks, that she came
before her time, and that Ichabod was borne at seven months: but that is not
like, because the child lived, c. 14.3. but here Samuels prophecy is
fulfilled, that there should not be an old man left of Helies house. 3. This
translating of the glory of God to the Philistims, prefigured the oblation of
grace to the Gentiles, and the remoouing of the glory of religion from the
obstinate Jews. Pelican.

CHAP. V.
1. Quest. v. 2. Why the Philistims brought the Ark of God into the house of
Dagon.
1. SOme think, that the Philistims herein did honor the Arc, (which the
Israelites had profaned, and used with small reverence) placing the same in
the most honorable place, as they thought, in the temple of their Idol Dagon:
therein showing their error and simplicity, rather then treachery. Pelican.
2. But it appears rather, that they did it in dishonor, and disgrace of the
Arc, as giving unto Dagon the honor of the victory, and consecrating it unto
their Idol, as one of their chief spoils. Bor. Osiand. And this is evident by
the event, first the casting down and defacing of their Idol by the hand of
God, then the plaguing of the people: which things came upon them for the
contempt of the Arc. 3. Thus in the kingdom of the beast and Antichrist,
Contr. Against Idols in Temples.
as the Philistims did give unto Dagon the honor of the Arc, so the Romanists
profane the Sacraments of religion, in their temples of Idols. Borr.

2. Quest. v. 4. Of these words, only Dagon remained.
1. Some read, the body of Dagon, Chald. others, the trunk of Dagon, L. or
stumpe. B. G. but none of these words are in the original, but only Dagon
remained: some read thus: only that which resembled a fish remained, Iun. but
this expounds rather the sense, then interprets the words. 2. This Idol
Dagon as appears by this description, in his upper parts he was like a man,
in his nether parts, he resembled a fish: for dag signifies a fish: and his
head and hands being cut off, only that which was properly called Dagon,
representing a fish remained: some think, it was called dagon, of the great
abundance of wheat and grain in those sea coasts: Osiand. but the other
deriuation is more certain: for whereas the country of the Philistims, which
were the same, called of foreign writers, Phenicians, consisted of merchandise
and fishing, they to that end framed their Idol to the similitude partly of a
man, partly of a fish. Borr.

3. Quest. Why the Lord showed this example upon the Philistims god.
1. Herein the Lord manifestly shows, that when religion seems to be
utterly banished, and the true worship of God to be abolished, and superstition
and impiety to take place, that then God will take the cause into his own
hand, and avenge himself of those which dishonor him. Osiand. And as here God
maintained the honor of the Arc, even in the mids of Dagons temple, so he
has restored the Arc of the Gospel, and set it up, which was as kept in
bondage in gross popish superstition and Idolatry. 2. The Lord herein
manifested the vanity of Idols, that are not able to help themselves, as the
Philistims are feign to set up Dagon in his place again being cast down:
such are the vain Idols, and images of both Gentile and popish Idolaters: they
have eyes and see not, feet and walk not. Borr. 3. Hereby it is also evident,
Controv. God will have no partners in his worship.
that God admits no partner in his worship, neither will suffer his honor
to be given to an other: as Dagon can not stand in the presence of the Arc, so
all copartners, as Saints, Images, honored with religious worship, are an
abomination unto God. Osiand. 4. Further it may be here observed, that the true
God expels and drives away all false gods: for as the Arc here, which was
the seat of the God of Israel, vanquisheth Dagon: so after that Christ the
true light of the world was come, the oracles of Apollo, and other heathen
Idols ceased. Plutarke makes many light and vain conjectures, as that it
might be the spirits, which were presidents of those Idols, grew old and
decayed: or that there might be some alteration in the influence of the
planets: or the exhalations were stayed, whereby Apollos prophetess used to be
inspired. But these are fond conceits: the true cause was, that Christ the
true Prophet was come, and therefore all such false cousening prophets held
their peace: like as, where the Gospel is received, many visions and
apparitions of Satan, with false signs and wonders are abolished. Mar.

4. Quest. v. 5. Why the priests of Dagon do not tread upon the threshold.
1. They foolishly imagined, that the threshold was sanctified by the very
touching of Dagon, and therefore they did forbear as it were to profane that
place with treading upon it. Osiand. 2. Thus in stead of giving God the honor,
they fall into a further degree of superstition. Genev. 3. Yet this also
redounded to the honor of God: for as often as they used this ceremony, it
called to their remembrance the confusion of their Idol in that place. Pellic.
4. But much unlike unto this superstitious use, was that custom observed of
old time among the Jews, in forbearing to eat of the sinew of the hinder
parts, in memory of the shrinking of Iakobs sinew, Genesis 32.32. for that was
kept as a civil remembrance of a thing done, but this was a superstitious
observation in honor of a filthy Idol.

5. Quest. v. 5. Of the meaning of these words, unto this day.
1. Some so understand them, as that the Philistims should among themselves
decree this to be a perpetual ordinance firmly to be kept: as Augustine also
understands the like place, Josh. 4.9. where it is said, that the twelve
stones, which Ioshuah caused to be set up within Jorden, continued unto this
day. But seeing both there and here, these are the words, not of them, whereof
it is written, but of the writer, it is clear, that they are not referred to
any such decree or purpose of the doer, sic Masius in 4. Josh. v. 9. 2. Some
think again, that by this phrase, it is insinuated, that the things spoken of
so remained, until the day and time of the writer of the history. sic Vatab.
Borr. Pelican. But where the history fell out to be written not long after
the acting thereof, in this sense no long time should be signified, if it
exceeded not the time of the writer. 3. Therefore I think rather, that by the
phrase, unto this day, is implied, that it so continued a long indefinite time:
though precisely according to the letter, many of those things are not extant
now: sic Iun. they continued immutabili and perpetuo statuto, by an immutable
and perpetual ordinance. Josh. 4.9.

6. Quest. v. 6. What manner of disease and plague it was, wherewith the
Philistims were smitten.
1. Some read that he smote them in altis locis, in the high places, Ar. but
this agrees not with that which follows, that the hand of God was against
the city, v. 9. that is, the inhabitants thereof, not upon their grounds. 2.
Some do understand the place where the disease was, not the disease it self,
as that they were smitten in their secret parts. S. L. V. 3. Others, that take
it for the disease it self, some think it was the dysenterie or bloody
flixe, Joseph. others, the falling down of the long gut, Osian. it was rather
the hemorrhoides, or piles, called mariscae, P. or ficus. 4. And of this
disease there were two kinds, which are touched here; the first is called
ghephalim, the common sort of Hemorrhoides: the other more grievous, which
wrung them in their inward parts: and therefore it is said, v. 9. that they
lay hid within them. Iun. 5. Some beside this disease add further, that the
waters boiled out of the earth, and nati sunt mures, and abundance of mise were
bread, wherewith the country was plagued; so the Latin, following some Greek
copies: but although it be evident in the next chapter by their manner of
offerings, that they were troubled also with mise, yet no such thing is
expressed here. Osiand.

7. Quest. v. 8. Why the Philistims agreed to carry about the Arc unto Gath.
1. Herein appears the fondnes of this people, that seeing, and finding by
experience, that the religion of Israel was of greater power then theirs, yet
consulted among themselves, and conferred not with the Lords priests, to take
direction of them. Osiand. 2. And they likewise show their malice, in that they
had rather keep the Arc unto their cost, then send it home to Israel again.
Pelican. 3. Their superstition also appears, in that they think the change
of place would alter the effect, and in carrying about the Arc from one place
to an other, they thought to try, whether it were the presence of the Arc
that had caused those plagues, or rather that it came of chance. Osiand. 4.
They do acknowledge the hand of God to be against them, and their god Dagon:
but this servile fear could not bring them to repentance: like as Pharaohs
sorcerers confessed it was the finger of God, and as the Devils felt the power
of God, when they said to Christ, What have we to do with thee? after the same
manner the Philistims here do confess God: and such is their blindness, though
they saw, that their god also was judged, yet they would not leave their
filthy idolatry. Borr.

CHAP. VI.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the continuance of the Arc among the Philistims for the
space of seven months.
1. Herein we may see the miserable state of Israel at this time, that were
deprived of that visible sign of Gods presence among them, namely the Arc,
wherein was the two Tables of the commandments: that for the time, they seemed
to be as forlorn, and forsaken of God: Osiand. so such times may sometime fall
out in the Church of God, that for their sin the Lord may suffer them for a
while to be deprived of the true use of Gods word and the Sacraments. 2. The
Philistims held the Arc thus long, thinking that in time plagues might
assuage, and then they purposed to keep the Arc in thraldom and captivity
still. Genevens. 3. At this time the Arc soiourned among the Philistims,
without any profit at all unto them: so a long time was the truth detained
among the Gentiles in unrighteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.18. for
the time was not yet come, that the Jews should utterly be dispossessed of the
Arc: But now we see, that the Arc of the Gospel is removed unto the
believing Gentiles, and has many hundred years continued among them, working
in them faith and obedience to the truth. Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 2, 3. Of the counsel and advise of the priests of the Philistims.
1. Josephus thinks, that there were three opinions among them: 1. some gave
advise, that seeing they were so plagued for the Arc, that it should be sent
home again: 2. others held the contrary, that the Arc was not the cause of
those plagues, but that they came of other ordinary and natural means: for
it was not like, if the God of Israel had such care of the Arc, that he would
have suffered it to be brought into captivity: and these held it dishonorable
for them to send it back: 3. A third opinion was between both: that they
should neither keep it, nor of purpose carry it home, but devise a way by
putting it into a cart, with certain offerings to send it away: and this
sentence prevailed. 2. Now it pleased God, as the false prophets Balaam and
Caiphas, ignorantly spoke the truth, and so were instruments serving to the
will, and pleasure of God: so it pleases God also at this time to the like
purpose, to use these superstitious priests of the Philistims. Pelican.

3. Quest. v. 3. Upon those words, then ye shall be healed, and it shall be
known, etc.
1. Iunius reads thus, or it shall be known, why his hand departs not,
etc. that is, that he is not the cause, but that it is some chance, as v. 9.
but this is not like to be the meaning: for in that place, they do set these
as opposite one to the other, we shall know then, that it was not his hand that
smote us, but it was a chance: therefore in this place, by the hand of God,
they can not understand a chance. 2. Some do expound these words, as though
the Philistim priests should certainly promise upon the restitution of the Arc,
that the people should be healed, and that thereby they should certainly know,
that God did punish them for detaining and irreverently using the Arc: Osiand.
but it is evident both by their ambiguous and doubtful speech, v. 5. it may be
he will ease his hand: and by that distinction, which they make v. 9. that if
the cattle went one way, it was Gods hand; if an other, it was but a chance,
that they do not here pronounce certainly and absolutely, that they should be
healed upon the return of the Arc. 3. Wherefore those words are uttered
conditionally, that, if so it fall out by that conjecture which they propound,
v. 9. that it is the God of Isreal's hand, then this is the way to appease him,
to send back the Arc with certain presents: whereupon it may be his wrath
shall be appeased, and they healed, and thereby it shall be known, that it was
for the wrong done to the Arc, wherefore they were punished. So two things they
undertake by their skill to search out: 1. whether it were Gods hand or a
chance, that they were smitten: 2. if Gods hand, then wherefore God did smite
them: the first is propounded v. 9. the other here.

4. Quest. v. 5. How the Philistims did give glory unto God.
1. As in taking the Arc they dishonored God, so in restoring the Arc, they
do as it were make restitution of his honor: Vatab. or they give glory to
God in confessing the truth, and yielding themselves to be justly punished of
him. Osiand. 2. Yet was this far off from a true confession: for they
continue in their Idolatry still, as the words following show, that he may
take his hand from you, and your g^ods: Bor. for this is Gods judgment upon
Idolaters, that knowing the true God, they worship him not aright. Genevens. 3.
This phrase of giving glory to God, is sometime spoken to them, that are
hinderers of Gods glory, and are far off from glofying God in truth: as
Ioshuah bids Achan, Josh. 7.19. sometime it is spoken by those which
themselves are enemies to Gods glory, as by the Pharisees to the blind man,
Ioh. 9.26. sometime the wicked and superstitious thus speak among themselves,
as here the priests of Dagon to the Philistims: therefore in this place the
phrase is to be understood not simply, but in part, of giving glory to God in
this particular, in acknowledging the truth, that they were smitten of God.

5. Quest. v. 9. Of the prognostication and conjecture of the priests of the
Philistims, by the way which the kine take that drew the Arc.
1. Though these priests of the uncircumcised people, can not in these their
conjectures, be excused from superstition: for the heathen superstitiously
observed the gliding of stars, flying of birds, the entralls of beasts, and
such like: yet as God used Balaam, and Caiphas false prophets, and
superstitious coniecturers to utter the truth; so here these idolatrous priests
were unwittingly directed and ouerruled by the spirit of God, to hit the truth,
for the further setting forth of Gods glory. Osiand. Yet these their
predictions are not without great reason, and probability: for they taking two
kine never used to the yoke, and having calves shut up, which they lowed after:
if they notwithstanding should go on still drawing in the yoke, wherewith they
were unacquainted, and should not make means to return to the stalles, where
their calves were, but go on still; it must needs be a sign of an
extraordinary work. Borr. 3. Herein notwithstanding their blindness is
manifest, that dream of chance, which the Gentiles called fortune, Iun.
imputing strange and unwonted events and accidents thereunto; whereas nothing
in the world comes to pass without Gods providence and decree. Genevens.
Indeed sometime the Scripture uses this phrase, that some thing falls out
by chance, (...); Whether any thing comes to pass by chance.
as Luke 10.31. A certain Priest came down that way by chance: but this is so
said in respect of us, it so seems a chance to us, but before God there is
no chance.

6. Quest. v. 11. Why the Philistims are not punished, as well as the
Bethshemites, for looking into the Arc.
1. The Philistims also were punished for their part, for their gross
rudeness in profaning the Arc, and consecrating it as one of their chief
spoils to their Idol, so making the great God inferior to their abominable
invention: this being a breach of the natural and moral law, did not escape
unpunished. 2. But the other being a ceremonial law, given only to the
Israelites, not to come near the Arc, or to gaze upon it, was given only
unto them, the heathen were ignorant of it: and therefore therein the Lord
requires a stricter obedience at the hands of his own people, then of the
ignorant Gentiles. Pelican. 3. And further the Lord accepts this kind of
reverence, which the Philistims out of their simple knowledge, yield unto the
Arc: not suffering it to go empty, but bestowing upon it jewels of gold:
Pelican. as also in making choice of kine never used to the yoke, and of a new
cart, as best beseeming the holiness of the Arc; they therein expressed their
reverend regard of it, herein following the prescript of Moses law. Borr.

7. Quest. v. 18. Of the great stone of Abel.
1. Some think that Abel is here taken for Eben, a stone, by the change only
of the last letter, as it is called, v. 14. eben gedalah, the great stone,
whereon the Bethshemites sacrificed: Chal. Sept. Iun. but seeing that Abel is
of a far diverse signification, betokening mourning, it can not properly be
translated a stone: though under this name the stone is insinuated. 2. Some do
not here retain Abel as a proper name, but read the great stone of mourning:
Vatab. but it being the name of a place, it is more fit to make it a proper
name: as we read of other places so called, because of mourning there: as Genesis
50. Abel Mizraim, the mourning or lamentation of the Egyptians. 3. Others
think that both Eben, and Abel, were the proper names of this stone, that
first it was called Eben, which signifies a stone; then Abel, by reason of the
lamentation there. Osiand. But that Eben was no proper name, it may be showed
by the like place, c. 14.33. where Saul bids them to roll, eben gedalah, a
great stone unto him. 4. Wherefore, this seems to be the right
interpretation, that the great Eben, 1. stone mentioned v. 14. is called here
Abel, because there the Betshemites mourned for the great slaughter among them:
for so it is said in the next verse, ijthabela, they mourned, whence also is
the word Abel, mourning, derived. sic Ar. Pagnin. Lat. 5. Some also read, unto
the great plain: for so Abel also signifies: in which plain Bethshemesh was
situate: Joseph. But the words following control this reading: unto the
great stone of Abel, whereon they set the Arc: but they set the Arc, and laid
the sacrifice upon the great stone. v. 14.

8. Quest. v. 19. Why the Lord smote the men of Bethshemesh.
The Bethshemites diverse ways offended. 1. In that they received not the Arc
with greater reverence and devotion, when they saw it coming, but entertained
it, as it should seem, with shouting, and such like signs of joy, which they
used in time of harvest, wherein they then were. Pelican. 2. They offered in
sacrifice the female kind, namely the two kine that drew the cart, whereas by
the law the males only were to be offered. Borr. 3. Some think that they
offered sacrifice of themselves, neither the priests, nor Samuel being
consulted with. Pelican. But that is not like: for seeing it is directly
mentioned, that the Levites, that is, the priests of Levi (for Bethshemesh was
a city of the priests of Aaron, not of Levites only, Josh. 22.16.) took
down the Arc, and before the Arc was taken down, they could not cleave the
cart for wood, nor consequently offer their sacrifice: therefore it is not
like, that the Bethshemites did presume to offer sacrifice without their
priests. 4. The true cause therefore, why the Lord did smite them, was, as is
here expressed, v. 19. because they looked into the Arc: where we need not
imagine with the Hebrews, that they opened the Arc to look into it: but it
was contrary to the law, to look upon the Arc bare or uncovered, Numb. 5.20.
as the men and citizens of Bethshemesh, such as were not priests, did gaze upon
the Arc, either being brought naked by the Philistims, or uncovered by them:
for so it is before showed, v. 13. that they rejoiced, or took delight in
beholding the Arc, that is, in gazing and looking upon it. Josephus thinks,
they did also handle it irreverently with their hands: but it was sufficient to
procure this judgment, that such, as were not priests did gaze upon it. The
priests also might offend themselves in not approaching and drawing near, with
such reverence as was meet. Iun. But it seems by the number of them, which
were smitten, that most of them were of the common sort.

9. Quest. v. 19. Of the number of the men of Bethshemesh that were slain.
1. Whereas in the Hebrew the number is placed thus, seventy men, and fifty
thousand men, some expound it thus: that seventy of the chief were slain,
which were equivalent or worth fifty thousand: as the people said to David,
that he was worth ten thousand of them, 2. Sam. 18. ex Pelican. and of this
opinion seems Josephus to be, who only makes mention of seventy that were
slain. But this is not like: for they are said to be smitten of the people,
that is, of the common sort. 2. Some therefore think that the seventy were of
the Elders and better sort: and the fifty thousand of the people: so the
Chalde. But by the same reason also this interpretation is refused: for it is
said, he smote among the people seventy men, etc. 3. Iunius in his former
edition had this conceit, that these were of the Philistims that were smitten:
and so in stead of, among or of the people, he reads, of them: but the word
is baham, of the people, not bahem, of them: and whereas he obiecteth, that
there were not so many in all the tract and region of Bethshemesh, and beside
that it was a city of Priests, for whom it was lawful to come near the
Arc: it may be answered, that the people of other towns came flocking
together to see the Arc, and that the greatest number that was smitten was of
them. 4. But Iunius himself in his latter editions reuerseth this opinion, and
thinks, that this number of fifty thousand and seventy men, was partly of
such of the Israelites, as came flocking from all parts to see the Arc, partly
of those which kept their garrisons and stations to defend their coasts from
the invasion of the Philistims: so also Osiander. Therefore it is directly
mentioned and expressed in the text; that the Lord smote of the men of
Bethshemesh, and among the people 70. men, and 50. thousand me^: so that we
must not suppose the^ all to be of Bethshemesh.

CHAP. VII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the hill where Abinadabs house was.
1. SOme read making it a proper name, and brought it to the house of Abinadab
in Gibeah: sic A. P. C. with others: but the word signifies, an hill: as the
Septuag. read, (...). so also Iun. and both our English translations. 2.
Therefore the better reading is, in the hill: for Gibeah was the name of a
city in Benjamin, c. 13.2. but Kiriathiearim was a city in Judah, called also
Kiriathbaal, 2. Sam. 6.2. therefore Pellicane is deceived, that places
Kiriathiearim in Benjamin. 3. This hill was the higher place of the city, as
sequestered and set apart by it self, and so fitter for this holy use, Vatab.
where Abinadab dwelt, a Leuite and a good man, to whom the charge of the Arc
was committed. Joseph. 4. Thus for the sin of Eli his house the Arc was
translated from Shilo, where it had continued ever since Ioshuashs time, and by
Gods providence was removed into the tribe of Judah, where the Lord had
appointed to erect the kingdom of David. Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 1. Of the sanctifying of Eleazar Abinadabs son to keep the
Arc.
1. This Eleazar was not the high Priest, for he is not recited in the
Catalogue of the high Priests, 1. Chron. 6. and he was the son of a Leuite,
as Josephus thinks: therefore it is not like, that he drew near to the Arc,
but it was kept drawn over with curtains, and covered according to the Law.
Osiand. 2. He only gave attendance upon it, to keep others from coming near
to pollute or defile it. Pellic. 3. Here is no mention made, nor yet afterward
of the Tabernacle, which Moses set up, because the Lord intended in stead
thereof, to have a Temple built in Sion. Borr.

3. Quest. v. 2. Of the true account of the twenty years while the Arc abode
in Kiriathiearim.
1. Some think that this was the whole term of the remaining of the Arc in
Kiriathiearim, till it was brought from thence by David, ^ Sam. 6. of this
opinion are some of the Hebrews: but this cannot be: for the Arc was removed
thither immediately after Eli his death: now after Eli, Samuel and Saul governed
Israel forty years, Act. 13.21. there must be then more then twenty years
between the end of Eli his government, and the beginning of David's reign. 2.
Some are of opinion, that these twenty years were run between the
reiection and casting off of Eli his house, and the government of Samuel: so
Hierome in his questions upon this book. But neither is this like, that there
should be so long a vacancie of government, or an interregnum, between Eli,
and Samuel: for while Eli yet lived, all Israel knew, that faithful Samuel was
the Lords prophet. c. 3.20. 3. Wherefore the most probable opinion is, that so
many years were already expired, since the first remove of the Arc to
Kiriathiearim, unto the solemn time here mentioned of the conversion, and
returning of the people to God, and forsaking of their filthy idols. Pelican.
Osiand. Martyr.

4. Quest. v. 2. Of these words, the people lamented after the Lord.
1. Some read, requievir, rested, or were quiet after the worship of God: Lat.
Chald. that is, sought to be in rest from the vexation of their enemies, by
seeking unto God. But here the word is mistaken, as though it should come of
nuach, to rest; whereas it is ijnahu, of nahah to lament. 2. The people then
being vexed and oppressed many ways by the Philistims, turned themselves by
mourning and prayer unto the Lord. Iun. 3. And though Samuel had before time
called upon them for repentance, yet now specially he works upon their
sorrow and grief for their afflictions: as commonly men when they are in
affliction and heaviness, are more ready to hear good admonitions. Osiand.

5. Quest. v. 4. Of their Idols Baalim, and Ashtaroth.
1. Some think that Baalim was the name of their gods, and Ashtaroth being
put in the feminine, the name of their goddesses: Vatab. and Augustine not much
unlike, says, that Baalim were their Iuppiters, and Ashtaroth their Iunoes.
quest. in Iudic. 2. Cicero. lib. 3. de nature. deor. says, that Astarte, or
Astarate, was one of the names of Venus. 3. But Ashtaroth was the peculiar Idol
of the Zidonians, 1. king. 11.5. and of the Philistims, 1. Sam. 31.10. so
called of the form, because it was like unto a sheep: for so signifies the
word Ashterah: and hereof this may be an argument, because of this Idol there
was a city called Ashteroth Carnaim, Genesis 14.5. which addition of Karnaim
signifies Bicornis, two horned: it belonged to Manasseh, Josh. 13.31. and out
of that tribe it was given to the Levites the Gershonites, 1. Chron. 6.71. Iun.
and Masius in 12. c. Josh.

6. Quest. v. 3. God only to be served.
1. Samuel exhorts the people to turn unto God with their whole heart, and
to serve him only: that they should not give part of their heart unto the true
God, and part unto their false gods; but that they should serve him with all
their heart. Bor. 2. And beside, as he would not have any but the true God
served, so he would have the true God worshipped, after a true and right
manner, not with any superstitious or false religion. Osiand. 3. This shows
that God will admit no partner in his worship: and as it condemns the
associating of heathen Idols gods and goddesses in the divine worship, so it
makes against the multiplicitie of popish Saints: for God only must be
served: the word is ghabad, which the Septuag. interpret here by the word
(...): which takes away that fond distinction of the Romanists, between (...),
and (...), as though religious worship should only be given unto God, but
religious service might be yielded unto Saints: for out of this place it is
evident, that all religious service is due only unto God: and as here Samuel
says, Controv. Against the adoration of Saints.
(...), serve him only: so our Savior says, (...), him only shall thou
worship, Math. 4.10. Religious worship then, and religious service, is all one,
and only due unto God.

7. Quest. v. 5. Of Mizpeh, whether Samuel assembled Israel.
1. There were diverse places called by this name; there was a Mizpeh in the
land of Moab, 1. Sam. 22.3. an other lying under the hill Hermon, Josh. 11.3.
near unto the land of Gilead, which is that place where Iakob and Laban made a
covenant, Genesis 31.49* there was a third in the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.38. and
a fourth in Benjamin. Josh. 18.28. 2. Some of the Rabbines think that this
Mizpeh was Shiloh: but that is not like, for Shiloh was now destroyed, because
of the wickedness of the people, and made desolate, as the Prophet shows,
Ierem. 7.12. 3. This Mizpeh was either that of Judah, which was not far from
Kiriathiearim, where the Arc now was: or, which is most like, it was the other
Mizpeh of Benjamin, where they used to keep their assemblies, as being the
fittest place, in respect of the equal distance, being as it were in the
mids of the land. Iun. and Masius. 4. Vatablus then is deceived, who
following Kimeh^ thinks that this Mizpeh, where the Israelites were
assembled, was that Mizpeh, where Ioshuah had the victory over the kings of
Canaan, Josh. 11.3. but that can not be: for that Mizpeh was near unto
Lebanon; but this Mizpeh was not far from Ramah where Samuel dwelt, which as
Josephus thinks, was distant not above forty furlongs from Jerusalem. Mas.
in c. 11. Josh. v. 3.

8. Quest. v. 6. How the Israelites drew water, and powered it out before God.
1. Some understand it of the water of purification, whereby they testified
their hope and faith in the remission and washing away of their sins,
Pelican. Mar. 2. Some think that by the pouring out of water, they showed
their humility, that they were as water powered out. Vatab. 3. Some think that
as there was a certain water appointed by the law, for the trial of
adultery, so also it was used for the conuincing of idolatry, which was a
spiritual kind of adultery: that the lips of such as were idolaters, as
soon as they touched the water did cleave and clamme up together with thirst:
and therefore they say, that Moses caused the Idolatrous Israelites to drink
the ashes of the golden calfe. sic Hieron. tradit. 4. Some understand it of the
drawing of water, and offering of it in drink offerings unto God. Joseph. 5.
But the Chalde interpretation is best, that they powered out their heart unto
God, and shed tears before the Lord in such abundance, as if they had drawn
water. Iun. Osiand.

9. Quest. v. 6. Why Samuel is said to have judged Israel in Mizpeh.
1. Some think, that there he put the Idolaters to death, and in that sense is
said to have judged Israel. Hieron. 2. Some, that there he compounded the
controversies, and determined the causes and strifes among the people. Vatab.
3. Some, that he is said now to judge them, because they submit themselves to
his government, and with one common consent receive him for their Judge and
Magistrate. Osiand. Mar. 4. But beside these interpretations, he is most of all
said to judge them, because he began now to reform both the Church and
Commonwealth, which were out of course, as it appears, 1. Chron. 9.22. Iun.
Borr.

10. Quest. v. 9. Of the sucking lamb which Samuel offered.
1. Some think, that Samuel offered not this sacrifice himself, but by the
hands of some of the Priests: for he was not a Priest, but a Leuite, and had
the charge to open and shut the doors. c. 3. R. Ben Gerson. Vatab. But as yet
Samuel was not publicly called to the office of a Prophet, when being brought
up under Eli, he was employed about the doors of the Temple: and though he
were but a Leuite, and so ordinarily was not to offer sacrifice; yet by the
extraordinary calling of a Prophet, he had warrant to do it: and therefore it
is said afterward, v. 17. that he built an altar unto God. So the Prophet Elias
also offered sacrifice, 1. king. 18. this is also the opinion of D. Kimchi. 2.
It seems that Samuel being in have, did not perform at this time all the
ceremonies of the Law, God accepting rather of his faith and obedience, then
looking to the external rite: Pelican. for in every burnt offering, the
skin was first taken off, and was due unto the Priest. Levit. 7.4. 3. This
sucking lamb was a sign of the true lamb Christ Jesus, by whom we have
deliverance, and victory over our spiritual adversaries, as here the
Israelites against the Philistims. Pelican.

11. Quest. v. 10. Of the discomfiting of the Philistims.
1. Three things do set forth and commend the greatness of this victory:
first, the people were now unprepared, and unarmed, gathered together in common
prayer and supplication, and their enemies came upon them unlooked for, and on
the sudden: Joseph. then they used no carnal weapons, or outward defense, but
Samuel only offered a sacrifice, and prayed for them: thirdly, God did
discomfite them from heaven: the earth under them trembled, and they fell, the
thunder astonished them, the lightning blasted them. Joseph. 2. Like unto this
victory, was that which God gave unto Barak and Deborah against Sisera, Iud.
5. when the stars fought in their courses, and that of Ioshuah, when the Lord
cast down stones upon his enemies. Josh. 10.10. Borr.

12. Quest. v. 12. Of the word Shen.
1. The most make it the proper name of a place, and call it Shen; the Chalde
Sinai, and thus read; he pitched a stone between Mizpeh and Shen: sic Ar.
Vatab. Lat. with others. 2. But I rather assent unto Iunius, which translateth
it scopulum, a rock, or rather the crag of a rock; which hangs over like a
tooth, for so shen signifies: and so Pagnine here reads: and it appears to
be so upon these reasons: 1. because this word shen is so taken, c. 14.5. 2. in
the former v. the name of this rock is set down, it is there called Bethcar:
and hereunto Josephus consents, who says, that this stone was set up among
the Coreans (whence Bethcar has the name) in the coasts of the Philistims.

13. Quest. v. 13. How it is said, the Philistims came no more into the coasts
of Israel all the days of Samuel.
While Samuel lived, Saul being king, the Israelites were much anoyed by the
Philistims, as is showed in the 13. and 14. chapters: therefore this must so be
understood, that the Philistims invaded not Israel to enlarge their bounds,
Reconcil.
and to take from them their cities, nor yet obtained any victory over Israel:
yet the Philistims had their garrisons, and maintained and kept that which they
had gotten: as it is evident, c. 10.5. and 13.3. Iun. But after Samuels death
they prevailed against Saul and Israel, and dispossessed the Israelites of
their cities, and the Philistims came and dwelt in them. c. 31.7.

14. Quest. v. 15. How Samuel is said to have judged Israel all the days of
his life, seeing while he lived Saul was made king.
1. Although Saul were anointed king by Samuel, who lived diverse years after
Saul's election to the kingdom; Reconcil.
yet Samuel altogether gave not over the regiment, but continually watched over
the people, to direct them in the ways of the Lord. Osiand. 2. And therefore
Saul and Samuel are joined together, c. 11.7. Whosoever comes not after Saul
and Samuel, so shall his oxen be served: hereof also it is, that Act. 13.21.
forty years of government are given unto Saul and Samuel jointly, as having
one common and joint administration of the kingdom.

15. Quest. v. 15. Of Samuels visiting of Bethel.
Iunius reads appellatiuely the house of God, which was now at Kiriathiearim,
where the Arc was, whether the people resorted thrice in the year at the
solemn feasts, where it is like that Samuel was present to judge and determine
their causes. So is Bethel taken for the house of God, Iud. 20.18. as it is
called beth Jehovah, the house of Jehovah, c. 3.15. so also c. 10.3. three men
are said to go up to God to Bethel, that is, to the house of God: for seeing
the people had recourse and flocked to that place, where the Arc was, it is
not like, that Samuel would omit to visit it in his circuit. This reading for
these reasons is to be preferred, before the usual interpretation, which
takes Bethel for a proper name here.

16. Quest. v. 17. Of Samuels retiring to Ramah.
1. Some read for Ramah, Ramatha, Chald. Lat. some Armathaim, Sep. but the name
of the city is Ramah, Josh. 18.25. Ramatha is the Hebrew inflexion of the word
in construction, with the paragogical addition of the letter he, in the end.
2. But here this doubt arises, how Samuel could absent himself from the Lords
house, and keep at Ramah, seeing he was consecrated unto God by his mother,
during his life, c. 1.28. Some think, that it was lawful for Samuel, when the
time of his ministry and service was over, to go unto his own house:
Pelican. but Annahs vow was more strict, for she did give him so unto the
Lord, that he should abide there for ever, c. 1.22. and if he had departed from
the Lords house, when his course of serving had been past, he had been no
more tied, then other common Levites. 3. Therefore the better solution is, that
so long as the house of God was known to be at Shiloh, Samuel was bound unto
that place by his vow: but now Shiloh being desolate, and no certain place
appointed of God, where the Arc should be settled, Samuel in that behalf was
freed of his vow, with the which, necessity in this case dispensed. Borr. The
like we read of the sons of Rechab, who were bound by their fathers vow to
dwell in tents: yet in case of necessity, when the host of the Chaldeans had
invaded the land, they went to dwell in Jerusalem for fear of the enemy.
Ierem. 35.11. 4. Further it may be answered, that vows so long hold, till Gods
pleasure be otherwise known: Samuel being now called to be a Judge, could not
be confined to a certain place: God therefore dispensed with that vow. Mar.

17. Quest. v. 17. Where Samuel built the altar.
1. Because it was not lawful by the law to offer any sacrifice, but before
the Lord, in the place which the Lord should choose, Deuteronomy. 12.14. and
consequently to build no altar but there: therefore Iunius refers these
words, also he built an altar there unto the Lord, unto the antecedent furthest
of, namely, the house of God: as the like is found in diverse places of the
Scripture: as Genesis 10.12. Resen also between Niniveh and Caleh: this is a
great city: that is, Niniveh: and, 1. Sam. 27.8. Then David and his men
invaded the Geshurites, and the Girzites, and the Amalekites: for they (that
is, the two first named) inhabited the land from the beginning. But against
this exposition, these reasons may be alleged: 1. because in none of these
places given in instance, nor in any other, which can be produced, the further
antecedent, is so far removed, by so many clauses coming between, as in
this place, two whole verses almost being inserted between Bethel, or the
house of God, and these words. 2. for that in those places, the necessity of
the sense enforces such relation to be had to the precedent part furthest off:
but there is no such necessity here. 3. the restrictiue or limiting particle
shun there, being twice repeated before in this verse, and applied to Ramah,
shows that it should be so taken here: there was his house, and there he
judged Israel, and he built an altar there unto the Lord, etc. 2. Therefore the
best answer is, that because there was yet no certain place appointed, where
the Arc should continue, it remaining at this time in a private man's house:
Pelican. and for that the Tabernacle, to the door whereof the sacrifices by
the law were appointed to be brought, Levit. 17.3. and the Arc were now
asunder, and in diverse places; Samuel might have this liberty to build an
altar at Ramah: especially considering that he was a Prophet, and did it by a
prophetical instinct: Osiander. Mar. as Elias the Prophet built an altar, 1.
king. 18. And seeing the Arc was removed from place to place, as appears c.
14.18. if an altar could not be built, but where the Arc was for the time
present, it is not unlike, but that the Ark of God might be sometime removed
to Ramah: as Saul having the Arc in the camp, there erected an altar. c.
14.35. But I rather insist upon the two former answers, the divulsion and
separation of the Arc from the Tabernacle, no certain place being yet
appointed for the resiance of the Arc, and the prophetical and extraordinary
direction, that Samuel had.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Quest. v. 2. Of the place where Samuel appointed his sons to be Judges.
1. BEcause Beersheba only is named, some think, that both his sons were
appointed to be Judges; either because that city was in the remote corner in
the South part of the land, whether Samuel by reason of his old age could not
travail in person: Borr. or for that it was situate in the confines and
borders of the Philistims, and so had more need of the presence of the Judge:
Osiand. or they being unjust Judges, might choose that place to weary the
people with long travail. Pelican. But seeing they were deputed by their
father, it is like that he would have assigned them to some convenient place,
whether the people might resort with more ease, and not set them in the utmost
corner of the land: and to what end should his two sons be limited to one
place? they being divided, might better dispatch the causes of the people.

2. Josephus therefore thinks, that one of them was appointed Judge in
Bethel, the other in Beershebah: but seeing no mention is made of Bethel in the
text, that conjecture has no warrant or certentie.

3. Therefore Iunius opinion is more probable, that the meaning is, they were
set Judges over the whole land from Dan to Beershebah, which were the two
extreme towns of the land: and Dan is to be supplied out of the like place,
Iud. 20.1. here being omitted, by a certain synecdoche, one opposite part
comprehending the other.

4. Samuel in making his sons Judges, offends two ways, both because he
consulted not with God, and he had no example for it: for neither Moses, nor
Gedeon, or any of the Judges appointed their son. Mar.

2. Quest. v. 6. Whether the people sinned in asking a King.
1. If they had simply desired a King to be given them, according to the law of
God, Deuteronomy. 17.15. that should govern them in equity, and such an one as
feared God, they then had not offended: but now they do ask a king of a
preposterous desire, only that they might be like unto other nations. Borr. 2.
Yet God having purposed to erect among his people a kingly throne, and to raise
unto them a king, of whose seed the Messiah should come, took this occasion
to accomplish his purpose, so turning their evil and inordinate desire unto a
good end: as God can convert the evil thoughts and actions of men, to serve
for his glory. Borr. 3. Now the people in asking a king, failed in diverse
circumstances: 1. in their curiosity, that pretending the injustice of Samuels
sons, yet indeed desired an innovation of the very government it self: for
they might have otherwise requested of Samuel, to admonish his sons, that the
fault might be amended, not the person removed. Pelican. 2. Their impiety
appears toward God, who had hitherto raised up unto them Judges and
deliuerers, they being not contented therewith, because their Judges shifted
from one tribe to an other, and many times were of mean parentage, and not so
fearful or terrible to their enemies, they desire to have a certainty of the
kingdom, as other nations had, and so they offended in their distrust and
diffidence toward God: Osiand. as the Lord himself says, they had rejected
him, v. 7. 3. Their ingratitude also was great toward Samuel, by whose means,
they had received so many and great benefits, that they would shake off his
government, even while he lived: in these respects, the petition of the people
for a King seemed evil unto Samuel.

3. Quest. v. 7. Whether by asking of a King, the people indeed cast off the
Lords government.
1. Simply it is not true, that the government under kings, is a shaking off
the Lords yoke. For the Lord is with kings, and rules his people by them: they
are the ordinance of God. Wisdom says, Proverb. 8. By me Kings rule. The Lord
blessed the government of David, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josias. But yet the
people, as much as in them lay, rejected the Lords government: because they
misliked that form of administration, which the Lord had set them, and desired
a change and innovation, without any direction from God. 2. But it will be
further questioned, whether God also do reign together with bad kings: the
answer is, that even the authority of wicked Kings is of God, which they abuse
to tyranny: and they shall give account unto God for abuse of their
government. And although the persons be evil, which govern, yet the
authority is lawful and good: and even under tyrants there are many good
things: as enacting of politic laws, administration of justice, punishment of
offenders. Mart.

4. Quest. v. 11. Of Samuels description of the King, whom the Israelites
desired.
1. Samuel describes such manners and fashions, which are incident, not to
true Monarchies, but such as decline rather unto a Tyranny: Osiand. he sets
not down here the office of a King, what he ought to be, but foresheweth by
the spirit of prophecy, what manner of king they should have: that they either
hereby might be persuaded to desist from their enterprise, or they might more
willingly bear these inconveniences, when they fell upon them, being thus
forewarned of them, and being the cause thereof themselves. Pelican. And thus
the Lord to their own cost grants their desire, that for the most part,
they had such kings, as governed them rather by will, then law, as the kings of
the Gentiles did. 2. Samuel shows how their King should have power over their
children and servants, their goods and lands. In all which the King has a
sovereign right: men's servants and children are to do the king service in
time of war, and of peace: the necessity of the Crown is to be supported
for the public good of the Commonwealth: but the manner is unlawful: the King
must rule by law, not by lust, nor lay unnecessary burdens upon his subjects,
knowing that he has also a Lord above him, the great king of heaven, to whom
he must give account. 3. In these three things Samuel shows, that their King
should fail: first in the manner, that he should not by order or law, but by
violence and compulsion take from them their sons and daughters, their lands
and goods, whereas yet Iezabel, would not but by color of justice take
Nab^oths vineyard from him. Pelican. Secondly, he should fail in the end:
abusing these things to his pleasure, and giving them to his servants and
favorites, not applying them to the common profit and benefit of the
Commonwealth. Borr. Thirdly, in respect of their persons, he should use them
altogether, as servants, v. 17. (putting them to base and servile offices) not
as free subjects, such as they were in time of the Judges, and their other
governors. Borr.

5. Quest. v. 19. Why the people would not hearken to Samuel.
1. God had decreed by this occasion to set a King over his people, as he
promised to Abraham, that Kings should come of his seed, Genesis 17.17. yet God
did not force their wills: but God uses their wills and desire, whereunto they
were inclined, to effect his counsel. Pelican. 2. Therefore justly
notwithstanding the Lord by his Prophet tells them, that he will not hear
them afterward, when they shall cry unto him, because of the oppressions of
their King, for that they now wilfully cast off the counsel of God, and refuse
to hearken unto his voice. Pelican. 3. And thus we see how many times men are
snared in their own desires, and obtain their requests unto their own hurt:
as the Lord took the people short in their hasty wishes: Numb. 14.28. As I
live, says the Lord, I will surely do unto you, as ye have spoken in mine
ears, your carkesses shall fall in this wilderness, etc. 4. Now in this their
petition the people offended, because they asked him after a preposterous
manner, not expecting the authority of God: therefore the Lord is said, to
have given them a King in his anger, Hosh. 13.11. their request was then
against the revealed will of God, though God in his secret counsel had so
determined. Mar.

CHAP. IX.
1. Quest. v. 5. Of the land of Zuph.
1. THe Septuag. read, the land of Siph, failing both in the pronouncing of the
letter, which is tsaddi, which is expressed by tz: not semech, which gives the
sound of our single s: as also of the vowel, which is shuree, not chiric: and
answers to our u. 2. The Chalde interprets, the land where was a Prophet:
of which reading see before, qu. 1. c. 1. 3. The land therefore of Zuph, was
that country, where Ramah Samuels city was situate, which thereupon was called
Ramah of the Zophims, c. 1. v. 1. for they were now near unto Ramah. Joseph.

2. Quest. v. 7. Whether Saul gave any thing to Samuel, and whether it were
lawful for the Prophets to receive any thing.
1. Some think, that Saul had this opinion, that Samuel might be allured with
gifts: and that it was not lawful for the Prophets to receive any gift, as
Gehezi was punished with leprosy, because he took a reward: and this is the
difference between the true and false prophets: these altogether sought their
own commodity, the other the glory of God. sic Hieronym. 2. But it is rather
to be thought, that Saul in reverence, and as a sign of a thankful heart,
would give a present unto Samuel, because now he was to appear as before the
Lord, into whose presence they were not to come empty. Elisha would receive no
gift of Naaman, because he was a stranger; which was forbidden, Leuit. 22.25.
neither were they to receive such large gifts as Gehezi did, to make them rich:
but for the Prophets and servants of God to receive small gifts (as this of
Saul's was, the fourth part of a shekel, about five pence) as an acknowledgement
of the offerers duty, and for their sustentation, it was not unlawful: as
Ieroboams wife going to Ahiah the Prophet, carried unto him a bottle of honey,
and ten loaves, 1. King. 14. Mar.

3. Quest. v. 9. Of the name Seer, which was given unto the Prophets.
1. The text says, that Prophets of old time were called Seers, not that they
then ceased to be so called: but it was a name both used of ancient time, and
then in Samuels time continued. Borr. 2. Such was the piety of the people in
the purer times, that when they would ask counsel of God, they resorted to
the Prophets, unto whom the Lord revealed himself: so did Rebekah, Genesis
25.22. Iun. 3. They were called Seers, both because they foresaw things to
come, Genevens. as also for that the Lord revealed himself, and was seen of
them in visions and dreams: Numb. 12.6. Iun. 4. Yea it pleased God, not only
in grave and weighty matters, when he was consulted with, to give answer to
the people, but upon other private necessary occasions, as here they go to
the Seer to learn what was become of the asses, that the Lord should not be
thought to have less care of the people in their necessities, then the gods of
the Gentiles, from whom they received answer by the ministry of Satan, in
such manner of consultations. Pelican.

4. Quest. v. 12. Whether it were a feast or a sacrifice, which was kept for
the people in the high place.
1. Iunius translateth zebach a feast, which word properly signifies a killing
or slaying for sacrifice, and sometime for other uses: his reason is this,
because it was against the law to sacrifice in any other place, then before the
Lord. Leuit. 17.3. and Deuteronomy. 12.5. But hereunto it may be answered, 1. that as
Samuel before, by extraordinary direction, built an altar at Ramah, so it was
lawful for him being a Prophet, to sacrifice other-where, then at the
Tabernacle: Osiand. especially seeing the Arc and the Tabernacle were now
asunder, and so no certain place appointed for the Arc, as is showed before,
c. 7. qu. 17. 2. It is not unlike, but that the Ark of God might be removed
hither at this time, at the election of their king, as Iunius thinks it was
translated to Gilgal, at his inauguration, c. 11.15. where they also offered
peace offerings. 2. I think rather, as both the Chald. Septuag. with other
interpreters, Vatab. Mon. Page do read here sacrifice: so first they offered
their peace offerings unto God, and then of the remainder thereof made a
solemn feast. Pelican. Osiand. And these reasons, may persuade it: 1. because
the word zebach more properly and usually is taken for sacrifice, as c. 10.8.
and 11.15. 2. the place argues as much, for if it had been but an ordinary
feast, Samuel might have kept it in his own house, he needed not to have gone
up to the high place, where they used to sacrifice before the Temple was built.
3. The public fame of this meeting, whereof the very maidens were not
ignorant, shows rather that it was a solemn sacrifice, then a private feast
for thirty persons. 4. The common use was, in their solemn meetings, first to
offer peace offerings, and to make a feast of the remainder: for of that kind
of offerings, the fat was offered to the Lord, the right shoulder and the
breast was the Priests, Leuit. 7.31, 32. of the rest the people might eat: so
Solomon, of the peace offerings, which he offered in great abundance, even 22.
thousand beeues, and an 120. thousand sheep, made a royal feast to all
Israel. 1. King. 8.

3. But it will be objected, that the shoulder and that upon it, which were
reserved for Saul, were the Priests fee, Levit. 7.31. whereof it was not
lawful for any stranger, not of Leui, to eat, no not for him that soiourned
with the priest, Leuit. 22.10. To this it may be answered: that the right
shoulder only was the Priests, Leuit. 7.32. but here v. 24. it is not named
what shoulder it was: and beside, though they did eat of the remainder of the
peace offerings, yet they might also in such feasts, eat of other meat, not
offered in sacrifice: but howsoever it was, it is not necessary to think that
this portion, was any of the Priests allowance, nay it is like it was not: but
some other portion reserved for Saul. Josephus calls it, portionem regiam, a
kingly part: who indeed, calls it epulum, a feast, he names it not a
sacrifice. But it was both, first the sacrifice was offered, then the feast
followed, as is showed before.

5. Quest. v. 13. Of Samuels blessing of the sacrifice.
1. It was a commendable custom among the Hebrews to bless God, that is, to
give him thanks, both before their meat and after: and he which blessed the
table, did also divide and distribute the meat, as the Chald. paraphrast
interprets: the which custom our Savior followed in the Gospel, when he
took bread, gave thanks, and brake it. Vatab. 2. This phrase of blessing is
also used in the new Testament: The cup of blessing, which we bless, etc. 1.
Cor. 10.16. and at Emmaus, our Savior Christ took the bread, and (...)
blessed, and brake it. Luke 24.30. 3. Bor. Which teaches us, not like vultures
and kites, to seize upon our meat, as a pray, without giving thanks, and
lifting up our hearts unto God. Osian. 4. And Christians do still retain that
commendable use, which was practiced, as R. Chimchi says, among the Jews, to
bless the table and meats set thereon, not that any thing is unclean in it
own nature, as the Manichees held; or that the evil spirits are mingled among
the creatures, as they imagine, which defend the sprinkling of holy water: for
the creature of God is good in it self, because all, which God made, is good:
but it is our own corruption and sin, which defiles the creature: prayer
therefore before meat is necessary, that it may be sanctified and made
wholesome for our use, and that we use and receive them soberly and moderatly.
Mar.

6. Quest. v. 18. Of the place where Saul met Samuel.
1. The most do read, that Saul went to Samuel in the mids of the gate, sic
Ar. Page Vatab. and both our English translations: but that can not be: for
before Saul met Samuel, it is said, v. 14. that Saul was come within the
city, or as some read, into the mids of the city: therefore he met not
Samuel in the mids of the gate. 2. The Septuagint therefore to help this
matter, read, that Saul came to Samuel, (...), into the mids of the city, as
before v. 14. but the word is here, bethoch hasshagnar, within the gate, as
Iunius following the Chalde paraphrast: as soon as they were entered the city,
and were come within the gate, Samuel met them.

7. Quest. v. 19. What was in Saul's heart, which Samuel promises to tell him.
1. The Hebrews, as Hierome notes in his Traditions upon this book, do
think, that it was revealed to Saul, that he should be King, because he saw in
a vision, that he was set in the top of a palm tree: and this was that (say
they) which Saul had in his heart: but this is not like, as it may appear by
Saul's answer, v. 21. making it very strange, that Samuel should have any
communication with him of any such thing. 2. Therefore the thing, that was in
Saul's heart, was to know, what was become of his asses, which thing Samuel
presently declares unto him, as it follows in the next verse. Iun.

8. Quest. v. 21. Of Saul's refusal of the kingdom, whether it were done in
simplicity or hypocrisy.
1. Saul excuses himself by three arguments: that both his tribe was the
smallest in Israel, having not yet recovered that loss and slaughter of their
men, which they received in the battle with Israel: Iud. 20. Osiand. as also
his fathers house was of small account in the tribe, and he himself the least
in his fathers house, Iun. 2. Some think, that Saul did herein dissemble, and
show his hypocrisy, which afterward brake forth in the rest of his acts.
Borr. But I rather condescend to those, which think that Saul did modeste
regnum recusare, modestly at this time refuse the kingdom: Iun. and, veraciter
se excusat de honor regni, and he does truly excuse himself concerning the
honor of the kingdom: Pelican. as may appear both by Saul's exquisite and
pithie answer, heaping up so many reasons of his refusal together: and by his
earnest speech to Samuel, Wherefore then speak thou so to me? Howsoever
afterward Saul played the hypocrite, yet he might have an other heart now, and
speak of simplicity.

9. Quest. v. 24. To whom Samuel said, I have called the people.
1. Some read, it was kept for thee, when I called the people: Lat. but beside
that, in this reading, the word lenior, in saying, is omitted: it is like it
was kept, not when he bid his ghests, but when he made provision for his
ghests. 2. The Septuag. read, as though it should have been kept and reserved
by the people: but Samuel spoke to the cook to keep it, v. 23. and not the
people. 3. Some think, that Samuel thus spoke unto Saul, saying, also I have
called the people, B. G. giving this note, that both by the assembling of the
people, and the meat prepared for thee, thou might know, that I knew of thy
coming: but it had been superfluous for Samuel so to say to Saul, when he was
now set among the people, and saw the people there assembled. 4. Therefore
Samuel means, that he caused that portion to be reserved, when he thus spoke
to the cook, that he had bidden the people, that provision might be made for
them. Iun.

10. Quest. v. 25. Why Samuel communeth with Saul toward the top of the house.
1. Beside that, their houses being made with plain and flat roofes, not like
unto ours, they used to walk there upon the top of their houses after
supper: Vatab. for then they used to feast, and this banquet, to the which Saul
was invited, was toward the evening: as it appears by the mentioning
immediately of their early rising the next morning. v. 26. Pelican. 2. Beside
I say, that it was their usual custom thus to do, an other reason, that
moved Samuel to choose that place was, that he might utter his mind more
freely in secret unto Saul concerning the kingdom, which was not convenient
yet to be publicly known: and therefore afterward, v. 27. Samuel would not
have Saul's servant within the hearing: the roof then of the house was a fit
place for secrecy, as Peter went up thither to pray, Act. 10.9. Iun.

CHAP. X.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of Samuels anointing of Saul to be King.
1. THis anointing in the old Testament, signified the gifts of the holy Ghost,
which were necessary for them, which should rule. Genevens. 2. This was a type
and figure of the spiritual anointing of the Messiah, to be our Priest,
Prophet, and King: which ceremony is not necessary now to be retained in the
new Testament. Osiand. 3. The Hebrews think, that Saul was not anointed with
the same oil, wherewith David and Solomon were anointed: for that was taken
out of the Tabernacle, so was not this: that was powered out of an horn, Keren:
this out of a viole, called Phach: out of such a vessel was Iehu anointed:
Borr. out of a brittle vessel, whether of glass or earth, which signified the
unstableness and short continuance of their two kingdoms: but the horn
showed the firm and durable state of the kingdom of David and Solomon.
Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 1. Of Samuels kissing of Saul.
1. This kiss was a sign of favor, as wishing all things to be prosperous
unto him: Pelican. it was also a sign of reverence, as it is taken, Psalm. 2.
Kiss the son, least he be angry. Borr. 2. Samuel searches not here into
Gods secret judgment, who purposed to reject and cast off Saul afterward, as
an hypocrite: neither was this yet revealed unto Samuel: he esteems Saul,
according to his present election, whereby the Lord had appointed him to be
governor of his people: afterward, when the Lords counsel was revealed to
Samuel, concerning the reiection of Saul, he then did forbear to kiss him,
but denounced the sentence of God against him, that because he had cast away
the word of the Lord, the Lord had cast away him. Borr.

3. Quest. v. 1. Of Samuels words to Saul, Should I not, etc.
1. The most read thus, has not the Lord anointed thee to be governor, etc.
sic Sept. Chald. Vatab. B.G. but in this reading, the Hebrew particle chi, for,
or, because, is omitted: and beside, halo, what not, is separated by a
distinction from the clause following. 2. Therefore the best reading is, should
I not, that is, do thus: for Jehovah has anointed, etc. Iun. for it seems
that Saul had used some resistance, refusing to be anointed, and that Samuel
did persuade and pacify him with these words, showing that it was the will of
God, that it should be so.

4. Quest. v. 3. Whether it is to be read, Bethel, or the house of God.
1. The most do think, that these three men went to Bethel there to offer
sacrifice, and so thinks Josephus, so the Chald. and Septuag. for that Bethel
was held to be a religious place, because of the altar, which Iakob built
there: Vatab. Borr. but that altar was long before defaced, neither was it
lawful for private men to offer any sacrifice but before the Lord, where the
Arc was. 2. Therefore I consent in this place to Iunius reading: that they
went up to the house of God, which was now at Kiriathiearim: which may be made
plain by these reasons, 1. because they are said to go up to God, that is,
where the Arc was, the representation of Gods presence: 2. they carried three
kids for sacrifice, but at Bethel it was not then lawful to sacrifice: 3.
Bethel is taken for the house of God then at Shiloh, Iud. 20.18. and 21.19. and
so it may fitly be taken here for the house of God at Kiriathiearim. 4. Now
whereas these men carried but three loaves, D. Kimchi maruelleth how they could
give two: the answer is, that God so put it in their hearts, that it was a
greater work of piety to feed the hungry, as they saw Saul at this time to
be very faint, then to offer sacrifice: or it is more like, that they had other
bread with them for their own necessary use, beside the three loaves, which
they went to offer. Mar.

5. Quest. v. 5. Of the hill of God.
1. The most do expound this of the high place in Kiriathiearim, where the
Arc was: so the Chalde interprets: so also Pellic. Borr. Genevens. but it is
not like that a garrison of the Philistims should be kept in that place, where
the Arc was, and whither the people usually resorted with their sacrifices and
offerings. 2. It was rather the high place of Gibeah, which is called Gibeah of
Benjamin, where there was a garrison of the Philistims, c. 13.2. Iun. and where
Saul's father, and his uncle and kindred dwelt, v. 14. so also Josephus calls
it the town of Gabatha. 3. It is called the hill of God, because there was a
College of the Prophets consecrate unto the service of God: who might be safe
notwithstanding the garrison of the Philistims, which was not far off: for
religious men were privileged, in those days, even in the mids of their
enemies: and beside the Philistims, though at this time they kept their own,
yet attempted nothing against Israel, as before is noted. chap. 7. quest. 13.
Iun.

6. Quest. v. 5. Of the company of Prophets whom Saul should meet.
1. Some think, that most of these were Levites, which studied the law, and
were prepared and made fit for the service of the Tabernacle: Borr. but this
opinion is grounded upon the other received interpretation, that this hill of
God was at Kiriathiearim, where the Arc abode at this time, which in the next
question before I showed to be an uncertain conjecture. It is like that among
these Prophets some were Levites, but it is not necessary to think, that most
of them were of that tribe: such a College of Prophets there was in the time
of Elisha at Bethel, and an other at Jericho, 2. king. 2.2. and 5. 2. These
Prophets then were such, as attended prophesying, given unto holy study and
meditation, to sing Psalms to the praise of God, using thereunto as
incitements musical instruments: as Elisha did, 2. king. 3.15. Borr. who
taught and instructed others, Osiand. endued also with the gift of prophesying.
3. Of these there were two sorts, some were called Prophets simply, as the
masters and instructers of others; some the children, that is, the scholars of
the Prophets. Iun.

7. Quest. v. 6. How the spirit of God came upon Saul.
1. The spirit of God, is taken either for the gift of prophesying, or for
ability prosperously to atcheiue any thing, or thirdly for the gift of
sanctification: the two first ways Saul was endued with the spirit of God:
Borr. for he received for the present, a temporary gift of prophesying, to
confirm him in his calling, as the 70. Elders prophesied for the time, Number.
11.25. and he was furnished with gifts fit for that calling, as courage and
magnanimity, meet for the office of a King. Iun. But he was far off from
the true inward sanctification, as his works following declared. Borr. 2. He
became an other man in these two respects: first, because he should now show
himself a Prophet, singing divine songs and hymns among the Prophets, as
though he had from his youth been trained up among them: Pelican. As also he
now should put on a princely mind, and meditate upon matters belonging to the
kingdom, whereas he was before but conversant among his cattle: yet this was
but a civil kind of change in him: there was no inward renouation, neither
became he in deed a new regenerate man, borne of the spirit. Borr.

8. Quest. v. 9. Of the fulfilling of the signs foreshewed.
1. God uses to confirm extraordinary callings by extraordinary signs: as
Moses assured by those signs and miracles which God showed, that the Lord had
appointed him to deliver his people: so likewise Gideon, Iud. 6. And Saul here
is confirmed by these prophetical predictions, in the office and calling of a
King, which was now first revived and raised up in Israel. 2. Four things are
foretold unto Saul: 1. that he should find two men at Rachels sepulcher, and
he tells him, what they should say unto him, v. 2. then he should meet three
men going to the house of God, v. 3. after that he should meet a company of
Prophets, v. 5. the fourth sign is, that he himself should prophecy. Borr.
3. The signs were to that end, that when he saw, that all Samuels predictions
were true, he should nothing doubt to take the kingdom upon him: Pellic. for
God was with him, verse. 7. that is, to prosper him, and give him good success:
though not with him as he uses to be with his elect and beloved in Christ.
Borr. 4. But such signs, now to confirm Christians in their calling, are not
to be expected: nay, to ask such signs, were to tempt God: our calling is not
now extraordinary, our faith and doctrine is not new, but the same which was
first preached and taught by Christ, then by his Apostles: it was then
confirmed by signs and miracles, and need not to be so confirmed again.

9. Quest. v. 12. Of the meaning of these words, Who is their father?
1. While they marueiled at this sudden change in Saul, whom they had known
to be a valiant man before, and of courage, but no Prophet: one, as it may
seem, of the same company of the Prophets, Iun. rises up, and by this speech
staieth their further wondering. Osiand. 2. In effect he says thus much; Do
not marvel, that Saul prophesies, having no Prophet to his father: for
neither is the gift of prophecy hereditarie in the rest, they have not all
Prophets to their fathers: Vatab. the spirit of God is their father, and
instructor: they are not so much taught by men, as by the spirit of God, which
works freely and accepts no man's person, but can raise up Prophets even
from the meanest and most abject. Iun.

10. Quest. v. 15. Why Saul concealeth from his Uncle the matter of the
kingdom.
1. Josephus is here deceived, who says, that Abner Saul's cousin questioned
with him, whereas it was Saul's fathers brother, likely to be Ner the father of
Abner, c. 14.50. 2. Some think that Saul's uncle was at Ciriathiearim, some
that Saul went from hence to an other place, which is not here expressed, as
many circumstances belonging to the story, for brevity sake are omitted in
Scripture. ex Vatab. But it seems rather, that the high place, whether Saul
went, was at Gibeah, where his father and kindred dwelt, as is before showed, v.
5. 3. Now Saul partly of modesty concealeth the communication, which he had
with Samuel about the kingdom, least he should be thought to be ambitious,
Pelican. as also in wisdom, least he might have been envied, and so some
impediments laid in his way. Osiand. Josephus touches both these reasons, Ne
res credita invidiam, non credita vanitatis opinionem ei contraheret: least
that the matter being believed might have procured envy, or being not
believed, might have bred an opinion of lightness and vanity. In like manner,
Moses taking leave of his father in law, pretends only to go and see his
brethren in Egypt, making no mention of his calling, nor what the Lord said
unto him, nor what he had seen. Exodus 4.

11. Quest. v. 17. How the people are said to be assembled before the Lord in
Mizpeh.
1. Some think that this Mizpeh was Gilgal, some Bethel, some Kiriathiearim:
but it was that famous place, where they used to assemble the people, and where
before Samuel had called the people together, when as that notable victory was
given them against the Philistims, c. 7. Saul was designed and elected King in
Mizpeh, and afterward established and confirmed King in Gilgal, c. 11.15. Iun.
2. Some think, that they are said to be assembled before the Lord, because
what was done in such great assemblies of the whole nation, was done as in the
sight and presence of God: Osiand. as in the same place it is said, they
assembled before the Lord, Iud. 20.1. when as yet the Arc was not there. 3.
But it is more likely, that Samuel had caused the Arc to be brought thither at
this time, and the Priest to be present with the Vrim and Thummim, to consult
with God, as v. 22. and to cast lots before the Arc, as the use was. Iun.

12. Quest. v. 20. How the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
1. Some of the Hebrews think, that the stone in the Priests breastplate,
wherein the name of Benjamin was taken, did shine extraordinarily, whereby they
knew that the King should come out of that tribe: but that is not like: for
though the tribe were found out by this means, yet that served not to find
out the family, and the very person: therefore the course here taken was by
casting of Lots. 2. It is like that Samuel here follows Ioshuahs president:
first, the tribe is taken by lot, then the family in the tribe, then the
household in that family, and lastly the person: as Josh. 7.14. Iun. so here
the tribe of Benjamin comes forth, then the family of Metri, then the
household of Kish, and lastly Saul of that house. 3. Concerning the manner of
casting lots: the names of the tribes were written, and cast into a pot,
Joseph. then some one of every tribe was appointed to draw out the lot for the
whole tribe, and so likewise for the family, and household. Osiand. And this
was done before the Arc, and with prayers being made before, as v. 22. it is
said, they asked the Lord again, that is, prayed unto him: Iun. So that this
casting of lots, was directed by the providence of God: as Solomon says, The
lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.
Prove. 16.33. D. Chimchi thinks that no lots were here cast, because no
mention is made of them: but that the Priest consulted with God by Vrim and
Thummim. R. Sele^^h thinks that lots were cast: which is most like, because
it was much used among the Israelites: as the land of Canaan was cast out by
lot: Jonathan was taken by lot: Mathias was chosen by lot, Act. 1. the word
lachad here used, which signifies to take, insinuates as much. Mart.

14. Quest. Zhether it be lawful now to cast lots.
1. We find three kind of lots used in Scripture: some for equal division,
and deciding of controversies that way: as the land of Canaan was sorted out by
lot: some were sorts consultatoriae, lots used for consultation, as when
Mathias was chosen: some, divinatoriae, divining lots, when any hid thing is
revealed, as Achan was taken by lot, Josh. 7. 2. Now some do utterly condemn
the use of lots now, as Hierome upon Jonas: and thinks that such examples in
Scripture were extraordinary, and not to be followed. 3. But Augustines
judgment is more probable, who thinks though the casting of lots ought not
to be so usual, as before: yet that in some cases lots may be cast: as he
puts this case; that in time of persecution, when it is thought fit, that
some ministers should be preserved for future times, and all are alike minded
to abide the extremest hazard, and of the like gifts, then they may be chosen
by lots. epist. ad Honorat. 4. But these conditions must be observed in lots:
1. that all other means should first be attempted, and lots not to be used but
upon great necessity, when no other way is left: so Mathias was elected, there
being such equality between him and the other, as that the Apostles could
make no difference. 2. they must be used not rashly, but reverently, as the
Apostles to their lots joined prayer. 3. superstitious lots must be abandoned:
such as were the lots of Numerius Suffetius, whom Cicero speaks of lib. de
Divinat. that he cut a flint in sunder, and out leaped certain lots. 4. there
must be no deceit used in lots. Mar. These conditions must be observed in such
lots as are used in great and weighty affairs: but they extend not to such
kind of lots, which are ordinarily used in some kind of recreations, where no
such weighty end is purposed.

14. Quest. v. 28. Of the book which Samuel writ.
1. Josephus thinks that this book contained the predictio^ of such things,
which should fall out under Saul's kingdom, and that he rehearsed it in the
hearing of the people and of Saul. But this is not like: for this had been
enough to have alienated the hearts of the people from Saul, that such a
tyrant, as he proved afterward, should reign over them. Therefore, this book
contained nothing, but what the King should perform to his people, and of the
duty of the people to their king: Pelican. agreeable to the description of a
king in Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. 2. This book was laid up before the Arc, that it
might continually put them in remembrance of their mutual duty. Iun. 3. But
this book is not now to be found, it is lost, as many other historical
books. Vatab.

15. Quest. v. 27. Of the wicked men that murmured against Saul.
1. They are called men of Belial: that is, without a yoke, which refused to
submit themselves to Saul's government, thinking that because he was of mean
parentage, and of no power, he was not a like man to save the people. Pellic.
2. Therefore they came not to show their duty to the king, to bring him
presents as other did: for by such gifts of acknowledgement, subjects may
express their loyal affection to the Magistrate. Osiand. 3. But Saul held his
peace, and winked at this fault, to avoid sedition, and to win them by
lenity. Genevens.

CHAP. XI.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the attempt of Nahash the Ammonite against the men of
Iabesh Gilead.
1. IT seems that the Ammonites yet bare in mind the great slaughter which
they received by Ipthah the Gileadite, Iud. 11. and therefore they now seek to
be revenged upon the men of Iabesh Gilead: Pelican. Gods providence so
disposing, that by this means Saul should have occasion to show his valor.
Borr. 2. This Josephus thinks fell out a month after Saul had taken the
kingdom, but that can not be: for yet seven days were not expired, which
Samuel had set unto Saul, that so long he should expect his coming to Gilgal,
c. 10.8. But it seems, that this attempt was made immediately before Saul was
elected king: and the fear of Nahash was the cause why the people asked a
king. chap. 12.14.

2. Quest. Of Nahash cruel demand, to have them put out their right eyes.
1. In this inhumane and hostile condition here imposed, the Ammonites show
their detestable hatred to the people of God: that as they denied them bread
and water in the wilderness, so they continue hateful toward them still, and
therefore the Lord knowing their malice against his people, provided in the
law, that the Israelites should have nothing to do with them, Deuteronomy. 23.6.
Borr. 2. By the right eye, some Hebrews understand that text in the law, that
the Ammonites should not enter into the congregation till the tenth generation;
that they would have it rased out: but this exposition is ridiculous and fond.
Nahash would indeed have their right eye put out, to make them unapt for
war, for the left eye was shadowed and hid with the shield, which they held
before it: Joseph. and to make them unfit either to read or write the law of
God, as some Hebrews: ex Pelican. but the reason is here expressed, to bring
shame and ignominy upon Israel: as the Ammonites had a delight to reproach the
people of God: as Haman the son of this Nahash did shame David's servants that
were sent to him in kindness, in shauing their beardes, and cutting off their
garments by the middle. 2. Sam. 10. 3. Now who are the Ammonites, that in these
days do reproach the people of God, it is not hard to judge: even they which
in stead of the word of God, do thrust upon the Church, superstitious
traditions, and so deny unto the Israelites the spiritual water and bread of
their souls: The Papists would put out the right eye of knowledge in the
people of God.
who while they nusle the people in ignorance, and seduce them from the right
faith, which is the eye of the soul, do in a manner condition with them to
pluck out their right eyes. Borr.

3. Quest. Whether the men of Iabesh Gilead did well in yiedling themselves to
Nahash demand.
1. They show their weakness, in that they would at all yield to Gods
dishonor, by the shaming of his people: they bewray also their diffidence and
distrust, in expecting help from man, and not relying upon God: Osiand. yea,
they seem also to prescribe unto God in limiting a time for their deliverance:
Mar. for this they had been worthy to have been delivered over into the hand
of their enemies, but that God had respect rather unto his own glory, then
unto their deserts. 2. They desire a time of seven days, which the enemy in
the pride of his heart, thinking that the Israelites durst not encounter him,
refuses not. But Gods providence herein is seen, in giving occasion to Saul
to show his valor, and to bring this proud tyrant to confusion. Pelican.

4. Quest. v. 6. What spirit of God came upon Saul.
1. The Chalde paraphrast very well expounds this place, that the spirit of
fortitude came upon Saul: as the like is said of Sampson, Judge. 14.5. that the
spirit of God came upon him, when he tare the lion: it was then an heroical
spirit, wherewith he was endued: Borr. the spirit of strength and courage to
go against this tyrant: it was not the spirit of sanctification, and
regeneration: see before chap. 10. quest. 7. 2. By this it is evident, that a
man even in civil actions has need of the direction of Gods spirit, to bring
them to a good end: as before chap. 10.26. it is said, that there followed
Saul a band of men whose heart God had touched: Controv. Against freewill in
good moral actions.
man has not any free will of himself in moral actions, to do that which is
good, and pleasing in the sight of God, unless he be thereunto drawn and
guided by the spirit of God: contrary to the erroneous doctrine of the
Romanists.

5. Quest. v. 7. Of the edict of Saul proclaimed in his name and Samuels, with
the hewing of the oxen in pieces.
1. Saul uses not his own name only, but Samuels also, saying, Whosoever
comes not forth after Saul and Samuel: both for more authority, because he
was anointed king by Samuel the Lords Prophet, Osiand. and because he was not
yet generally approved and received king of all: Vatab. as also Samuel had not
wholly resigned and given up the administration, as is noted before, c. 7.
quest. 14. and it seems also that Samuel was present also at this time in the
battle, as appears v. 14. Iun. 2. And Saul uses this policy, in hewing his
oxen in pieces and sending them, because he knew that deeds would persuade
more then words: Osiand. as the Leuite did the like, when he hewed his wife in
pieces, and sent her parts into all quarters of Israel, Iud. 19. beside, Saul
herein shows his zeal and forwardnes, in defending the Lords people.
Pelican. And it was necessary also, that Saul being already contemned of
some, should set forth his edicts under some penalty, that the people might be
kept in due awe and obedience. Osiand.

6. Quest. v. 8. Why the men of Judah were counted apart from the men of Israel.
1. Whereas it is said, the men of Israel were three hundred thousand, the men
of Judah thirty thousand, it is evident, that before the falling away of the
ten tribes from the kingdom of David, some were reckoned of Isreel, and some
of Judah. Borr. 2. Under Judah also Simeon is comprehended, as Iud. 1.3. for
the Simeonites had their possessions and habitation within the tribe of Judah.
3. Now the cause was this, why the men of Judah are reckoned apart, for that
this tribe had a privilege, first to go against the enemy in any common
danger, Mar. and that it might appear, how that they being a populous tribe,
yet did not envy to be commanded by Benjamin the least of the tribes, Osiand.
they were also one of the greatest and most populous tribes, and of the largest
territory: and sometime they were singled out by the Lord himself, to be the
captain of the people: Iud. 1.1. but the most likely cause, why they are
numbered here apart by themselves was, for that they bordered upon the
Philistims, and defended their coasts from foreign invasions, and upon that
occasion they could not for their number draw out so many men and spare them
for this service, as the other tribes could. Iun.

7. Quest. Whether the men of Iabesh Gilead lied in saying, to morrow will we
come out unto you.
1. Some think, that they in deed made as though their brethren had forsaken
them, and so to make the enemy more secure, promise simply to yield themselves
the next day: adding further, that it was not unlawful to deceive those, whom
it was lawful to kill. Osiand. Pelican. Borr. 2. But it is not necessary to
lay such an imputation of dissembling upon the men of Iabesh Gilead: they do
but repeat the covenant, that they would come forth and yield themselves,
concealing the condition, if help came not in the mean time: by suppressing
whereof they both provide for their safety, that they might be secure that
night, and to make the enemy more secure, that Saul might take them unawares.
Iun.

8. Quest. v. 11. Of Saul's stratageme in coming upon the Ammonites in the
morning watch.
1. Saul's diligence and celeritie was wonderful, that came before the men of
Iabesh expected him: for he sent them word, that he would help them by that
time the Sun were hot, but he came in the morning watch. Osiand. Josephus
thinks, that he in one night went ten measures of ground, which are called
schoeni, which contain each of them 60. stadia or furlongs, as Herodotus
witnesses, lib. 2. that is, seven miles and an half, counting eight furlongs
to a mile, so that ten of those measures would make 75. miles: but it is
scarce credible, that Saul with such a multitude in one night, should rid
such a great compass of ground: it is more like that Saul mustred the men at
the bank of Jorden, from whence in one night he might come to Iabesh. 2. Saul
comes upon them unawares, falling upon them in the night toward the morning
watch: and divided his company, as Abraham did, when he pursued the four
kings, Genesis 14.15. so did Ioshuah travel all night, Of war like policies.
to come upon his enemies of a sudden, Josh. 10.9. and David fell upon the
Amalekites in the twilight, 1. Sam. 30.17. It is lawful therefore in war to
use stratagemes and policies, as Ioshuah did lay men in ambushment against Hai,
Josh. 8. so did the Israelites lie in wait against Gibeah. Iud. 20.29. As
weapons may be used against the enemy, so politic frauds: so that faith be
not violated. Mar.

9. Quest. v. 11. Whether Nahash the king of Ammon were slain in this battle.
1. Josephus thinks, that he among others was slain in this battle, lib. 6.
antiquit. Iudaic. c. 6. and the text seems to favor that opinion, because it
is said, that they which remained, and were not slain in battle, were so
dispersed, that two of them were not left together. 2. But Josephus is herein
deceived: for this Nahash died in the beginning of David's reign, 2. Sam. 10.1.
and 1. Chron. 19.1. and David had received much kindness at his hand, and
therefore he sent messengers to comfort his son after his fathers death, 2.
Sam. 10.2. therefore this Nahash could not be slain at this time: and Josephus
also himself lib. 7. c. 6. writes, that Nahash the king of Ammon then died,
when David sent a message of consolation unto (...): unless it be here
suggested, that it was an other Nahash, which is not like: for it should seem,
that this Nahash succored David, whom Saul so egerly pursued, not so much for
love unto David, as for despite unto Saul, which had done him so great harm.
Iun. in 2. Sam. 10. v. 1.

10. Quest. v. 11. Of the morning watch, when Saul came upon the Ammonites.
1. The Hebrews divided both the civil day, which is called (...),
comprehending the day and the night, and the natural day, as likewise the
natural night into four parts: the Civil day was divided into the evening,
the morning, and perfect day, whereof there were two distinctions, the one in
the ascending, the other in the descending of the sun. 2. The natural day
likewise was parted into four quarters, each containing three hours: the
morning, unto the third hour, then perfect day, from the third to the sixth,
and from the sixth to the ninth: the fourth was the evening and shutting in of
the day, from the ninth hour to the Sunset. Iun. Exodus 12.6. 3. So also was
the night distributed into four watches: as they are set down together, Mark.
13.35. (...), the evening, (...), midnight: (...), the cock crowing, and then
(...), the morning watch: which contained the last hours of the night, and
ended about the break of the day, Exodus 14.27. About this time David fell upon
the Amalekites in the twilight, c. 30.17. in the morning as the Septuag. there
interpret. And at the same season Saul smote the Ammonites; before it was
perfect day, and yet not altogether dark, that Saul and his company might see
where they lay.

11. Quest. v. 13. Of Saul's clemency in sparing those, who murmured against
him.
1. Saul herein shows his piety, humanity, wisdom; the first in not
seeking private revenge, the second in bearing with their scruple and
doubtfulnesse, that yet had not received him for their king: his wisdom, in
seeking to win them with lenity: the like is seen in David* 2. Sam. 19.25.
in pardoning Shemei, and granting him his life. Iun. 2. Saul gives this
reason, because this day the Lord has saved Israel, he would not have the joy
of that day obscured, and polluted with shedding of blood: Pelican. but as God
had showed them mercy in sending them such a joyful deliverance, so the like
mercy he thought fit to be showed unto others. R. Ben Gerson thinks, that
Saul did not pardon these men, but only respited their punishment: but that is
not like. 3. Hitherto Saul declares himself an innocent man, and a good
Prince: Pelican. but afterward* Saul forgot his own rule, when he would have
killed Jonathan, for ignorantly breaking his rash, vow, whom notwithstanding
the people saved, using the like reason, which Saul does here: Shall Jonathan
die, who has so mightily delivered Israel? c. 14.45. This mutabilitie in Saul,
and changeable nature, in falling from clemency to cruelty, from piety to
prophanes, from a good governor, to become a tyrant, does show, that these
virtues were not thoroughly grounded in him, but only superficially infused.

12. Quest. Whether the Prince may pardon the punishment inflicted by the law.
1. As it is a princely part for clemency to be extended, where there is place
for favor, so it is acceptable to God, and honorable before men, for justice
duly to be executed: as these reasons do show: 1. the Prince bears not the
sword for naught, Romans 13.4. but if malefactors should escape unpunished, what
use should be then of the sword. 2. To justify the wicked, and to condemn the
righteous, are both an abomination unto God, Prove. 17.15. if it be unlawful to
condemn the righteous, so is it to clear the wicked. 3. he only has power
to dispense with the punishment, who first imposed it, but God has prescribed
the punishment for certain sins, by him then, and the authority of his
word, they must be released. 4. where justice is executed, God is pleased, as
appears 2. Sam. 21. when Saul's sons were hanged up for the slaughter of the
Gibeonites. And where justice is suspended, God is offended, as the land was
punished with famine, in the same place.

2. But further to decide this question, and not to shut up all way unto
clemency; here are certain necessary considerations to be weighed. 1. There
is great difference between humane and divine laws: for in humane, as the law
receives life from the Prince, so the punishment is arbitrarie in him, to be
inflicted, or remitted: but in the execution of the divine laws, there is not
the like liberty. 2. Concerning the divine laws, these distinctions must be
observed: first, some are negative, Thou shall not kill, steal, etc. which are
strictly to be observed: but in the affirmative, as to put the murderer to
death, there is not the like strictnes and necessity: secondly, where there is
no penalty joined to the law, as that they should use just waights and
measures, but the punishment is not prescribed, and in such like, there was
place for favor: thirdly, where the penalty of the law can not be inflicted,
without greater damage to the Commonwealth, there it may be respited: as
David put not Ioab to death for slaying Abner and Amasa, because he saw he
could not do it without great disturbance in the Commonwealth. But for the
punishment inflicted by the law of God, to be upon partiality and conniuence
released (as David suffered Amnon for his incest, and Abshalom for murder to
go unpunished) has no good warrant. And though David spared them, yet Gods
justice ouertooke them both. Mar. Further, how far Moses Judicials do now
tend, see Hexapl. in Exodus in the question before the first chapter.

13. Quest. v. 15. How Saul was made King in Gilgal before the Lord.
1. Some think it is so said, because of the public and great solemnity and
general assembly, gathered together as in the presence of the Lord. Osiand. 2.
Some, that there was an altar there built, before the which Saul was confirmed
king. Vatab. 3. Some, that the place was holy, because there the people were
circumcised by Joshua, and there the covenant was renewed between God and his
people. Josh. 5. Pelican. 4. Josephus thinks that Saul was there again
anointed with the holy oil: but that is not like, seeing he had with his own
hand anointed him before: David indeed was thrice anointed, once by Samuel,
then by the tribe of Judah in Hebron, 2. Sam. 2.4. and afterward he was
anointed king over all Israel, 2. Sam. 5.3. but he was not again anointed by
Samuel. 5. Wherefore it is said, before the Lord: because the Arc was brought
thither at this time. Iun. Borr. And as it was before translated to Mizpeh, c.
10. so now was it removed to Gilgal. Hieron.

CHAP. XII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of Samuels purging of himself.
1. SAmuel thought it fit to clear himself, before he dismissed the people,
least that afterward, when the administration of the kingdom should not be
altogether answerable unto the peoples expectation, they might allege that
they were provoked and urged by the unjust government under Samuel and his
sons, to ask a king: therefore he would clear himself and his government
before the people. Osiand. 2. Because they seemed to rejoice in their new
elected king, with a carnal and immoderate joy, he thought it fit to allay and
temper their joy, by calling to remembrance how they had sinned against God, in
the manner of asking a king. Pelican. 3. And withal by clearing himself of
all wrong and oppression done unto them, he does by the way tax their
ingratitude, that were weary of so good and upright a Magistrate. Borr. 4.
Likewise Samuel makes this Apology in respect of the new king, that it might
be a president and pattern for him to follow. Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 2. Of Samuels age: he says, I am old and gray headed.
1. Some of the Hebrews think that Samuel exceeded not the age of 52. years
when he died: but that can not be* for if Samuel, as Josephus thinks, lived
18 years after Saul was king, lib. 6. in fine, and yet in the beginning of his
kingdom was gray headed, and had sons fit for government, then if his whole
age were but 52. we must have Samuel gray headed at 34. years, and then to
have children fit to bear office. 2. Therefore it is more probable that Samuel
was at this time 52. year old at the least, and that he lived more 18. years
under Saul, and might be about 70. years of age in all. Josephus seems to
favor the first opinion: for he thinks that Samuel was but 12. year old,
when the Lord first appeared unto him, c. 3. not long after that Eli died: and
he says that Samuel judged Israel 12. years alone, and 18. years with Saul,
lib. 6. c. 14. all makes but 42. years. But after Eli his death, the Arc was
20. years in Kiriathiearim, c. 7.2. not long before Saul was made king: and
whereas immediately after Eli his 40. years, Samuel and Saul succeeded 40.
years more, Act. 13.21. if this time be divided, and half of it given to
Samuel, half to Saul: Samuel should not be above 32. year old, when Saul was
desired to be king: but the Scripture says, that Samuel was then become old.
chap. 8.1. Therefore it is not probable, that Samuel was then but twelve year
old: or else we must make a longer space between Gods first appearing to Samuel
and Eli his death. 3. Here then are some things certain, some uncertain. First,
it is uncertain how old Samuel was when Eli died: secondly it is uncertain, how
long Samuel and Saul governed Israel. But it is certain, that Samuel and Saul
between them had but 40. years, Act. 13.21. as may also be gathered by
casting of the years from the departure of the children of Israel out of
Egypt, which unto the 4. year of Salomons reign were 480. years, 1. king.
6.1. reckened thus: 40. years in the wilderness, 17. years under Joshua, 299.
under the Judges, 80. under Eli, Samuel, and Saul, 40. under David, and 4.
years of Salomons reign: which make 480. years. It is likewise certain, that
Samuel judged Israel after Eli before Saul, at the least 20. years, c. 7.2. It
is like then, that he was more then 12. year old when Eli died, and at the
least 50. or more, when he substituted his sons. His whole age then could not
be so little, as 52. years, as some Hebrews surmise. Pellic. 4. And further
some think; as Peter Mar. in c. 1. that Samuel was borne in the 366. year
after the coming of Israel out of Egypt: for whereas from thence to the
building of the Temple in the 4. year of Solomon, were but 480. years, 1.
king. 6.1. of which time David reigned 40. save four: Samuel and Saul twenty
between them: whereof giving unto Saul 20. years of those forty, there will
be 60. years wanting, four abated of the said sum of 480. then was Samuel
borne in 366. year. 50. year old at the least when Saul's 20. year began,
which falls in the 424. year: 60. years before the building of their Temple
by Solomon. See more of this, c. 14. qu. 2.

3. Quest. v. 2. In what sense Samuel says, my sons are among you.
1. Some think, he makes mention of his sons, that they were among them,
ready to be consulted with in their weighty affairs, their king being not
yet so well entered, and experienced in the business of the kingdom: Pelican.
Vatab. but it is not like, that Samuel would send the people for counsel to
his sons, both because they had now a King appointed to govern them, and for
that his sons were offensive for their evil government. 2. Some think,
that Samuel does by making this mention, tax the people for their ingratitude,
that might better have accepted of the sons for their fathers sake: and if
they were faulty, to have sought their amendment, rather then a change and
innovation of the state. Borr. But Samuel then should have showed some
coffeehouse, that his sons did not succeed him in the government,
wherewith notwithstanding he was willing and well pleased, submitting himself
to Gods good pleasure. 3. Therefore Samuels meaning was this, that now in the
determining of the government of his house, which he resigned by reason of his
age, and his sons also were now as private men, a king being appointed: he
is willing to give up a reckoning and account as it were of his stewardship
among them. Iun. As also, as he purges himself, so he is willing that his
sons should give account of their government, who were now in their hands and
power, and they might proceed against them as they desired. Osiand.

4. Quest. v. 3. Whom Samuel means, saying, before his Anointed.
1. Some think that under the type of Saul the Anointed king, he understands
the Messiah, the Anointed of God, whom the Lord has appointed to be Judge of
the world, and before whom we must give account of all our doings. Borr. But
it is evident, v. 5. where he says, his Anointed is witness this day, that he
means Saul there present, in whose hearing he made this Apology: and in the
same sense David calls Saul the Lords Anointed. c. 24.7. Iun. 2. Now Samuel
makes special mention of Saul in these regards, both in respect of himself,
namely Saul, that he might have here a pattern, how to govern the people
uprightly and justly without oppression: Pelican. as also in respect of the
people, that they might see what difference there was, as they should afterward
find between the upright and indifferent government, which they had enjoyed
under their Judges, and the hard service, which they should feel under some of
their kings, as he had foretold them before, c. 8. Borr. As also Samuel by this
means provides for his own credit, which it is lawful to preserve, least in
time to come his government might have been accused and traduced. Osiand.

5. Quest. v. 3. Of these words of Samuel, that I should hide mine eyes for it.
1. Some do understand it of the person: that I should wink at him: Vatab. or
turn mine eyes away from him in judgment. Chald. 2. Some refer it to the
sin, that I should wink at his offense, and suffer it to pass unpunished.
Osiand. 3. Some apply it to the innocent (...), that I should turn away my
countenance from hearing his cause. Pelican. 4. But the best interpretation
is, to understand it of the gift, that I should hide mine eyes therewith, or
for it: Iun. as it is said, Deuteronomy. 16.19. That the reward blinds the eyes of
the wise. Borr.

6. Quest. v. 8. How Moses and Aaron caused the people to dwell in the place.
1. Whereas Moses and Aaron died before the people came into the land of
Canaan, some do understand it of the law and doctrine, and the true worship of
God, which Moses and Aaron taught the people, whereby they obtained the
promised land. Vatab. Borr. 2. But it is better understood of the actual
possession of some part of the land, which the Israelites possessed beyond
Jordan, which they subdued and inherited under Moses: Iun. as also, because
Moses substituted and appointed Ioshuah in his place while he lived, who gave
unto the people possession of the rest of the land. Osiand.

7. Quest. v. 11. Which of the Judges Bedan was.
1. The Septuag. translate, Barack: being deceived by the similitude of the
letters: for between daleth, and the, there is no great difference in the
Hebrew characters. But the order of the names admits not this
interpretation: for Ierubbaal, which was Gedeon, is here set before Bedan, but
Barack was before Gedeon. 2. The Chalde takes it for Samson, and so Hierome.
in his traditions upon this place: and some derive it, as though it should be
contracted of ben dan, the son of Dan: Pelican. or be dan, in Dan, or of
Dan: Osiand. for Samson was of Dan: so also Bor. Genevens. but the order of
time is against this sense: here Bedan is placed before Iiptah, but Samson
followed Iiptah many years after. 3. Therefore Iunius opinion is more
probable, who thinks that this Bedan was Iair the Menashite, Judge. 10.3.
which is agreeable to the order of time here observed, for he was before
Iipthah: and there is one Bedan of Macher of Menasseh mentioned, 1. Chron.
7.17. who might be called Bedan beside his ordinary name by way of
distinction, because there was an elder Iair, Numb. 32.41. of Manasseh, of
whom certain towns were called Havoth Iair. sic Iun.

8. Quest. v. 14. Of the meaning of these words, both ye and your king shall
continue, following the Lord, etc.
1. The most read thus, both ye and your King, etc. shall follow the Lord your
God, etc. G. or, shall be after the Lord. V. A.P. that is, shall continue in
his worship. Called. he will keep you in his fear. Osiand. But the distinction
coming between, does separate these words, after the Lord, from the former
clause, both ye shall be, and your king. 2. Therefore the best reading is this,
then ye shall be (that is, continue, and your King) following Jehovah your God:
that is, so long as you obey him, and fear him: Iun. so that this sentence
contains both the promise, ye shall continue, and the condition, if ye follow
the Lord: otherwise, it should be a repetition of the same thing, if ye hear
his voice, and rebel not against his word, both ye and your king shall follow
the Lord: which were as much in effect, as to say, if ye obey and follow him,
ye shall follow him.

9. Quest. v. 15. How the hand of God should be upon their fathers.
1. The Septuag. understand and so read, upon your king: and so the Hebrews,
by fathers, understand their kings. Pelican. Vatab. some, their kings and
Priests, and other governors. Borr. 2. But the better reading is, the hand of
God shall be against you, as against your fathers: Chald. Iun. Osiand. that as
their fathers were punished aforetime for their rebellion, so should they also,
if they continued in their fathers steps.

10. Quest. v. 17. Of the thunder and rain which Samuel called for in the time
of wheat harvest.
1. Though it be no strange thing with us, for thunder and rain to come in
harvest, because it falls in autumn: yet in that country it was not usual,
both because their climate is hotter then ours, and their wheat harvest was in
the heat, and mids of Summer: when the parching heat of the Sun consumed
and dried up the exhalations and vapors, whereof the thunder and rain was
engendered. Borr. 2. Some of the Hebrews think, that in that country it
raineth not from the mids of March unto October: but that is not like,
because the Scripture makes mention of the first and latter rain: others of
them affirm, that it never raineth there in the time of harvest, and that is
like. 3. Beside the rain and thunder was the more strange, because it came
then, when it was a fair day, and they were in their wheat harvest, when
there was no likelihood of thunder and rain: Iun. as it was a fair sunshine
morning when it rained fire and brimstone upon Sodom: for it is said, that
the Sun did rise upon the earth, when Lot entered into Zoar, Genesis 19.23.

11. Quest. Why Samuel called for thunder and rain.
1. Hereby the Lord showed his power, and the people saw their foolishnes, in
not being contented to have such a mighty God for their protector, who could
with thunder and rain fight for them against their enemies, as he did for
Israel against the host of Pharaoh, and not long before this against the
Philistims. c. 7. And beside it appeared what small reason they had to be
weary of Samuels government, who by his prayer could fetch down rain and
thunder from heaven. Pelican. 2. In these two signs the Lord showed his
mercy and judgment: the rain is for the most part a sign of his mercy, and
the thunder and lightning of his judgment: Borr. and as rain does mitigate
the heat and rage of the lightning, which otherwise were like to make a
combustion, so the Lords judgments are tempered with mercy. 3. But it will be
objected, that by this means their harvest was hindered, and their fruits of
the earth, being now ripe for the sicle, by this storm and tempest spoiled:
the answer is, that it is like this tempest was not general, and so did no
great harm: and though it did, the Prophet was to have greater regard of their
souls, to bring them to repentance, and acknowledgement of their sin, then
of their bodies. Osiand.

12. Quest. v. 19. How the people sinned in asking a King.
Seeing it is said before, that the Lord had chosen Saul, c. 10.24. as Samuel
says, See you not him, whom the Lord has chosen, that there is none like him
among all the people: how are the people guilty of sin? seeing their request
stood with the will of God? Reconcil.
the answer is, that although God had decreed to give them a King, yet the
occasion that moved them was not good: they failed in the manner, bewraying
not only an ungrateful mind toward Samuel, but a diffident and distrustful
heart toward God, as is before showed, chap. 8. quest. 2. like as it stood with
the counsel and determinate purpose of God, that Christ should be delivered up
to die for the world, Act. 2.23. yet Judas sin was no whit the less in
betraying him.

13. Quest. v. 22. Of these words of Samuel, It has pleased the Lord to make
you his people.
1. Some read, God has sworn: L. has begun: Pelican. but the better
reading is, it has pleased God, Iun. Chald. or, God would make you his people:
Vatab. for neither did God now begin to make them his people, neither is
there here any oath mentioned. 2. So that God did choose them for his people,
not of their merits, but of his own mercy. Genev. Pelican. So Moses often
protested unto the people: as Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord did not set his love upon
you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number then any people, etc. but
because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had
sworn to your fathers. So Deuteronomy. 9.5. Thou entrest not to inherit the land for
thy righteousness, or for thy upright heart, but for the wickedness of those
nations, etc. and that might perform the word, which the Lord thy God swear,
etc. Then if the temporal election of the Israelites issued out of Gods mere
grace and favor toward them: much more is our eternal election grounded only
upon the grace of God, without any foresight and respect unto our works: as
the Apostle teaches upon the example of Iaakob and Esau, that the purpose of
God might remain, according to election, not by works, but by him that
calls. Romans 9.12. And again, Who has predestinate us to be adopted through
Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Ephesians.
1.5. No other reason can be yielded, why the Lord elected those which shall be
saved in Christ, but the good will and pleasure of God. By this then it
appears, how erroneous that assertion of the Rhemists is, that Christ
appoints not by his absolute and eternal election, men so to be partakers of
the fruit of his redemption, without any condition or respect of their own
works, obedience, or free will: but with this conditional, always, if men
will obey him. Annotat. in Hebr. 5. sect. 7. God indeed conditioneth and
couenanteth on his part, to give grace, faith, and obedience to all them, whom
he electeth in Christ: as the Apostle speaks, We are his workmanship created
in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk
in them, Ephesians. 2.10. but the decree of election is not grounded upon any such
condition, respect, or foresight of our works and faith: for then contrary to
the Apostle, Romans 9.15. it should be in him that wills, and runs, and not
in God that shows mercy.

14. Quest. v. 23. Whether Samuel should have sinned, if he had ceased to pray
for the people, and to show them the good way.
1. There are sins of omission, when a duty commanded, is left undone; as
there are sins of commission, when things are committed which are unlawful
and forbidden to be done: of duties omitted, some are private, and in them
there is less danger, some are public, the omitting whereof is a loss and
hindrance to many, and the default herein is more grievous and offensive. And
of these duties some concern the civil and politic state, as the
administration of justice, some the spiritual estate and condition of the
soul, as in teaching and instructing, and preaching the word. And of all other
the omission of these duties is most displeasing to God, discommodious to his
Church, and dangerous to their soul, by women the default is committed. And
therefore Samuel says here in direct terms, far be it from me, that I
should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you: yea, I will instruct
you in the good and right way. Samuel confesses he should have sinned, if he
ceased or intermitted to pray for the^ and teach them, and to execute his
Prophetical office among them: as the Apostle says, Woe is me if I preach not
the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.16. 2. If such necessity be laid upon Prophets and
Apostles then, and Pastors and Ministers now to preach the Gospel: Whether the
preaching of the word be a necessary part of sanctifying the Sabbath.
does it not follow, that every Pastor in his particular charge, is bound to
preach unto his people continually, and to sanctify the Lords day with them in
preaching the word: and that a Pastor being not necessarily let, omitting
to preach, does not hallow the Lords day, as the Lord requires: and will it
not follow upon Samuels conclusion, that whosoever cease to pray, and preach
for and to his people (especially upon the Lords day, which is consecrated to
those exercises) therein sins? This position then, that every Pastor, not
necessarily absent, or otherwise necessarily let, is bound to pray with, and
preach to his people every Lords day, and in omitting these duties vnhalloweth
for his part, that sacred day: it may be justified by the word of God, and by
the continual practice of the Church.

For, the Lord says by his Prophet, If the watchman see the sword coming, and
blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned: if the sword come and take
any person from among them, he is taken for his iniquity: but his blood will I
require at the watchmans hand. Ezech. 33.6, 7. When should the Minister blow
the trumpet, but upon the Lords day, which is as it were the feast of blowing
the trumpet of the word of God: and is there not fear of Gods judgments
continually, and does not the Pastor daily see the Lords sword drawn out
against sin: if he then spare to tell the people thereof, his danger is
great. Moses was read and preached in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act.
15.21. S. Paul says, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe if I preach not the
Gospel. The Prophet says, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Cursed is he that does the work of God negligently, Ierem. 48.10. S. Peter is
an ensample to all good Pastors, who says, I think it meet as long as I am
in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance, 2. Pet.
1.13. For if parents are bound to whet upon their children the law of God,
Deuter. 6.7. often to inculcate unto them the Lords commandments: much more
is it the duty of the Pastor: if bodily alms is not to be deferred till to
morrow, if we now have it, Proverb. 2.28. how much more is not spiritual alms
to be deferred.

Further, if a Pastor preach not unto his people, where he is not let by
necessary absence, public employment, or sickness and infirmity, and so is
stayed by the hand of God, by his private necessary affairs being abroad, or
by the public business of the Church: what is the cause of his not preaching?
either it is his want of ability, and then he is an intruder, or if he can and
will not, it is his want of zeal, and shows idleness and negligence, which in
Gods business is accursed, as the Prophet says; or he would and can not, by
reason of many Churches, which he has cure and charge of, which proceeds of
greedines and covetousness: so then, which soever of these causes is pretended,
whether it be the ignorant, idle, or covetous Pastor, he can not be excused in
leaving such a principal duty undone upon the Lords day: for every one
according to his place is to sanctify the Lords day: he that is taught,
sanctifies it in hearing the word reverently, and communicating with the
prayers of the Church devoutly: but he that teaches must sanctify the Lords
day, not as one of the sheep, but as a Pastor, not as an hearer, but as a
teacher: or else he sanctifies it not, as he ought: and his fault and
negligence is so much the greater, because he only does not fail in
sanctifying the Lords day himself, but is the occasion that others sanctify
it not, as they would and might, by hearing the word preached.

I do reverence in this behalf that worthy Canon of the Trullan Council:
Oportet eos, qui praesunt Ecclesiis, omnibus quidem diebus, sed maxim
dominicis, populum docere pietatis eloquia, ex divina scriptura colligentes
iudicia veritatis: They which are set over the Churches ought upon all days,
but most of all the Lords days, teach the people, the precepts of piety,
gathering out of the Scripture the judgments of truth. Trul. c. 19. Augustine
has an excellent reason to show the necessity of the often preaching of the
word: Certissime scitote fratres, quia qualis est caro, quae post multos dies
percipit cibum, talis est anima, quae non assidue pascitur verbo dei: etc. Know
ye brethren for a certentie, that as the flesh is, which after many days
receives food, such is the soul which is not continually fed with Gods word.
de Temp. Sermon. 56. Origin long before him said, In nostro dominico die semper
pluit Dominus Manna de coelo: In our Lords day, the Lord always raineth Manna
from heaven. hom. 7. in Exodus Who will not embrace that worthy saying ascribed
to Damasus: Omnis negligenter pascens toties sibi commendatum dominicum gregem,
convincitur summum non amare pastorem, nec eius se velle discipulum fieri,
cuius exempla negligit imitari. Every one negligently feeding the Lords flock
so often commended unto him, is convinced not to love the chief shepherd, and
that he will not become his disciple, whose example he neglects to imitate.

Thus it appears by the Scripture, and by the practice of the Church, what
necessity is laid upon preaching, and what curse hangs over them, that are
negligent in the Lords work, and that every Lords day the spiritual Manna of
Gods word should rain down upon the people. It pitieth my heart therefore,
that some men should so much forget themselves, as to call them Sabbatarians,
which require this duty at the Pastors hands, to sanctify the Lords day
continually with the preaching of the word of God: and further are not afraid,
to call these positions, and the like, as that the Lords day must necessarily
be kept now of all Christians: that it is not lawful to use the seventh day
to any other end, but to the holy and sanctified end, to the which the Lord
appointed it: that we be restrained upon the Sabbath day from work, both hand
and foot, as the Jews were: that the Church has no authority to set up any
day like to the Sabbath day: these and the like conclusions, one is not ashamed
to call, Sabbatarian errors, and impieties: more then either Jewish or Popish
superstition: a new Idol: noisome doctrines, tending to schism and sedition:
yea, heretical assertions. Let such an one take heed, how he rail upon Gods
ordinance and institution, which can not be too much honored: and howsoever he
may turn his pen in his heat against his brethren, let him not oppose
himself against the sacred institution of God in the Sabbath, as he hops one
day to enjoy the everlasting Sabbath.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Quest. v. 1. How Saul is said to have been one year in his kingdom.
1. WHereas the words in the original are, Saul the son of a year in his
reign: some do read thus, Saul was the son of a year, when he began to
reign: Lat. that is, innocent as a child of a year old, as the Chald.
Pelican. but this interpretation seems to be coact and forced: because
mention is made of two years, that he reigned in the next words: he should be
there expounded also, to have been as one of two year old: neither is it
true, that Saul was or could be so innocent, as a child of a year old. 2.
Wherefore others do refer it unto the time from his unction and
inauguration, that a year was expired. Vatab. Genevens. Osiand. but that can
not be: for as yet the seven days were not expired, which Samuel set unto Saul
to stay for him in Gilgal. v. 8. 3. Some finding this doubt to be very
difficult, do think, that in this place it was expressed, how old Saul was
when he began to reign, Reconcil.
and how long he reigned, but that in continuance of time the place was
corrupted, and changed: but give this liberty, thus to answer proposed doubts,
by imagining the text to be corrupt, and it will greatly empaire the credit and
authority of the Canonical and authentical Scriptures. 4. Therefore the best
solution is: that Saul was now in his first year, while these things were
done, mentioned in the two former chapters, and in this. Chimchi. Iun. and
though in the original, it is said, only the son of a year, neither one
nor first is added: yet by the correspondencie of the number of two years,
afterward expressed, here, that word, one or first may be well supplied.

2. Quest. v. 1. How Saul is said to have reigned two years over Israel.
1. Some understand it, that he reigned but two years in all over Israel:
Osiand. but the many wars which Saul had with the Philistims, and other
enemies, c. 14.47. and the long persecution of David, and the time of David's
abode in Ziklag, which was a year and four months, c. 27.7. do make evident
proof, that Saul was king above two years. Josephus also writes that Saul
reigned, while Samuel lived 18. years, and after his death 20. years. c. 15.
lib. 6. de antiqu. And S. Paul gives to Saul and Samuel together 40. years,
Act. 13.21. All this shows, that Saul reigned more then two years. 2. Some
other expound it thus: that Saul reigned two years before he took upon him
the state of a king, Genevens. but reigned without any pomp, as the Roman
Dictatours, not yet having any garrison or guard of soldiers: Pelican. but
this can not hang together, seeing it is said before, he had been a year
king, or was in the first year of his kingdom; as he reigned the first year,
so he reigned the second: if he took not upon him the state of a king for two
years, how it is said, he had been king one year: beside, this business
expressed in this and the next chapter, in the choosing of three thousand men,
and encountering with the Philistims, shows that he took upon him to be king:
as likewise in the 11. chap. when he sent a peremptory message over all
Israel, that they should come forth after Saul and Samuel. 3. Therefore the
meaning is, that he reigned two years, that is, lawfully, before the Lord
rejected him, which was upon his return from Amalek, when he had disobeied the
commandment of God, c. 15. and immediately after the Lord commanded Samuel to
anoint David king, and then the spirit of God departed from Saul: so in right
he reigned but two years: then he usurped the kingdom afterward. Vatab. Borr.
as it is said, c. 14.47. he held the kingdom over Israel, that is, by violence
and tyranny.

3. Quest. v. 2. Of Saul's age, when he began to reign.
Although it be no where expressly set down how old Saul was, when he began
to reign: yet it may be coniectured that he was of good years, seeing in the
first year of his reign he had a son, namely Jonathan, that was able to
take upon him a charge of soldiers: as this verse shows, that a thousand of
the garrison, which Saul had chosen out, were with Jonathan in Gibeah: and in
the next chapter, Jonathan with his armor bearer slew twenty men of the
Philistims: this shows, that Jonathan could not be much less then twenty
year old, and Saul his father, forty or thereabout. Pelican.

4. Quest. v. 3. Of the place where Jonathan smote the garrison of the
Philistims.
1. Some read: Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistims, which was in the
hill, namely at Kiriathiearim, where the Arc was. Vatab. Genevens. Some think
it was an hill in the confines and borders of Israel, where the Philistims had
a garrison. Osiand. 2. But it is rather taken here for a proper name, Ghebah,
which is the same, v. 2. called Gibeah: sometime it is named Gibeah of
Benjamin, v. 15. sometime Gebah of Benjamin, v. 16. sic Ar. Page Chal.
Pelican. Iun. Josephus also says, that this garrison of the Philistims held a
castle near unto Gabah, where Jonathan did discomfite them. See before, c. 10.
quest. 5.

5. Quest. v. 5. Of the number of the Philistims that gathered them to battle
against Saul.
1. Beside the number expressed in the text, that the Philistims gathered
together 30. thousand charets, and 6. thousand horsemen: Josephus says, there
were beside, 300. thousand footmen: but though the number was very great, for
it is said the number of the people was like the sand of the sea in multitude:
yet it is too much boldness, to conjecture at the certain number, where the
Scripture has not set it down. Here also let it be observed, that Josephus
does usually take unto himself great liberty, to alter and change the numbers
specified in Scripture: as for thirty men, whom Samuel had invited, he names
seventy: c. 5. lib. 6. and whereas the Hebrew text speaks but of 300.
thousand of Israel, and 30. thousand of Judah, which gathered unto Saul against
the Ammonites, c. 11. he reckeneth 700. thousand of Israel, and 70. thousand of
Judah. c. 6. The like he does in many places beside.

6. Quest. v. 5. Of Bethaven.
1. Some do take this to be all one with Bethel, which the Prophets called
Bethaven, the house of iniquity, because of the Idolatry there committed:
Vat. Pell. Genev. but this ignominious name of Bethel, was not yet taken up,
till afterward. 2. Therefore this Bethaven was the name of a town and desert
so called, not far from Bethel, Josh. 18.12. Iun. Masius in Josh.
which was a distinct place by it self: but afterward, as it was near in place
to Bethel, so in stead of the house of God, Bethel, became an house of Idols,
the name of Bethaven, by allusion to the signification of it, was also
translated unto Bethel.

7. Quest. v. 8. How the seven days are to be accounted, which Saul tarried for
Samuel in Gilgal.
1. Samuel had given Saul a charge before to go down before him to Gilgal, c.
10.8. and to stay for him there seven days: which time must not take beginning
from that instant when Samuel gave that charge: for all that came between, as
the election of Saul in Mizpeh: the gathering together of 300. thousand out of
all Israel; the renewing of Saul's kingdom in Gilgal, c. 11. the Apology of
Saul, and the calling for thunder and rain, c. 12. all these things could not
be done in the compass of seven days. 2. Therefore these seven days must be
counted from the time that Saul went down to Gilgal, that there he should stay
for Samuel seven days, after he was come thither: as here v. 4. it is said
that the people gathered together after Saul to Gilgal: and that Saul was yet
at Gilgal, that is, stayed there, v. 7. and so fulfilled the number of 7. days
expecting Samuels coming, v. 8. 3. It must be considered, that before this
Samuel and Saul went to Gilgal, where the kingdom was renewed, c. 11. and where
Samuel made his apology c. 12. but Samuel did not mean that going to Gilgal:
for he says, thou shall go down before me to Gilgal, Reconcil.
c. 10.8. but then Samuel was the first, that made the motion to go to Gilgal,
c. 11.14. and as yet Saul was not fully established in his kingdom: he means
therefore, that after he was confirmed king, he should go down to Gilgal,
Samuel being not then present with him: and so being in Gilgal, he should
stay for the Prophet seven days, to receive further direction from him.

8. Quest. Of Saul's excuse, v. 12. after I had refrained my self, etc.
1. Some read, I was bold, V. B. G. that is, whereas I had a purpose to stay
for thee, yet I strained my self, seeing the present necessity, to offer
sacrifice before thy coming. 2. Other read, necessitate compulsus, being
forced by necessity, Lat. or I forced my self, P. or roboravi me, confirmed
my self. Chal. Page 3. But the word aphak signifies to refrain or contain:
as it is said of Joseph, c. 45.1. he could no longer refrain, or contain
himself: so Isa. 42.14. I held my peace a long time, and refrained my self:
so here Saul says, when I had contained my self, that is, with much ado had
expected thee six days, I then was bold to offer sacrifice the seventh. sic
Iun.

9. Quest. v. 13. Upon Samuels words, thou have done foolishly, and wherein
Saul offended, in not staying for him.
1. Some think, that Saul's sin at this time was his diffidence and distrust
in Gods help and assistance, because the people fell away from him, as though
the Lord could not save as well with few, as with many: for the like fault
Moses was not suffered to go into the land of Canaan, because he doubted of
Gods power, and believed him not, when he smote the rock. Pelican. but there
was an other special sin beside, which Samuel charge him with, because he
had broken the commandment of God. 2. Again, it may be thought, that Saul had
an evil opinion of Samuel, that he failed in his promise, and forgot the time
which he had appointed: whereas he might have remembered, how faithful Samuel
had showed himself hitherto, that all which he had said came accordingly to
pass: Pelican. but this was not all the cause, upon the former reason, Saul
had transgressed against some special commandment of God. 3. Some think,
that Saul brake Samuels charge, in that he stayed not for him full seven days,
but in the beginning of the seventh day offered sacrifice: for as soon as he
had made an end of sacrificing, Samuel came: Borr. But it seems, that this
was not the greatest matter: for whereas Saul excuses himself, that Samuel
came not at the days set, Samuel to that answers nothing, but only charge
him with the breach of Gods commandment. 4. Wherefore whereas there were two
parts of Samuels charges: that he should tarry for Samuel seven days, the
other that he should attempt nothing before his coming: tarry for me seven
days, til I come, and show thee what thou shall do: Saul offended more in the
second, then in the first: that he presumed of himself, without direction of
the Prophet, to command sacrifice to be offered: thinking that God would be
pleased, with the external act of sacrificing, neither offered up in faith,
nor obedience, as hypocrites please themselves in external ceremonies. Borr.

10. Quest. v. 13. Of these words: for now the Lord had established thy
kingdom upon Israel for ever.
Seeing according to Iaakobs prophecy, the kingdom was to remain in Judah
until Shiloh came: how then did the Lord purpose to establish the kingdom in
Saul: to answer this doubt: 1. Some answer, that by ever is understood a long
time, that if Saul had been obedient unto Gods commandment, the Lord would
have settled the kingdom in his house for a long season: sic Ben Gerson, Vatab.
Osiand. which might afterward have come to David: but this can not be said in
respect of Gods purpose and decree: for as he had determined that Judah should
have the government, so the Lord also had set down the time, and decreed what
person, who, and when should be first king of Judah. 2. Therefore some by ever,
understand, during all Saul's life, all his days, as Hannah says, that Samuel
should abide before the Lord for ever, c. 1.22. Iun. But this is not the
meaning: for both Saul continued king all his days, though with much trouble
and vexation: and David though anointed, yet confesses Saul, while he lived,
to be the Lords anointed: as also even in this sense, if it be referred to the
external purpose of God, there should follow an alteration in God, in making
David king sooner then he had purposed. 3. Therefore the best exposition is,
that God speaks here to the capacity, and according to the sight and
judgment of man, that Saul's kingdom had been likely to continue, if he had
not disobeied God: that then is here propounded as an effect of Saul's
disobedience the loss of the kingdom, which indeed was according to the
everlasting decree of God: so as Pelican well says, loquitur humano more, and
vt videri poterat stabiliri regnum: he speaks after an humane manner, and as
his kingdom might have seemed to us likely to have been established. The like
speech we had before, c. 2.30. I had said, that thine house, and the house of
thy father, should walk before me for ever, but now the Lord says it shall
not be so. As there though God had foreseen and decreed the rejecting of Eli
his house from the Priesthood, who was of Ithamar, and the restitution of
Eleazars posterity in Zadock, yet the Lord so propounds it, as though this
alteration had been procured by the sin of Eli his house: the very like is
here to be said of the innovation and change of the kingdom. Gods purpose
then is to be considered, as decreed in his counsel, which is always certain
and unchangeable, and as it is propounded to us: absolute and definite in it
self, but yet offered unto us with condition: to God there is nothing
contingent or happening by chance: to man, whose will is not compelled, but
works freely, many things seem to be contingent, which God notwithstanding
did foresee should so fall out, and they could not otherwise. 4. Further it is
to be considered, that there were two causes of the casting off and rejecting
of Saul, the one the immediate and the next cause, which was the sin and
disobedience of Saul; the other, the first cause and furthest off, the will and
decree of God: this will and foreknowledge of God, did impose no necessity
upon Saul, neither was he forced, but sinned voluntarily: for Gods prescience
lays no necessity simply upon men's actions, but by consequent, because
whatsoever God foreseeth shall come to pass: his prescience can not be
deceived and frustrate.

Now then seeing the sin of Saul was the cause of his reiection, which he was
not forced by any necessity to commit, and if he had not sinned, his kingdom
might have continued: Therefore this is not spoken in respect of Gods immutable
decree, but in regard of the outward possibility and likelihood, which Saul
had to hold the kingdom. So it is said, Apoc. 2.15. Hold that thou have, least
an other take thy crown: where we are not to understand the everlasting
crown decreed of God, which none can be deprived of to whom it is assigned:
but that crown, which in respect of their outward profession and good
beginning, they might seem to be appointed unto: the like occasion there is of
Saul's kingdom here. Mart.

11. Quest. v. 14. How David is said to be a man after Gods own heart.
1. David was a man that fell into tentation, and offense before God, as in the
matter of Vriah: for it is said, that the thing which David had done,
displeased the Lord, c. 11.27. This therefore is to be understood, first
comparatively in respect of Saul: Reconcil.
as Samuel says, c. 15.28. The Lord has given it to thy neighbor, that is
better then thou: as also, because Saul was an hypocrite, he had not a sound
and faithful heart unto God, but all his obedience was in outward pretense and
show, but David's heart and desire was set to please God, howsoever he failed in
some outward acts: therefore this saying must be expounded according to that
rule of the Apostle: if first there be a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not. David then
had a willing and desirous heart to please God: as he says, My heart is fixed,
my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57.7. and therefore God accepted of his obedience,
though imperfect, according to the desire and meaning of his heart. 2. But
herein David was a type of Christ, who was indeed absolutely according to Gods
heart, in whom the Lord is well pleased. Borr. 3. And in that David of Judah
of deformed Leah, not of beautiful Rachel, was chosen to be king, and the
Messiah was to come of David of Leah: this showed the mystery of Christ's
deformity as it were in his sufferings, and specially in his passion upon the
Cross: as the Prophet Isai says, He had neither form nor beauty, when we
shall see him, there shall be no form, that we should desire him. Isa. 53.2.
Bor.

12. Quest. v. 15. Of Samuels departing from Gilgal from Saul.
1. Some read, that Samuel went from Gilgal in Gibeah of Benjamin, and went to
Ramah: Genevens. but Gilgal is improperly said to be in Gibeah of Benjamin, for
they were two distinct places, and a good way asunder. 2. Josephus says that
Samuel went to his own house, and Saul with Jonathan returned to Gibeah: but
he leaves out somewhat in the text: that Samuel went from Gilgal to Gibeah:
neither is it like that Samuel though he went away in some anger from Saul,
that he would altogether leave him in such great danger: seeing that Saul,
notwithstanding the Prophets hard message, yet gives not over at this brunt,
but does the duty of a king in defending his people. Pelican. 3. Wherefore
the better reading is, that Samuel went from Gilgal, not in Gibeah, but to
Gibeah of Benjamin. Chal. Iun. So Samuel and Saul went to the same place, not
together, as Vatab. but Samuel went before, Saul and Jonathan with their men
follow after. Pellic.

13. Quest. v. 19. Of these words, there was no smith found in Israel.
1. Josephus thinks that the Philistims barred the Israelites from all use of
iron: but the text shows, that they permitted unto them the use of iron
instruments for their tillage and husbandry, as shares, mattocks, pitchforks,
v. 21. they only suffered them to have no warrelike weapons, nor iron smithes
to make them any. 2. And further they allowed them not otherwise then with a
file to sharpen their instruments of husbandry: Pelican so understands,
that only among the Philistims it was lawful for the^ to file their tools:
but that had not bin possible for them, from all parts of Israel, and upon
every occasion to go down to the Philistims, to set an edge upon their
instruments: therefore when they would new sharpen or point their shares, or
mattocks, or other instruments, which could not be done without new forging of
them, they went to the Philistims, for they had no smiths of their own: and
they bought of the Philistims all their iron implements for husbandry, but a
file to make a shift to sharpen them, they were allowed. 3. Thus we see into
what servitude Israel was brought, altogether destitute of outward weapons,
that the glory of the victory should only redound unto God. Genevens. 4.
Like unto these Philistims, was Julian the Apostata, that denied to the
Christians the helps of the liberal arts, that they might be kept in
ignorance: and Antichrist, who took from the people the word of God: Borr. and
Satan goes about, vt pij Ecclesiae ministri e medio tollantur: that the godly
ministers of the Church should be taken out of the way, which should reach out
the word of God unto the people, that is, put spiritual weapons into their
hands, whereby they should resist his tentations. Osiand.

14. Quest. v. 22. How it was true that neither sword nor spear was found
among the people.
The doubt here is, because not long before, c. 11. they obtained a great
victory against the Ammonites, how the people could be without weapons here.
1. Chimchi thinks, that they had their old weapons, but they made them new.
2. Other of the Rabbines think, that only they were forbidden the use of
weapons on the hither-side of Jorden toward the Philistims, but not on the
other side, where Iabesh was: but where then did Saul get weapons for the 300.
thousand? they could not find sufficient in Iabesh. 3. Ben Gerson thinks
that there was no iron in Israel, and therefore they could have no weapons: but
this is contrary to that blessing which Moses gave to Asher, that his
shoulders should be iron and brass, Deuteronomy. 33.25. 5. Therefore it is like in
the battle against Ammon, they used slings, and such other weapons: with the
which they besieged afterward a city of Moab, and in Deborahs time there was
neither shield nor spear found among forty thousand of them. Iud. 5.5. Mar.

CHAP. XIIII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Whether Jonathan offended, because he told not his father,
when he went against the Philistims.
1. IN battles ordered by humane and military discipline, it is not fit that
any should without consent of the General, leave their standing, and go
against the enemy, for this would bring confusion into the camp, and give
advantage to the enemy: and we read in the Roman histories, that it was death
to break the order of battle: yea, Manlius spared not his own son, though
he had done valiantly against the enemy: yet there is an other reason in such
battles, which are governed and directed by God: as Jonathan here by the
direction of Gods spirit, was moved to set upon the Philistims. Borr. 2. Who
also of purpose would not acquaint his father, being timorous and doubtful,
least that by this fear this worthy exploit might have been hindered. Osiand.

2. Quest. v. 4. Of Ahiah the high Priest.
1. This Ahiah was also called Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, chap. 22.20. for
it was not (...) among the Hebrews for the same to be called by sundry names.
2. Some read Ahiah the son of Ahitub, the brother of Ichabod, that is, which
Ahiah was the brother of Ichabod: Iun. Vatab. but it is better referred to
Ahitub, that he was the brother of Ichabod. Chald. Sept. Lat. Ar. Page for if
Ahiah had been the brother of Ichabod, he should have been the son of
Phinehes Ichabods father, and not of Ahitub. 3. Further it is added, the
brother of Ichabod, the son of Phinehes, the son of Eli, the Priest of
Jehovah in Shiloh, that is, which Eli was sometime the Lords Priests in Shiloh:
sic Lat. Iun. not, referring it to Ahia, that he was the Lords Priest in
Shiloh: as the most do understand and so read, as the Chal. Sept. Ar. Page
Genev. for Shiloh was now destroyed, and the Ark of God abode in
Ciriathiearim. 4. So as yet the high priestood was in the house of Eli: the
prophecy against his house was not yet fulfilled until Salomo^s time: the
sentence of God, though it be for a time suspended, yet in the end shall most
surely take place. Pellic. 5. This mentioning of Ahiah will help us to
understand that place, c. 7.2. of the twenty years remaining of the Arc in
Kiriathiearim: that it is to be taken of the time, which went before the
election of Saul, and that act of the Prophet there declared in calling the
people to repentance: for Ahiah could not be high Priest under 25. year old
now in the beginning of Saul's reign: under those years he was not, but it is
likely he was much above: for Abiathar his son not many years after this
ministered in the Priests office. c. 23.9. This Ahiah was nephew unto Ichabod
borne at the death of Eli, c. 4.21. who was then unborn, or very young: then
it must be needs above twenty years between the death of Eli, and the
election of Saul. Further hence it may be coniectured, that Samuel could not be
so young, as some Hebrews imagine, not elder then 52. years when he died: for
he knew all these high Priests, first Eli, and under him Phinehes his son,
then Ahitub, after him Ahiah, and after him Abiathar, that fled unto David: all
these to have been high Priests is evident in the story, only Ahitub
excepted, who must have executed the high Priests office after Eli and Phinehes
death, or else it was vacant: and from him it descended unto Ahiah his son.

3. Quest. v. 7. Whether Jonathan doubted of Gods assistance, saying, It may be
Jehovah will work for us.
It is evident both by Ionathans confident adventure, and by his godly
confession in the words following: that the Lord can save with few as with
many, that he doubted not of good success: but thus he says, 1. to show the
difficulty of the enterprise in it self, and to stir up his servant also to
have confidence in God, and repose their trust in him: as Caleb upon the like
occasion, when he enterprised to take Hebron, said; If so be the Lord will be
with me to drive them out. Josh. 14.12. Iun. 2. And this speech is uttered by
Jonathan, magis orantis, qua^ trepidantis affectu: rather with a devout then
doubtful affection: praying for good success, rather then fearing. Pellic. 3.
Yet because we have not such absolute assurance of spiritual things as
temporal, he thus speaks, as being ready, if the Lords pleasure were so,
to adventure his life in the quarrel of Gods people. Osiand.

4. Quest. v. 10. Of the sign which Jonathan takes of good success from the
answer of the Philistims.
1. This observation of Jonathan of the answer and speech of the Philistims, is
far unlike that superstitious conjecture, which Dagons priests made by the
going of the kine, which carried the Arc, chap. 6. for there is great
difference between the speeches and behavior of men, which are guided with
reason, and the gestures and motions of beasts and birds, which have no such
direction. 2. This sign, which Jonathan purposes to himself, was represented
unto him by the instinct of Gods spirit: as was that token which Abraham's
servant prays might be given him, as an assurance of good success,
concerning the behavior of the maid, that should be Isaaks wife, Genesis 24.14.
So Gedeon took that dream, which he heard one Madianite tell an other, to be
a sign of victory, Iud. 7.13. And as there it is expressed, that God offered
unto him this sign, so it is not to be doubted, but that Jonathan thus spoke
by a divine inspiration. Iun. 3. Neither was this sign without some natural
reason: for if the Philistims said, tarry till we come to you, it was a sign
of their courage and boldness; but if they said, come up unto us, it was a
bewraying of their fearefulnes, that they durst not set upon their enemies, and
so Jonathan took that as a sign, that God would give them into their hands.
Pelican. 4. Further, there was a spiritual reason hereof: for if they said,
come up unto us, as in boasting and insolent manner, as insulting over them, as
Goliath did over David, then Jonathan was persuaded, that God who resists the
proud, would also fight against them, and abate their pride: Borr. and further
in that Jonathan takes their going up the steep rocks rather to be a sign
of victory, then the Philistims coming down to them: it shows that the way
of Gods servants is hard, difficult, and laborious, not easy and pleasant.
Borr. 5. Josephus seems to give an other likely reason of this sign: because
the Philistims were confident upon the defense of the place, thinking that none
durst ad^enture to come up unto them: and such carnal confidence the Lord
hates, and sets himself against such: as the Prophet says to Shebnah,
which had graued for himself an habitation as in a rock, that the Lord would
turn him like a ball in a large country, Isa. 22.16.18.

5. Quest. v. 13. Of Ionathans creeping on his hands and feet up the hill.
1. Some think, that where it is said, he went up on his hands and feet, the
meaning is, that he assaied to go up with all his strength: Vatab. but rather
it shows the manner of his climing up, that because the place was steep, he
was feign to creep of all four, and to take hold with his hands and feet: he
went up with much ado, Iun. rather then in have, Genevens. for he could make
no great have, in going up so steep a rock. 2. But it is further to be
considered, as Iosep. well notes, that Jonathan and his servant did not go up
on that side, where the Philistims espied the^, but they went to an other
place, which was not kept with any garrison, because they thought it surely
defe^sed by nature. Bor. 3. This their rare adventure and hard enterprise,
shows that God was with them, and did assist them far beyond their own
strength: foreign histories do much commend Alexanders taking of the Aorna
saxa, who sent up his soldiers into those steep rocks upon their hands and
feet: but more worthy is the memory of this fact of Jonathan, who with less
power then Alexander had, enterprised an harder work, and achieved a greater
victory, having confidence in his God, then the other did, intending nothing
but victory and praise.

6. Quest. v. 14. In what compass of ground Ionathans first slaughter was made.
1. It is called the first slaughter, the second was, when they one slew an
other, and the third, when the Israelites chased them. Genevens. 2. In this
first slaughter they killed twenty men, taking some of their weapons that were
slain, in a very small compass of ground, in the space of half an aker, of a
pair of oxens plowing: some read, as though an half aker were two oxens
plowing in a day: Lat. but then it had been sufficient to say, so much as two
oxen use to plow: the Chalde better gives the sense, circiter spacium dimidiae
ambulationis iugi boum, etc. about the space of half a journey of a pair of
oxen: that is, of half such an aker, as oxen use to plow in a day: common
experience also shows as much, that a couple of oxen, in such light sandy
grounds, as the land of Palestina most what was, use to plow an aker in a day.
3. But it may be further doubted, whether we are here to take the breadth, or
length of an aker: the Septuag. read, (...), in a stones cast, rather
understanding it of the length, then breadth: but they rather expound the
meaning, then give the sense of the word: there are two things noted in this
slaughter, which show the strangenes of it, the number slain by two men, and
in such a small circuit of ground: therefore I think it was neither so much as
a bow shoot, which phrase sometime the Scripture uses: as Genesis 21.16. nor as
a stones cast, as they used to throw out of slings, as the Scripture uses also
to speak, Luke 22.41. nor yet the length of an aker or furlong cast long
ways, which commonly makes 40. pole: and the breadth of an half aker, in that
form, containing but two pole of ground, would be thought to be too small a
space, for twenty men to be slain in: therefore I take the meaning to be,
that in the space of half an aker, that is, half the length of an aker, which
might make some twenty pole: in the length of every pole they slew a man.
Josephus thinks, that Jonathan fell upon them being a sleep: but then a
great number might have been slain in a less compass: and it seems by the
great terror which fell upon the host, that they were slain as they fled,
and by their flying terrified others.

7. Quest. v. 15. Of the fear which fell upon the host of the Philistims.
Three things do set forth the greatness of this fear. 1. that the Philistims
feared where was no cause of fear: for only two men pursued them: such a
fear the Lord sent upon the Cananites before Israel: such as the Lord
threatened to send upon his people for their sin, they should fear none
pursuing them, Levit. 26.36. Osiand. 2. This fear was general: for all the
people, as well they which kept their stations and garrisons, as they which
went forth to spoil, were horribly afraid. Iun. 3. This fear is set forth by
the effects, that the very insensible creatures the earth it self, seemed to
tremble under them, and to be smitten, as with fear from God: some read, with
a great fear: Iun. Page because the phrase is so sometime taken, as Genesis 30.8.
the wrestlings of God are taken for great wrestlings: but it is both more
significatiue, and better expressing the sense of the original, that it was
stricken with the fear of God, that is, sent of God. Vat. Chal. etc. 4. Some
think, that it is an hyperbolical speech, to say the earth trembled, to
signify a very great fear: Bish. but the meaning is rather, that the earth as
it were for fear trembled, and was moved under them. Iun. Vatab.

8. Quest. v. 16. Of the meaning of these words, they went on beating
themselves.
1. Some read, the multitude did run up and down: V. or did fly this way
and that way: L. but the word halam here used, signifies to bruise, to beat.
2. Others read, that they were smitten as they went: B. G. and the breaking or
beating of them still increased. Chald. but here it is left still in doubt, by
whom they were beaten, and smitten. 3. Therefore the fittest interpretation
is, that they went on still beating themselves: for so it is expressed, v. 20.
that every man's sword was against his fellow.

9. Quest. v. 19. Of Saul's words to the Priest, Withdraw thy hand.
1. Josephus is here deceived, who thinks that the Priest did indeed consult
with God, and returned answer unto Saul, that the victory was his, lib. 6. de
antiqu. Iudaic. c. 7. but it is evident by the text, that as the Priest was
about to ask counsel of God, Saul bid him stay, and not to proceed. 2. Now
Saul begins to show his profane heart void of the spirit of God, in that he
makes no more reckoning to receive direction and counsel from God. Iun. 3.
Some think that Saul herein showed his hypocrisy, that while he saw himself
in danger, not knowing yet the cause of the tumult and noise among the
Philistims, he was forward to have the Priest consult with God: but as soon as
he saw the danger over, then he laid his devotion apart: as the fashion of
hypocrites is to call upon God in the time of their need, and to forget him
afterward. Osiand. But it seems by the verse following, that yet Saul did not
know how the case stood with the Philistims. 4. Therefore it is more like,
that Saul seeing his enemies to run along, and to come somewhat near him, he
then gave over to consult with God, as having no leisure: Vatab. wherein he
shows his diffidence and distrust in Gods word, who appointed that this
course should always be taken in their weighty affairs, that the Priest
should consult with God by Vrim. Numb. 27.21. Much unlike was he herein to
Samuel, who when the Philistims came upon them being assembled before the Lord
in Mizpeh, would not give over, till he had offered a burnt offering unto God.
c. 7. 5. See also the chaungeable nature of hypocrites: Saul was too confident
upon his sacrifice, when he would needs do it before Samuel came, c. 13. and
now, when there was cause he ascribes nothing at all to such religious acts.

10. Quest. v. 19. Of the meaning of the words, The multitude went on still and
skirmished.
1. Some, for multitude, read the noise, (...). S. L. V. B. G. but hamon
signifies a multitude, or company, as it is taken, v. 16. the multitude was
discomfited: and so read Chal. A.P. Iun. 2. But the other word, the most
translate, they increased, not skirmished: so read all but Iunius: but that it
is better expressed by the word conflictari, to skirmish, then multiplicaeri,
to increase: it may appear, both because the original of the word gives it:
for varabh is not here derived of rababh, to multiply, as most think, for
then the last letter should have dagesh, to supply the want of the dubled
letter of the root rabab: but rather of rabh, to contend, as c. 15.5. iarebh
in the future tense, so signifies to strive or contend: as also it is more
agreeable to the sense: for the multitude one killing an other, increased not,
but were rather diminished, and decreased.

11. Quest. v. 20. Of the victory, which Saul obtained over the Philistims,
and the means thereof.
1. The first cause of this victory was in the Philistims themselves, who by
the just judgment of God one fell upon an other: as did the Midianites, whom
Gedeon subdued, Judge. 7.21, 22. so the Ammonites and Moabites that came out
against Iehoshaphat helped one to destroy an other. 2. Chron. 20.23. Genevens.
2. Then the Israelites did bend all their force against the Philistims: who
were of three companies: some of them were captives with the Philistims, and
went up with them to the battle, and kept their stuff, these turned to be
with Saul and Jonathan, v. 21. another sort were of them which were with Saul
and Jonathan, v. 20. the third of the Israelites, that hid themselves in the
rocks and caves, v. 22. Borr. 3. Like as here some of the Israelites fled to
the Philistims, some hid themselves: so there are two sorts of weak
professors of the Gospel, some that turn to the adversaries, some that are
timorous and hide their profession, and do not publicly show it. Osiand.

12. Quest. v. 24. Wherein Saul offended in binding the people to eat nothing
till night.
1. Herein first Saul shows his hypocrisy and arrogancy, that he would by
this means ascribe to his own policy, that which God had given by the hand
of Jonathan. Genevens. 2. Beside it seemed to proceed from an immoderate joy,
which Saul conceived of this victory, as men in their unexpected felicity can
hardly contain themselves: Joseph. and so as it were in bravery and
ostentation, gives this charge. 3. He pretends a good end, to be avenged of
his enemies, but he uses two evil means, the interdiction of food, and the
binding of it with an oath. Iun. This was against S. Paul's rule, We must not
do evil, that good may come thereof, Romans 3. v. 8. 4. Saul's rash and
inconsiderate zeal appears, who hereby does not only seek the ruin of the
Philistims, but brings an inconvenience upon his own people, in weakening and
disabling of them: whereas a good Magistrate sets as much by the life of one
good citizen, as by the death of many of his enemies. Osiand. 5. Then Saul
offended diversely in this prohibition: 1. because he did it of his own head,
without any warrant from God: 2. he did it rashly and unadvisedly, not making
exception in this his oath and vow, of the case of necessity: 3. he weakneth
the people, and so hinders the victory, as Jonathan shows, v. 30. 4. he was
occasion, that the people for greedines trespassed afterward in eating the
flesh with the blood. Borr.

13. Quest. v. 30. Of Ionathans excuse, and of the true meaning of the thirty
verse.
1. The most do translate thus: how much more, if the people had eaten to day
of the spoil of their enemies, etc. for had there not been now a greater
slaughter, etc. all do thus read, but Iunius. and Ar. Mont. who translate
thus, yea because I would the people had eaten, etc. because, I say, there was
no greater slaughter, etc. and so he would not have the last words read with
an interrogation, but positiuely, as rendering the cause of his wish: this
reading to be the better, it may thus be showed: 1. because the proper sense of
the words is kept: for aph chi, signifies yea because, not, how much more: and
Lu is vtinam, a term of wishing, not, if. 2. in the first reading, the sense
is imperfect, how much more, and has small coherence with the rest of the
text. 3. the negative particle in the last clause, lo, is not to be read here
interrogatiuely: had there not been a greater slaughter? but, causally, as
giving a reason of his wish: I would the people had eaten, because there was no
greater slaughter to day.

2. Jonathan, though he knew not of his fathers charge, for it was made in his
absence, yet forbeareth further eating: Joseph. and he misliketh his fathers
act, and improoueth his counsel by these three reasons: 1. from the effect,
because by this means the people were weakened, as appeared by himself, who
was revived and strengthened, and his sight which was dim with fasting and
wearines, restored. 2. by the event, the slaughter of the enemy by this
occasion was not so great, because the people being weary could not pursue
and follow them. 3. from the inconvenience, the abridging of the liberty of
the people, that could not take freely of the spoil of their enemies. Iun.

14. Quest. v. 32. How the people did eat the flesh with the blood.
1. Hierome thinks, they are said to eat with blood, because they brought
not the blood to the altar, and first offered sacrifice: but it is evident by
the text, that they did eat the blood contrary to the law. 2. Some think,
because it is said, they killed them upon the ground, the blood could not soke
out of the flesh, but the flesh drunk up the blood. Pellic. 3. Some, that for
have they did eat the flesh being not thoroughly sodden, but half raw.
Osiand. 4. But they rather for have, being hungry, stayed not till all the
blood were pressed out of the flesh, or shed out, but did dress the flesh with
the blood in it: Iun. Vatab. which was contrary to the law, that they should
pour out the blood first upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 12.26. they should draine out
all the blood, before they prepared it for their meat. 5. By this means,
while they were careful to keep the Kings edict, they neglected the
commandment of God: So in our Savior Christ's time, the Pharisees and Priests
preferred their traditions before the precepts of God, as it is to this day
practiced among the Pharisees of these days the Romanists. Borr.

15. Quest. v. 33. To what end Saul commanded a great stone to be rouled unto
him.
1. The most think, that he commanded the stone to be brought, that the beasts
being slain thereupon, the blood might better run out. Pelican. Borr.
Josephus thinks he made an altar beside. 2. But this is not like to have
been the use of the stone, that the blood should be pressed forth upon it: for
one stone could not have sufficed: he makes an altar of it, as it follows v.
35. that in Gods sight and his presence they might slay their cattle, not on
the stone, but in the field by it. Iun. 3. But herein Saul shows his
hypocrisy, that lays all the blame upon the people, that they had
trespassed, whereas he had offended more, in laying such a yoke upon the people
against charity. Osiand. 4. But this is worthy to be observed, that if they
were so careful even in the tumult and business of battle, to keep a
ceremonial precept; how much more careful ought Christian soldiers to be to
keep the moral commandments of God, which are much neglected among them.
Pelican.

16. Quest. v. 35. Of Saul's building of an altar.
1. Hierome thinks, that this is said to be the first altar that Saul built,
not that he built none before, but this was the first which he erected in
obedience, the other before he built in hypocrisy. trad. Hebraic. But it is
more like, if Saul had built any before, being not rejected of God, that he
therein should have showed himself more obedient, then now after the Lord had
left him. 2. Some think that this altar was not sacrificed upon, but made
only as a monument of the victory: Osiand. but Josephus better thinks, that
sacrifices were offered thereupon. 3. Some are of opinion, that the Arc having
yet no settling place, it was free for the Saints to build altars, where they
thought good, as Abraham and Iaakob did, before the erection of the Tabernacle.
Pelican. But that is not like: for it had been an apparent transgression of
the Law, Levit. 17.5. if they did not bring their offerings and present them to
the Lord. It seems that for Prophets, which had extraordinary direction from
God, it was lawful to build altars other where, then where the Arc was, as
Samuel did, c. 7. and Eliah, 1. king. 18.36. but generally, it was not
permitted: here in this place they had the presence of the Arc, v. 18. and of
the high Priest, and therefore they had a warrant to build an altar unto God.

17. Quest. v. 37. Why the Lord refused to answer Saul.
1. Some think, that God was angry with Saul, because he had presumed before
to offer sacrifice, not expecting Samuels coming, and now had troubled all
Israel, with a rash oath. Osiand. 2. Some think that God might be offended
with the whole host, because they had transgressed in eating flesh with the
blood. Pelican. 3. But it is evident, by the extraordinary directing of the
lot, which fell upon Jonathan, that it was in respect of him that the Lord used
this silence. Borr.

18. Quest. v. 41. Whether Jonathan sinned in breaking of his fathers oath and
vow ignorantly.
1. Some think, that Ionathans offense was for that he went aside from the
camp without the priuitie and authority of his father, which might have
brought the whole host into great danger. Pelican. But therein Jonathan
offended not, because he did it by the extraordinary motion of Gods spirit, as
it may appear by his confidence and firm trust in God: v. 6. and by Ionathans
confession it appears, his heart gave him, it was for that he had broken the
oath, and eaten a little honey.

2. Others do altogether excuse Jonathan, that he was not taken for any crime
he had committed, but that his innocence might appear, and the unlawfulness of
his fathers oath: Borr. and whereas Saul prays, give a perfect lot; Iunius
reads, give him that is innocent and entire: and so God according to his
request, brought out by lot Jonathan that was innocent: so also Osiand. But
this seems not to be the meaning: rather, as the Chal. interprets, that God
would give sortem veram, a true lot: to cause it to fall on him that had broken
the oath: Genevens. the perfection or integrity, which Saul desires might
appear, is not referred to the guiltines or clearing of the party, but to the
manifestation of the thing.

3. Therefore neither is their interpretation to be received, that think Saul
prays that he which was faulty might come to light: Vatab. Joseph. as though
Jonathan had been more faulty then Saul: which was not like, because Jonathan
ignorantly brake the oath and vow of his father, neither gave consent unto it.
Osiand.

4. But as Jonathan is not to be held to have been the special offender,
whom God here shoots at, as he did upon the like occasion bring Achans sin
to light, Iud. 7. so neither is he to be altogether excused: for although it be
a sin to make a rash oath and vow at the first, yet it is a fault also to
break even such a rash oath, and yet a greater sin it is to keep it with
greater inconueniencie and hurt: and ignorance though it does qualify the
offense, yet it does not altogether justify it: ignorantia excusat a tanto,
non a tot^: ignorance excuses from so great a fault, but not from all the
fault: as the Preacher speaking of the paying of vows, would not have a man
plead, and say it was ignorance, Eccl. 5.5. We must therefore yield Jonathan to
have been somewhat faulty in breaking the oath, though ignorantly, because
the lots fell out just, but yet Saul more faulty in making it: for the Lord
does not by this lot show who was most faulty, but who it was that had broken
the oath, which was the thing which Saul earnestly requested. But though
Jonathan were somewhat touched in this action, as his own heart does misgiue
him: (which two arguments of the disposing of the lots, and his own confession
show, that he was not altogether clear) yet this was not Gods principal
intendiment, to discover the offense of Jonathan, as to lay open Saul's
hypocrisy by that means, which had endammaged his own son, and troubled
the host, and hindered the victory: as also God by this means would humble
Jonathan, least he might have been puffed up too much with the joy of his
victory: and further it must be considered, that as God by lot brought
Jonathan to light, and so into this danger, yet he had provided also a means,
whereby Jonathan should escape it, by the mediation of the people.

5. But although it be granted that Jonathan was faulty, yet offending
materially, in respect of the thing done, not formally, in regard of any such
mind or purpose which he had: yet this example proves not, that rash vows,
as of forced chastity, and other such superstitious injunctions, as to go in
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, or such like, are better kept then violated: it is an
offense for a man even to break a vow, which is not in his power to keep, in
regard of his rashness, Controv. Whether rash vows once made, be not better
broken then kept.
that made such a vow, and so dallying as it were with God, but it is a greater
sin to keep such a vow, to greater mischief: as if a man has vowed not to
marry, if he do marry, he offends, because of his former rashness; but he
sins double, if keeping his vow, he falls thereby into adultery. Iipthah
had done best of all, if he had not made so rash a vow, to offer whatsoever
came first to meet him, for a dog or unclean beast might have been the
first, as well as his daughter: but the vow being made, it had been better
for him, not to have kept his vow, but to have redeemed it according to the
law, which appoints redemption, both for men and women, that are consecrated
unto God, Leuit. 27.3, 4. yet had it been an offense also in Iipthah, in not
keeping his vow, his former rashness considered, though his oversight was
greater in performing it contrary to the law. Leuit. 27.3, 4.

19. Quest. v. 41. Whether Saul prayed with faith, seeing the Lord heard him,
and directed the lots.
1. Some think that this was a great pre-eminence of the Israelites, that God
vouchsafed to give them answers, when they asked counsel of him, which
direction Christians now have not. But their state and ours considered, this
was no pre-eminence, but rather a supporting of their weakness: for they
consulted with God, either for direction, to know what they should do: but
that is not now needful, seeing the word of God is a sufficient rule unto us:
or else to know, what success they should have in their business: this was
necessary for them then, that their religion should be confirmed by such
signs: and they were but one nation, and all the world was against them:
therefore such sensible presence of the Lord among them was necessary. But now
the faith of Christians has been already sufficiently confirmed by miracles:
and some of all nations belong unto the Church: therefore there is not now such
cause of the Lords visible manifesting of himself. Mar.

2. And though the Lord hears Saul, it was not for any efficacy in his
prayers being void of faith: but because the Lord does challenge unto
himself the ordering of lots, as the mariners lots in Jonas ship, though
they were Idolaters, fell out just, when they cried unto God, because that
which they asked, was agreeable to Gods will, and the Lord would reap glory
by it. So in this place the Lord does that which Saul desired, not because he
asked it, but for that God intended some further work thereby: as the humbling
of Jonathan, and the revealing of the hypocrisy of Saul. ex Martyr.

20. Quest. Whether Saul or Jonathan were the greater offenders, seeing
Jonathan was taken by lot.
1. It is clear, that Saul had trespassed more: in making such a rash vow at
the first, giving occasion to the people to sin in eating of blood: further,
he swears thrice unadvisedly: first, when he made the vow, again, when the
Lord would not answer him, and the third time, after Jonathan was discovered:
three times did he thus swear, that he should die. Now Ionathans oversight is
excused two ways, by his necessity that urged him to eat, and his ignorance
that did hide it from him.

2. But yet it pleased God, that Ionathans slip should be discovered for
these causes: 1. if Saul being king had been pointed out by lot, it would
somewhat have empaired the credit of the king: 2. it was a greater grief unto
Saul, then if he himself had been taken: for no man could have executed the
sentence upon him: 3. by this means some think, that God would establish
military discipline, that orders made in armies should be strictly observed:
4. and though Jonathan sinned of ignorance, yet it was fit it should be
purged.

3. Saul shows his hypocrisy, in that he neglects Gods commandment, which
the people had transgressed in eating of blood: but he presses obedience to
his own law even unto death. So among the Romanists, he that speaks against
their superstitious rites, is punished unto death: whereas adultery,
blasphemy, and other greater enormities, are either not at all, or very
lightly punished. ex Martyr.

21. Quest. v. 45. How Jonathan was delivered by the people.
1. Saul in taking an oath, wishing that God should do so and so to him, if
Jonathan died not: both showed his profane custom of swearing and cursing, to
the which it seems he was much given: Iun. as likewise his unnatural
cruelty joined with vain glorious ambition, in hardening his heart against
his own son, whom rather he should have sought means to deliver from this
danger: Osiand. but this oath and curse did in the end fall upon his own
head. Iun. 2. The people oppose a just oath against his hypocritical oath:
Borr. and do charge his conscience before God, that he should rather have
respect unto equity, then unto his rash oath: Iun. and they use two reasons,
why Jonathan should not die: first that he was found guilty of no capital
offense, in saying, shall Jonathan die, that is, in whom there is found no
cause of death: Borr. secondly, because he by whom God had wrought such
deliverance, was not worthy of death: Iun. it was not fit, that he should die,
by whose means they were all alive. Osiand. 3. Josephus thinks, the people
were moved by pity and commiseration toward Jonathan, when they saw that he
willingly yielded himself to death: but it seems rather by Ionathans answer,
I tasted a little honey, and lo shall I die? that he thought his fathers
sentence unjust and hard against him: and was discontented with it. 4. If the
people interceded by their prayer, they offended not: but if they pressed
violently upon Saul, in making a mutiny, they can not be excused. Mar.

22. Quest. v. 47. Of Saul's victories.
1. Some read, he overcame them: L. some, he did valiantly, P. stoutly: V. or
troubled, disquieted them: Iun. some, that he condemned them, A. or handled
them as wicked men: G. the word is iarshiang, he made them evil, which is well
interpreted, he put them to the wurse: B. which is more then to disquiet or
trouble them: for one may be troublesome, where he prevails not. 2. It
pleased God though Saul were a wicked a man, yet for his Church, and people
sake, to give him good success. Osiand. 3. But he did not make a perfect
conquest of them: that was reserved for David. Borr.

23. Quest. Of Saul's sons.
1. Here are three sons only rehearsed of Saul, he had Ishbosheth beside, 2.
Sam. 2.8. who is omitted here, as some think, because they only are here
named, which were fit for the war: Reconcil.
Vatab. but this is not like: for Ishbosheth was 40. year old, when he began
to reign over Israel after Saul's death. 2. Sam. 8.9. And Saul did not reign
above twenty years, for Samuel and Saul had but 40. years between them,
Act. 31.21. whereof twenty were expired before Saul was chosen king: c. 7.2.
then Ishbosheth might be at this time about 20. year old: which age was not
altogether unfit for the war. 2. It is more likely, that he is omitted here,
because they only are mentioned which died with their father in the battle
against the Philistims. c. 31.2. Iun. 3. He which is called Ishua, is named
also Abinadab. c. 31.2. and 1. Chron. 8.9. Iun. Genevens.

24. Quest. v. 50. Of Saul's monogamie or single marriage.
1. Some do number this among Saul's virtues, that he had but one wife: and
fere solus non multiplicasse vxores legitur, and he is found alone almost of
all the kings not to have multiplied wives: Pelican. the same author says,
that excepting the persecution of David, which was for the kingdom, meliores
Israelitae reges paucos habuerunt, the Israelites had few better kings. But he
fails in both these commendations of Saul. First, concerning his wife, though
he be read to have but one, no more is there mention made but of one wife of
Jeroboam. 1. king. 14.1. As Jeroboam notwithstanding with his one wife, is not
to be preferred before Solomon with his many wives, no more does Saul's
monogamie joined with many vices, obscure David with his polygamie being
endued with many virtues: David transgressed in two great sins against the
second table, but Saul beside his murders and other trespasses against the
second table, chiefly offended in his hypocrisy, disobedience, and rebellion
against God in the breach of the first table: so that in these two examples it
is evident, that the sins against the first table which concerns our duty
toward God, are more grievous in their kind and degree, then the sins
committed against the second table: but in this comparison, the great
transgressions of the first table, must be set against the greatest of the
second, not that the least offense of the first table, is heavier then the
greatest of the second: as that it is more heinous to work upon the Lords day,
then to commit adultery, or to kill a man: but Idolatry is more grievous then
either: the comparison then must be in the same degree, or else it holds not.
But to return to Saul, what though he had but one wife, yet he had a concubine
beside Rispah, by whom he had two children, 2. Sam. 21.8. which was all one,
as if he had two wives, nay in those days, when for the carnal generation of
that people, polygamie was tolerated, or rather winked at, it was worse.

Secondly, there were other great enormities in Saul, beside his persecuting of
David, as the putting to the sword of the innocent Priests with their whole
city: the seeking unto witches: beside his hypocrisy and disobedience toward
God, that many worse can not be found, setting Idolatry aside, which Saul was
not touched with, in all the rank of the kings of Israel: there were many
moral and civil virtues in Saul, his valor and magnanimity against the
enemies of Israel, his blind zeal for the people of God: so are there to be
found among the heathen, many worthy examples of fortitude, justice,
temperance: which were in them but speciosa peccata, goodly sins, as
Augustine says: and so were they in Saul: his goodly virtues in show, were
obscured with most foul vices.

CHAP. XV.
1. Quest. Why God is called the Lord of hoasts.
GOd is called the Lord of hoasts, whom all the host and armies of the
creatures, both in heaven and earth do serve, and are at his beck: as Isa.
40.26. He brings out their armies by number, and calls them by their names.
This title is given unto God in Scripture, upon four principal occasions. 1.
To show, that none other God is to be worshipped, beside the Almighty Creator
and sovereign Commander of all creatures: as c. 1.3. Elkanah is said to
worship and sacrifice unto the Lord of hoasts: and this reason the Prophet Isai
alleges, c. 40.25. that they should not liken God to any thing, nor make any
similitude of him: To whom will you liken me, etc. behold, who has created
all these things?

2. It is used as a persuasion to obedience, that we should serve the Lord of
hoasts, whom all creatures readily obey: as the Prophet reproouing the
disobedience of the people of Israel, comparing them to a vineyard, that
brought forth wild grapes, says, The vineyard of the Lord of hoasts, is the
house of Israel, Isa. 5.7. This vineyard should have brought forth fruit unto
the Lord the husbandman thereof: as the great vineyard of the world, in so many
hoasts and armies of the creatures, does service unto the great Lord.

3. This title is given to God showing his omnipotency, and then used, when
the servants of God ground their requests upon his power and ability to
perform: as devout Annah being barren, praying for a son, calls God, Lord
of hoasts, c. 1.11. to whom nothing was hard, or impossible.

4. This title shows the power of God, in judging of his enemies: as Ier.
11.20. O Lord of hoasts, that iudgest righteously, etc. let me see thy
vengeance upon them. And in this sense is God called the Lord of hoasts, which
now was determined to take revenge of the Amalekites for the injuries which
they had done unto his people, when they came out of Egypt. It might also
assure Saul of Gods help and assistance against these enemies of God, seeing
he did fight the battle of the Lord of hoasts.

2. Quest. v. 2. Of the injuries and wrongs which the Amalekites offered unto
the Israelites in the desert.
1. Hierome in his traditions, reports this to be the opinion of some
Hebrews, that the Amalekites did set upon those, which were kept out of the
camp for their uncleanness: and that they did cut off their circumcision in
derision thereof: but the Amalekites rage was more general, then only to
work upon a few separated from the camp, for their legal impurities. 2.
Therefore, there was a double assault of the Amalekites upon the Israelites:
one was subtle and secret, by laying wait for them by the way in smiting all
the feeble persons among them, the women, children, old and impotent persons,
that came hindmost in the camp: Pelican. as may be gathered, Deuter. 25.18.
The other assault was public, when they encountered with Ioshuah, and bid him
battle, Exodus 17. and so would have let and hindered them from going into
the land of Canaan. Osiand. 3. And this their cruel attempt against Israel, is
amplified by two circumstances: first, because the Amalekites were not provoked
by any wrong or injury offered on the part of Israel: Pelican. the other,
that they persecuted them, which were already afflicted, being feeble and
wearied with the way. Borr.

3. Quest. v. 3. How it stands with Gods justice, that man and woman, infant
and suckling, ox and ass, are commanded to be slain.
1. Gods justice appeared herein, who punishes the wickedness of the fathers in
their ungodly posterity: as their fathers had afflicted Israel, so their seed
still continued enemies to Gods people: therefore because they abused Gods long
suffering and patience, the Lord justly gives them over, and all that
belongs unto them to the sword. Osiand. 2. Beside it pleased God to make this
an example of his vengeance upon those, which deal cruelly with his people:
Genevens. that as in a Commonwealth severity is justly showed upon some, that
all may receive warning by it; so the Lord in the administration of the great
Commonwealth of the world, does exemplify some for the instruction of others.
3. And as for Saul, it was no cruelty in him to execute Gods commandment: for
although the second table say, Thou shall not kill, yet because the second
table is subordinate to the first, he is not guilty of killing, whom the Lord
bids kill, whom we are commanded in the first table to obey: Borr. like as
the inferior minister and executioner of justice, transgresses not the law,
being appointed by the Magistrate to do it. 4. So Saul thought it no cruel
part, to put them all to the sword; first because they were professed enemies
to the Church of God, secondly because the Lord had so commanded. Joseph. lib.
6. cap. 8.

4. Quest. v. 4. Of the place where Saul mustred his men.
1. Some, do make this word telaim, an appellatiue, signifying lambs: and the
Chalde understands it of the paschal lambs: others, of the lambs which
every one brought, whereby their number was known, because the Jews do hold,
Jews surmises.
that it was not lawful for them to be numbered by their persons. ex Vatab.
Pelican. But this is a fabulous conceit: for Moses numbered them by their
names, man by man: or by their heads or polles, Numb. 1.2. and if it were
unlawful to number their persons, why should they be numbered rather by lambs,
then by their half shekels, which every man gave, as they have a president in
Moses, Exodus 30.13. 2. Some read, he numbered them as lambs, Lat. Pellic. that
is, without any choice: but the word is batelaim, not cetelaim: in or with
lambs, not as lambs: and it is not like but that Saul taking such an hard
interprise in hand, to go and root out an whole nation, would take the
choicest, and ablest men. 3. Therefore this is rather a proper name, that the
people were assembled in the fields adjoining to Telem a town of Judah. Josh.
15.24. 4. Josephus following the Septuagint reads corruptly, for Telaim,
Gilgala.

5. Quest. Of the number of men, that Saul gathered together for this battle
against Amalek.
1. Josephus says, there were 40. thousand of Israel, and 30. thousand of
Judah, wherein he commits a double error, both in lessening the number of
Israel, which were 200. thousand, and augmenting the number of the tribe of
Judah, which was but ten thousand. 2. The tribe of Judah is rehearsed apart,
some think because they were the slowest in this service, Pelican. some,
because they were the most valiant in battle, and the more populous tribe:
Osiand. but the best reason is yielded before, c. 11.6. because they of Judah
confined upon the Philistims, and so were employed in defending of their
coasts, and could not spare so many men for their number, as the rest of the
tribes. Iun.

6. Quest. v. 5. Why Saul did choose to sight with Amalek in the valley.
1. Some do read, he did lay wait by the river, L.P. or set watch by the
river. Joseph. following the Septuag. Genev. but it is better translated, he
did skirmish or contend, Iun. Page for the word here used iareb, comes not of
arab, to lay wait, but of rhub, to contend: and though nachal signify both a
valley, and a brook or river, which uses to run in the valley, yet it is
most like it was in the valley, which was a fitter place to encampe in then by
the river. 2. Now the reason why Saul encamped in the valley, was not, either
because he was somewhat doubtful what to do, and so slacked the time, as some
of the Hebrews: Hebrews surmises.
or so much to lie in wait for the Amalekites, and so to surprise them both by
open battle, and by secret ambushments, Pelican. Joseph. but because the
Kenites, whom he wished to avoid, dwelt in the hills in the way to Amalek.
Numb. 24.21. Iun. he declineth the mountains, least it might have been
prejudicial to the Kenites.

7. Quest. v. 6. Why and when Saul spoke to the Kenites to depart.
1. These Kenites were the nation of whom came Hobab Moses father in law, who
is called a Kenite, Iud. 1.16. they dwelt, not some among the tribe of Judah,
some among the Amalekites: Pellic. Osiand. but they dwelt in the south parts of
Judah bordering upon Amalek, Iud. 16. they used to dwell in tents, and so might
conveniently remove from one place to an other: and of them came the
Rechabites in Ieremies time, that dwelt in tents. Ierem. 35. Pellic. 2. Saul
spoke unto them, as soon as he came to the cities and cuntries of Amalek. Some
think, that Saul was come up to the principal or chief city of Amalek, as
they do interpret the former verse: Osisiand. Pelican. but this verse shows
that it must be understood of some of the utmost cities of Amalek, because the
Kenites dwelt not so high in the Amalekites country, but upon the hills in the
way thither. Iun. 3. The reason is here rendered, why the Kenites are spared,
because they showed mercy to Israel: for Hobab the Kenite did aid them with
his counsel, and guided and conducted them in the wilderness. Exodus 18. Numb.
10.31. So the Amalekites are bequeathed to destruction for their inhumanitie,
and unkindness toward Israel, and the Kenites for showing kindness are spared. 4.
And this morally teaches, that God will not forget the offices and services of
love extended toward his Saints: and that the godly should separate themselves
from the society and fellowship of the wicked, least they be overtaken in
their judgments. Osiand.

8. Quest. v. 8. Whether Saul utterly destroyed Amalek.
1. Josephus thinks, that Saul put all the Amalekites to the sword, and gave
not over till he had made an end of them all, lib. 6. c. 8. and some other
think that Saul went over all the land of the Amalekites from one side to an
other, killing and slaying: Pelican. but this is not true, for afterward
David, while he soiourned among the Philistims invaded the Amalekites, c. 27.8.
and the Amalekites burnt Ziklag, c. 30.1. David's city: therefore Amalek was not
thoroughly destroyed. 2. Therefore we understand, that Saul only put those to
the sword, which came against him, the king with his people: and whereas it is
said, he smote them from Havilah to Shur, that is before Egypt: he describes
not the coast of Arabia, which Saul smote, for Havilah is a country of Arabia,
and Sur is the utmost bound thereof toward Egypt, as appears, Genesis 25.18. but
only that region, where Saul met with the Amalekites that came against him.
Iun.

9. Quest. v. 8. Whether Saul sinned in sparing Agag the king of the Amalekites.
1. Some do excuse Saul herein, that he might spare Agag, to the intent that
he might slay him in the sight of all Israel, as Ioshuah did the five kings of
the Cananites, causing the people to set their feet upon them, Josh. 10.24.
and this may seem more probable, because Samuel did not reprove Saul for
sparing of the king, but for saving the best of the cattle: Pelican. but this
opinion can not be justified, for this was contrary to Gods commandment to
spare any man, as it was to have compassion of the cattle. 2. Therefore it
being agreed upon that Saul herein offended, some think he did it of a
covetous mind, that Agag might bewray unto Saul, where his treasure was: as
some Hebrews. Josephus thinks he had compassion of him, because he saw him
to be a goodly person: but it is like, that Saul did it in a covetous mind, as
he saved the best of the cattle: and as Saul against Gods commandment
presumed to save Agag alive, so the people by his example were bold to take the
same course with the best of the cattle. Joseph.

10. Quest. v. 9. Which of the cattle Saul spared.
1. The word mishenim the Latin corruptly translateth, pepercit vestibus, he
spared their garments, the Septuag. with as little reason reads (...),
ferculorum, the messes: the most read pinguibus, the fat beasts: as Chal. Ar.
Page Genev. but the word is better translated secundarios, the beasts of the
second sort: Iun. as the word is taken, 1. Chron. 15.18. where the Levites of
the second order are named.

2. The next word carim, Iunius translateth, ovium duces, the ringleaders of
the flock, that the rest might follow the better: and his reason is, because
this word is often in Scripture applied metaphorically to the heads of the
people, 2. king. 11.4. but carim properly signifies lambs, as Psalm. 37.20.
and Ezech. 39.18. and though by a metaphor it is applied in that sense to men,
yet it is here taken in the proper and usual sense, mention being made of
cattle: as the most of the interpreters do read. V.A.P.B.G.

3. As they saved the King of the men, and the best of the cattle, so also
they kept to themselves every good thing beside of their household stuff, and
whatsoever was precious, and to be desired: like as Achan was entised with the
sight of the goodly Babylonish garment, and the wedge of gold in Jericho: the
like offense Saul here commits in saving that, which by the Lord was
bequeathed to destruction, as the city of Jericho was. Pelican.

11. Quest. v. 11. How the Lord is said to repent.
1. God properly is not said to repent, as man repents, as v. 29. it is said
he repents not: but this is spoken to our capacity, after an humane phrase.
Iun. 2. Or God is said to repent, because he so seems unto us to repent, when
any thing goes contrary to his temporal election. Genevens. 3. He is said
to repent, not in respect of his counsel, which is constant and immutable,
even in things that are mutable: Pelican. but in respect of the thing which is
altered and changed, which he so decreed should be changed: Borr. so as
Augustine says, poenitudo Dei est mutandorum immutabilis ratio: the repentance
of God, is an unchangeable course, of things changeable: as here God changed
not concerning Saul, for he had decreed that the kingdom should not continue
in his posterity: but Saul changed, in forgetting his duty and obedience
toward God: so Gods decree concerning Saul was unchangeable, he foresaw that
Saul would fall away, and decreed the innovation of the kingdom: but Saul was
changeable, and the kingdom changed, Gods decree remained unchangeable. 4.
Further, because repentance is joined with grief: by this is signified the
Lords grief, as it were, for Saul, that by his disobedience had made himself
unworthy of the kingdom. Osiand. 5. Man indeed changes often, because as he
himself is mutable, so are his counsels: and because things may fall out
otherwise, then he thought: but God is both of an immutable nature, and his
prescience can not be frustrate or deceived, neither can any thing fall out
otherwise, then he has decreed. Borr.

12. Quest. v. 12. Of the place which Saul made him in Carmel.
1. Some think, that he there set up a triumphant pillar, or monument of the
victory, Hierom. as taking the honor thereof unto himself, and not giving
due thanks unto God: Osiand. but this Carmel being in Judah, it seems that
Saul would not have chosen that place, rather then his own tribe and
territory of Benjamin, to set up any such triumphant monument in. 2. Some
think, that Saul made some stay there, to divide the pray and spoil among the
people: Vat. but it seems by the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of
the oxen afterward, that the pray was not divided yet: and Saul afterward
excused himself, that they had reserved them for sacrifice. v. 14. 3. So
neither is it like that Saul made him a place, that is, there built an altar
unto God, as some Hebrews think: for by his answer made unto Samuel, it
appears, that he had not yet sacrificed. 4. Therefore the place (which in
Hebrew properly signifies an hand, that is, a space or elbow as it were of
ground) which Saul made, was some convenient plot of ground, where Saul
refreshed his host, being newly returned from battle: for he stayed not
there long, but from thence went to Gilgal. Iun.

13. Quest. v. 12. Of Carmel where Saul made his place.
1. This word Carmel, is sometime taken appellatiuely in Scripture: and it
signifies, a green ear of corn, Leuit. 2.14. or purple color, Cantic. 7.5.
sometime it is taken for a fertile or fruitful field, as Isa. 10.18. carmilo,
his fruitful fields. 2. But here it is a proper name of a town in Judah,
Josh. 15.55. which was in the way, as they returned from Amalek. Iun. 3. There
was an other Carmel, which bounded Zebulun, Ifachar, and Assher, Iosu. 18.24.
which was diverse from this Carmel: for that was toward the Sea westward, as
that place of Joshua shows, famous for the confession of Baals priests there
by the Prophet Elias, 1. king. 18. the other was South near unto mount Seir in
the tribe of Judah, Borr. in Josh. 18.24. 4. Yet some do think, that it might
be all one Carmel, one end whereof hung over into the Sea, the other reached
up in the land toward mount Thabor. Masius in Josh.

14. Quest. v. 15. Of Saul's excuse and defense unto Samuel.
Saul's hypocrisy here is discovered: 1. in boasting that he had fulfilled Gods
commandment, whereas appara^tly he had transgressed it: for this is the manner
of hypocrites, when they follow their own devises, to say they have fulfilled
the commandment of the Lord. Bis. 2. He excuses himself in laying the fault
upon the people, and putting it from himself. Pelican. 3. He cloaketh and
colors his covetousness with a pretense of zeal and religion, as though he
had spared the best things for sacrifice. 4. He afterward notwithstanding
justifies his sin, as though he had for all this done well, and obeyed the
voice of God, v. 22. Pelican. 5. He makes a semblance of sorrow and
repentance at the last, but it was far from true submission, v. 25. Borr. 6.
He does all upon a vain ostentation, only desiring that the Prophet would
honor him before the people, v. 25. Osiand.

15. Quest. v. 23. Of the meaning of the Prophets words, Rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft.
1. The Prophet to amplify Saul's sin, compares it with two great
transgressions, of soothsaying and divining by magical predictions, and of
committing idolatry: he touches two kinds of idolatry, one inward in the
superstition of the mind, called here aven, which signifies a lie or
falsehood, as also injustice or unrighteousness, as the Sept. read (...), but
here it is properly applied to false worship: the other kind is in the outward
adoration of Idols, here called teraphim. Bor. 2. Some think, that here is a
comparison made not of the sins, but of the punishment: that rebellion
deserves as well a capital punishment, as either Idolatry or soothsaying: ex
Vatab. but the Prophet speaks directly of the sin it self, as before of
the virtue of obedience: to obey is better then sacrifice, v. 22. 3. The
Prophet must be understood not to speak of transgressions, either of ignorance
or infirmity, but of the sin of obstinacy, contumacie, and rebellion, when
one knowing the will of God, does wilfully resist it: for this proceeds from
the same cause, namely, infidelity, which the other sins of witchcraft and
Idolatry do: he which fears not to break Gods commandments, does in a
manner not acknowledge the Lord to be God: Pelican. and he makes himself
wiser then God, as though he could find out a better way, then the Lord has
prescribed. Vatab. 4. By this then we see, Contr. Against the leaving of Gods
word to establish humane rites.
what is to be judged of the manifold superstitions among the Romanists, and
their leaving of Gods commandments to establish their own traditions: that
although they pretend a good intention, yet the wilful forsaking of the word
of God, and his institution, to make way for humane superstitious rites, is as
the sin of soothsaying before God. 5. Yet it can not be inferred hereupon,
that sins are equal, and that every transgression and disobedience of Gods
commandment, is equal to the sin of witchcraft and Idolatry: but the
quality of the sin is rather here to be respected, then the quantity: for
rebellion and obstinacy in what thing soever, does proceed from infidelity,
even as the sins of witchcraft and idolatry, though not in the same degree:
and Josephus does seem to expound it thus: that this disobedience of Saul did
prejudice his sacrifice, and made it of no value or acceptance with God, as if
a soothsayer or Idolater should sacrifice unto God: as the Prophet in the same
sense says, he that kills a bullock, is as he that smites a man, Isa.
66.3. that is, an hypocrite is no more accepted of God, then a profane
murderer, and wicked person. And this disobedience of Saul, was a sufficient
cause to deprive him of the kingdom, as if he had been guilty of soothsaying
or Idolatry.

16. Quest. v. 24. Of Saul's repentance, in saying to Samuel, I have sinned.
There was great difference between Saul's repentance here, and David's, 2. Sam.
c. 12. who in the very same word says, catathi, I have sinned. 1. David at the
first, as soon as his sin was showed unto him, confessed it, but Saul is
hardly brought to acknowledge his sin, it was a long time first: so he is
serae poenitentiae exemplum, an example of slow and late repentance. 2. He does
not make a simple and plain confession, but minseth and extenuateth his sin,
that he feared the people, and so at their instigation did as he did: so hard
is it for hypocrites to be brought to make a true confession of their sin,
but to lay the fault upon others. Osiand. 3. He confesses his sin rather for
fear, to loose the kingdom, then for grief that he had offended God: for
till such time as Samuel had said the Lord had rejected and cast him off, Saul
would not confess himself in a fault. Borr.

17. Quest. v. 25. How Saul prays Samuel to take away his sin.
1. Some read, fer, porta, bear my sin, S. L. V. but neither Samuel, nor any
other Saint, can bear an others sins, or make satisfaction for them: but
only Christ, who has borne our sins, and healed our infirmities: others
therefore read, remit, Chal. forgive, Iun. but neither has any man power to
forgive sins, but God only: therefore the best reading is, take away, for
all these significations the word nasha, has: that is, he desires to be
reconciled unto God by the Prophet, that by his prayer and mediation his sin
might be forgiven: which he desires, rather because of the fearful
expectation of the punishment threatened, then for the hatred and detestation of
his sin. 2. But Saul herein goes somewhat further, then Simon Magus, who
depended altogether of Peter's prayers, desiring him to pray for him, having no
heart to pray for himself: but here Saul desires the Prophet only to go and
pray with him: he will pray himself, but he would have the Prophet also to
pray with him. 3. And whereas Saul desires Samuels assistance then present and
living, to pray with him and for him: this example does not give any warrant,
that men should flee to any of the Saints that are departed, Contr. Against the
invocation of Saints.
to be reconciled unto God by them, who can not pray with us being absent, and
not knowing our necessities, can not pray for us. sic fere Pelican.

18. Quest. v. 28. How the kingdom is said to be rent from Saul.
1. By this present occasion of rending the lap of Samuels garment, he
confirms Gods former sentence in the reiection of Saul, Iun. not that he was
now actually deposed, for he continued king till his dying day: but he was
deprived of the right of the kingdom, which was translated to David, though
not presently in his own person, yet in his posterity and succession: and
hereby also may be insinuate the violate death of Saul, who should as by force
be pulled from the kingdom, and it rent from him. Pellic. 2. And whereas David
is said to be better then he, it is not understood of any difference in their
nature at all, for we are all by nature the children of wrath, nor so much in
respect of outward works, wherein in some of them David offended more then
Saul, but this is to be taken, both in respect of God, of whom David was
better accepted and more favored, and his sins pardoned, as also of David,
that he had a more obedient heart wrought in him by grace, to do the will of
God, and seek and set forth his glory: whereas Saul's heart was not sound, but
auerse and estranged from God. sic fere Pelican.

19. Quest. v. 29. Whether is the better reading: The eternity of Israel, or
the strength of Israel will not lie.
1. The word netzach, is by the most here translated, victoria, fortitudo,
victory, strength: C.B.G.V.P. some referring it unto God, who gave Israel
power and victory over their enemies: some to the people, that God would not
fail them, of their former strength. 2. But seeing netzach signifies also
eternity, as Psalm. 49.20. They shall not see light or live, ghadh netzach, in
eternu^, for ever: that sense is more fit here: because it is more agreeable to
the eternity and constancy of God, not to lie or repent, then properly an
effect of his power. 3. Some understand this of the constancy of Gods sentence
against Saul, that although a man may in his rage threaten, and yet after
repent him, yet it is not so with God: he has said, and he will perform:
Osiand. yet it is better referred to both the infallible purpose of God in
electing of David, as in the rejecting of Saul. Iun. 4. And although Gods
judgments are immutable and irrevocable, where there is no repentance, yet
upon our repentance and submission, the Lord is said also to repent him of the
evils otherwise determined against us. Osiand.

20. Quest. v. 31. Why Samuel returned with Saul, which he had refused before.
1. At the first Samuel denied to return with him, v. 26. least he might have
seemed in showing such facility, to have approved his sin: he did not
simply then deny him: but said in effect, that he would not go with him yet,
or at that time: Reconcil.
Osiand. as Christ said, Ioh. 7.5. I will not go up yet to the feast, and yet
afterward went. 2. Some think, that because Saul only required a civil
honor of Samuel, to honor him in the presence of the people, that Samuel
refused not: Osiand. but seeing that is said that Saul worshipped God, and
Samuel was also present, it is not like but that Samuel worshipped God also
with Saul, as Josephus well notes, c. 7. lib. 6. de antiquit. 3. But yet
though Samuel vouchsafed his presence to Saul in prayer, he did not pray for
the restoring of the kingdom to Saul, or for the reuersing of Gods sentence:
for then he had prayed against the will of God: but only he assisteth Saul in
his prophetical office, according to the will of God. Pelican. 4. One reason
also of Samuels returning might be, to see just execution done upon Agag the
king of Amalek, whom Samuel hewed in pieces before the Lord. Borr. 5. This
reverent and respective behavior of Samuel toward Saul, shows that the
ministers of God should yield outward honor even unto evil Magistrates,
contrary to the practice of that proud man of sin, that has disgraced,
accursed, and trampled upon with his feet, good Princes, Emperors, and Kings,
the Lords Anointed. Osiand.

21. Quest. Of Agags behavior and speech before Samuel.
1. Whereas it is said, he came mighedanoth, daintily, or delicately, the sense
can not be, that he came (...), trembling, as afraid of death, as Lat. Septuag.
for it seems by his speech that he did not look for death at Samuels hand, a
weak old man: some make the contrary sense, that he came pleasantly,
Genevens. as contemning death, Osiand. but rather it is understood, that he
came delicately apparelled, and adorned as a king, Vatab. Iun. as fearing
nothing less then death. 2. Concerning his speech, the bitterness of death is
passed: some think he spoke it, as bewailing the bitterness of death, which he
was like to suffer, as saying a bitter death: so R. Levi. Iosep. Lat. Septuag.
some think he came confidently, as making no account of death. Osiand. But he
rather thought there was now no fear of death, but that the danger was over,
seeing he came from a valiant captain to a weak old man, Iun. and the same
merciful and clement, being the Lords Prophet. Pelican.

22. Quest. v. 33. Of Samuels hewing Agag in pieces.
1. Josephus says only, that Samuel commanded him to be slain in Gilgal: but
the text is otherwise, that Samuel commanded Agag to be brought unto him, who
(with his own hands) hewed him in pieces. 2. This Samuel did being Judge of
Israel, to execute the sentence of God pronounced against Amalek, which was
neglected by Saul: that it might also be a terror to other kings, that they
persecute not the people of God: Pelican. and this was agreeable also to the
law, that wills the witnesses hand to be first upon the malefactor: so
Samuel as a witness before the Lord, of the cruelty of Agag against the Lords
people, does lay his hand first upon him. Borr. 3. But yet as Samuel was a
Leuite and a Prophet, this example was extraordinary, and not now to be
imitated, Osiand. for if S. Paul forbid a Bishop to be a striker, 1. Tim. 3.3.
much less is it fit that he should kill or put to death. The ancient
Constitutions of the Church have provided, that no Clergy man should so much
as come unto the place, Vbi quisquam pro reatus sui qualitate interficiendus
est: where any man is to be put to death for his offense. Council. Matiscon. 2.
c. 19. And again it was thus decreed, Council. Antisiador. c. 33. Non licet
praesbytero ad trepatium, vbi rei torquentur, stare: It is not lawful for a
Presbyter (or Minister) to stand by the rack, where offenders are tortured.
And, Can. 34. Non licet illi in iudicio sedere, vbi homo ad mortem traditur: it
is not lawful for him to sit in judgment, where a man is delivered to death.
Yea, the Canons were so straight herein, that they did forbid any Clergy man
to exercise, eam chirurgiae partem, quae ad vstionem, vel incisionem ducit:
that part of Chirurgerie, which leads one to searing or incision. Council.
Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. c. 18.

22. Quest. v. 35. How it is said Samuel came no more to see Saul until the
day of his death, seeing he saw him again afterward, chap. 19.22.
1. Some refer these words, until the day of his death, to that apparition
of a counterfeit Samuel, c. 28. who at that time saw Saul, and spoke with him:
but neither was that Samuel: and that word, ghad iom, until the day, does no
more prove, that Samuel saw Saul at the day of his death, then that Michol
had a child then: of whom it is said, that she had no child until the day of
her death, 2. Sam. 6.23. Mar. 2. Others think, that Samuel died not long
after, which was the cause he came no more at him. Pelican. But it is evident
that Samuel lived a good while after this, it may be some years, as appears
by the many persecutions of David by the hand of Saul, before Samuel died. c.
25.1. 3. Some expound it thus, that Samuel came not to Saul, any more, though
Saul came where Samuel was: Genevens. but it is rather understood of the end
and manner of Samuels coming, Reconcil.
then of the act of coming and going: that Samuel came not to visit and see
Saul, as he had used to do before time, to consult with him about the affairs
of the kingdom, Osiand. and to give him direction from God. Iun. 5. Of this
strangenes between them there were two special causes: the one in Samuel,
because he knew that the Lord had cast off Saul from being king, and therefore
he did forbear to visit him in that familiar manner: Borr. the other was in
Saul, who hated Samuel, because he had brought him such an heavy message, as
the property of Tyrants is to love and reward their flatterers, and to hate
their friends, that deal plainly with them, and tell them the truth. Pelican.
6. Josephus is here deceived, who says, that Saul after this never came into
Samuels sight: c. 9. l. 6. and yet as forgetting himself, c. 14. he reporting
that story which follows chap. 19. how Saul came to Ramah, where Samuel was,
writes how Saul prophesied before Samuel: lib. 6. de antiqu. Iudaic. c. 14.
The meaning therefore is, that Samuel had no conference with Saul, as before,
to give him instruction and direction, no not at that time when Saul prophesied
in his sight.

23. Quest. v. 35. Why Samuel mourned for Saul.
1. He mourned not so much for Saul, because he was rejected and deposed from
the kingdom, for he knew that the sentence of God was irreuocable, and that
had been, to be discontented with the Lords will. Borr. 2. But he lamenteth
the hardness of Saul's impenitent heart, seeing him to go on in his sin
without any remorse, as it was evident in the persecuting of David. Pelican.
3. As also he did foresee the misery that Saul was like to fall unto, not
only the loss of the kingdom, but of his life also. Borr. 4. Yea, and
Samuel, though he knew, that Gods sentence for the rejecting of Saul from the
kingdom could not be reuersed, yet he might entreat for the forgiveness of his
sin, with the which Samuel was so much grieved and displeased, c. 15.11. 5.
Herein Samuel shows his tender and loving affection, that sorroweth for the
misery of Saul, which succeeded him in the government: so far was he from
envying his kingdom. Osiand.

CHAP. XVI.
1. Quest. v. 2. Whether Samuel feared to do, as the Lord commanded him,
saying, How can I go?
1. SOme note this to have been an infirmity in Samuel: Josephus says, that
Samuel said he was afraid to go: for God takes not away all infirmities from
the Saints in this life. Osiand. But it is not like, that Samuel having had
such experience of Gods assistance, was so timorous, that he distrusted Gods
defense, seeing he had a special commandment and warrant from God. 2.
Therefore this question moved by Samuel, proceeds not from any doubt or
diffidence, but from a desire to be instructed, by what way and means with the
least danger this business might be compassed: Borr. like as Marie, after she
had heard the Angels salutation: asked, how that could be, not doubting of the
effect, but desirous for her further confirmation to understand the manner.

2. Quest. v. 2. Whether Samuel went to offer sacrifice or to celebrate only a
feast.
1. Iunius (all the other Interpreters here translating the word zabach, to
sacrifice) reads, ad celebrandum convivium: to celebrate a feast: his reasons
are these. First, because in the most corrupt times, it was not lawful to
sacrifice, but where the Arc was, saving in the high places: secondly,
sacrifices were public, but this was private within Ishai his house: thirdly,
it may be added, Ishai is invited to the sacrifice, whereat the Priests only
and the Ministers of the altar were present. But to these objections it may be
answered: first, that though ordinarily, and when the Arc was settled, it was
not lawful to sacrifice any where else, then at the Tabernacle: yet by Gods
extraordinary direction, the Prophets did sacrifice other where, as Elias did,
1. king. 18. especially in those times, when the Arc and Tabernacle were
asunder, as is before showed: and there was greater liberty for peace
offerings, then other sacrifices. c. 9. qu. 3. Secondly, though the feast after
the sacrifice might be in Ishai his house, it is not necessary to imagine,
that the sacrifice also was there offered. Thirdly, Samuel bids them not to
the sacrifice it self, but to the feast after the sacrifice, as the Chalde
translateth, and Josephus expounds, which is called the sacrifice, because
the feast was made of the remainder of the peace offerings, and eucharisticall
sacrifices. 2. Therefore their opinion seems more probable, which think that
Samuel pretended to offer sacrifice: 1. because it is added, I am come to do
sacrifice to the Lord, which phrase shows that it was a sacred and religious
act: 2. they are bidden also to sanctify themselves, as by washing of their
bodies and raiment, and by taking heed that they touch no unclean thing,
according to the law: Osiand. 3. it had been no sufficient excuse for so grave
a Prophet, to say he went to keep a feast: 4. neither had it been necessary
for him to carry a bullock with him to that end: but to sacrifice with, it
was fittest to take a bullock, which was separated before and sequestered to
that end: 5. beside the religious use and practice of the Prophet shows as
much, whose custom was to begin the weighty and grave affairs of the
kingdom with sacrifice, as he did at the first designement of Saul to be King,
c. 9. and at his solemn inauguration, c. 11. Pelican.

3. Quest. v. 2. Whether Samuel dissembled in saying he was come to sacrifice.
Three things do excuse, or rather justify Samuels act herein. 1. In respect
of the author of this counsel, which was God, who commands not sin to be
done, neither is the author of any evil: Samuel therefore no more lied being
bidden thus to say by the Lord, then he can be said to commit murder, whom
the Lord bids to kill. 2. The end is to be considered, it is unlawful to
lie or dissemble of malice, to the hurt of our brother: but this semblance here
used by Samuel, brought no such inconvenience with it, none received any hurt
by it. Osiand. 3. But most of all, the manner of this action does make Samuels
excuse lawful: for he tells no untruth, but only concealeth some part of
the truth: for indeed he sacrificed, but that was not the chief nor only end
of his coming: and thus in great and weighty affairs to conceal somewhat,
and not to utter all, it is prouidencie, not hypocrisy. Pelican. So the
Prophet Jeremy being asked by the Princes what communication he had with the
King, only tells them, that he had entreated him, that he might not return
to Iehonathans house to die there, but the rest of the conference he uttered
not. Ier. 38.27.

4. Quest. v. 4. Why the Elders of the city were astonished at Samuels coming.
1. Some read only that the Elders were gathered together at Samuels coming,
Chal. and Josephus to the same end, magno hominum comitatu salutatus est: he
was saluted by a great company of men: but the words following show, that they
were afraid, in saying, come thou peaceably? and the word charad, signifies
to tremble, to be moved, or astonished. 2. They were astonished, by reason of
the place, because Samuel used not to come thither, Genevens. or of the time,
he came at an extraordinary and unwonted season, Pellic. and the occasion
might trouble them: they might fear, least some grievous sin had been
committed among the^, and that the Prophet was sent of God, to be the minister
of some great judgment or punishment. Vatab.

5. Quest. Of Samuels error, in taking Eliab the eldest son of Ishai, to be
the Lords anointed.
1. Samuel in saying the Lords anointed is before him, means, that he was
chosen and approved of God to be anointed king: Iun. as that which a man
loves, he casts his eye upon, that which he hates, he turns his eyes
from. Borr. 2. But herein Samuel speaks unadvisedly of himself, without Gods
warrant, as Nathan did to David, when he encouraged him to build God an house,
2. Sam. 7.3. Iun. 3. Samuel looked to the outward stature, lineaments, and
proportion of his body, which indeed are comely ornaments in Magistrates and
governors, but the inward parts and gifts of the mind are more to be
respected, unto the which the Lord looks, and not to the outward man. Osiand.
4. And Samuel had experience already of a king, in the outward comelines and
stature of the body, exceeding all others, and none in Israel to be compared
with him, yet God was not pleased with him, neither were the inwards parts of
his mind answerable to the outward show: no more were Eliabs, as may appear by
his unkind and discourteous carriage toward David. c. 17.28.

6. Quest. v. 10. Of the number of Ishai his sons.
1. Josephus thinks, that Ishai had only seven sons, six beside David,
and he to be the seventh: and names all the seven much according to the
names set down, 2. Chr. 2.15. which are these: Eliab, called also Elihu, 1.
Chr. 27.18. Abinadab, whom Josephus calls Aminadab, Shammah, called also
Shimmah, 1. Chr. 2.13. Nathaneel, Raddai, whom Josephus calls Rael, and Ozem,
with Josephus Asam: these six are said to be Ishai his sons, and David the
seventh. 1. Chron. 2. 2. But whereas here seven of his sons were brought
before Samuel, Reconcil.
before David came, and c. 16.12. Ishai is said directly to have eight sons:
to reconcile this doubt, the eight is supposed to have been one of the elder
brothers sons, it may be Ionadab the son of Shammah, whereof mention is
made, 2. Sam. 13.3. for in the Hebrew phrase, nephews were called sons. Iun.

7. Quest. v. 12. Of David's ruddie or red color, whether it were of his hair,
or of his face.
1. Some think that his hair was of red color, both in his head and beard:
Pelican. as the Latin also reads, rufus, red, and Iunius, which properly is
referred to the hair: Josephus thinks he was of yellow color: (...), of
fire color, as the Septuag. all these seem to understand this description of
his red color of his hair. 2. But I rather think that he was of a ruddie
countenance, as B.G. translate, rubeus, A.P. or rubicundus: Osiand. that is,
ruddie, or reddish: my reasons are these, 1. because David is here described to
be a comely person, as these two are joined together, c. 17.42. He was ruddie,
and of a comely face: but the rednes of the hair belonged not to his
comelines: especially seeing that in those countries, the blackish curled hair
was had in more price, as appears by Salomons description, Cantic. 5.11.
Vatab. 2. the word here used, admoni, of edom, red, or ruddie, is referred to
the ruddines of the body: Lament. 4.7. the Nazarites are described to be white
as milk, and ruddie bodied as the precious stones: which two colors of
whitenes and ruddines withal, do make a perfect hue.

8. Quest. v. 13. Of David's age, when he was anointed King.
1. Josephus making Saul to reign 20. yeaaes after Samuels death, lib. 6. c.
15. in fine, must needs suppose David at this time, not to be above 10. year
old, nor yet so much: for Samuel could not live less then two years after
this, as may appear by the turbulent affairs, that fell out between this
time, and Samuels death, c. 25.1. and David was but thirty year old after
Saul's death, when he began to reign in Hebron, 2. Sam. 5.6. But it is not like
that David at eight or ten year old, could do such exploits, as the killing
of the Lion and bear, which immediately followed, and the subduing of Goliath:
and not long after this he received the sword of Goliath of the high Priest, to
use as his weapon, which shows, that he was both of strength, and stature: he
was also the kings son in law before Samuel died. c. 22.14. 2. Therefore I
think their opinion more probable, that take David at this time to have been
about 23. years old: Pelican. and so would have as many years between
David's first anointing by Samuel, and his second anointing by the men of Judah
in Hebron, 1. Sam. 2. as were from that his second anointing in Hebron, to his
third anointing by the men of Israel over all Israel, 2. Sam. 5.7. that is,
about seven years. In which space all those troubles, which fell between Saul
and David, with his exile and banishment, might well be compassed: his age
because it is not set down, cannot be precisely gathered: but upon the former
reasons, it is like he exceeded twenty years.

9. Quest. v. 13. Whether David were anointed before his brethren.
1. Some think, that he was not, and whereas it is said in the text, that
Samuel anointed him in the mids of his brethren, they expound it thus; that
he anointed one among the brethren: Vatab. that is, the last of all the
brethren. Pelican. But beside that the phrase more properly gives this sense,
that in the mids of his brethren, that is, in their presence, and before them
David was anointed: so the Septuag. translate bekereb, (...), in the mids,
and the Chald. inter, among: so much is gathered also out of the text, that all
the brethren sat down together at the feast, as Josephus also observes, as
Samuel had said, verse. 11. We will not sit down till he come hither.

2. Josephus further says, that Samuel having placed David next unto him at
the table, he should round him in the ear, that God had appointed him to be
King, and forthwith powered the anointing oil upon him: but seeing he was
anointed before his brethren, whereby David's brethren perceived, what the
Prophet intended, to what end should he have concealed the words? And further
seeing the Israelites, when they anointed David king, could repeat the words
which Samuel used at his first anointing, which were these: The Lord has said
to thee, thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be a captain over
Israel, 2. Sam. 5.2. it is like these words were not whispered in David's ear,
for how then should they come to the notice of all Israel.

3. Wherefore some think it more probable, that Samuel both spak unto him in
the audience of his brethren, and anointed him in their sight: yet they might
not greatly regard it, nor think the Prophet did it seriously, but contemned
it, as appears by Eliabs unkind entertainment of David in the camp after
this, c. 17.28. Like as Joseph's brethren regarded not his dreams, but Iaakob
only laid them to his heart: neither would the Pharisees and Jews
acknowledge Christ, of whom David was a type, for their Messiah and King.
Osiand.

4. Now then, whereas some think, that David was not so much as anointed
before his brethren, but before they sat down, Chimch. some that he was
anointed before them, but they knew not what was done, Joseph. I take the way
between both: that they saw David to be anointed before them, but understood
nothing concerning the kingdom: for then Eliab would not have carried himself
so insolently against him afterward, chap. 17. but when they heard David to
sing prophetical songs, they might think that he was anointed to be a
Prophet: but that David knew himself nothing concerning the kingdom, it has
no show: for the word of promise was annexed to the outward sign of his
anointing: those words which Samuel spoke to David, might afterward be
published by Samuel or David himself. And if all David's brethren had been
acquainted with this secret, it could not have been kept from Saul: seeing as
it appears by Eliab, they were envious against David. Mart.

10. Quest. v. 13. Of the spirit of God, that came upon David after his
anointing.
1. By the spirit, we understand the excellent graces and gifts of the spirit,
which now David was endued with, and made fit for the kingdom, and Saul
thereof deprived, being rejected from the kingdom: as the gift of fortitude
and magnanimity, Vatab. whereby he feared not to encounter with a lion and a
bear. 2. He had the gift of prophecy, Joseph. whereby he began to endite
and sing divine Psalms and hymns to the praise of God. Osiand. 3. The
blessing of God was with David, and his spirit assisted him, qua omnia
foeliciter ageret, whereby he did all things happily: Bor. prouidently and
prosperously: for so the word tzalach signifies, to prosper: Ar. and to come
upon. 4. Beside, the spirit of God came in a further degree upon David, then it
rested upon Saul, for it framed David's heart to obedience unto the will of God,
Pelican. and it wrought in him true sanctification, which Saul had not, but
only received for the time certain heroical gifts, and temporary graces of
the spirit.

11. Quest. v. 14. Of the evil spirit of the Lord that was sent upon Saul.
1. Some think it is called the evil spirit of the Lord, because God also was
the creator of them, yet not as they are evil: Vatab. but whereas two phrases
are here used, an evil spirit from the Lord, and an evil spirit of God; the
meaning appears to be, that it is called the evil spirit of God, because it
was sent of God. 2. Some here speak of permission, that God suffered the evil
spirit to come upon Saul to vex him: Vatab. but the phrase, from the Lord,
imports more then permission. 3. Some do here use a distinction, that both
the good spirit, and the evil spirit are sent of God, and have their power and
commission from him, but with this difference, that the things which the good
spirits of God work, are of themselves pleasing and acceptable unto God: but
the things which the evil spirit enterpriseth, are not of themselves to Gods
liking, as they are wrought by Satan, but as they make for the manifestation
of Gods will, and the revelation of his just judgment: in which respect they
are said to be sent of God: Borr. so that the very wicked and evil spirits are
at Gods commandment to execute his will. Genevens. 4. It will be objected,
that the punishing of sin, and the execution of Gods judgments, is a thing
pleasing unto God, and therefore Satan's work and ministry should be to his
liking: to this I answer by a double distinction: first, the work it self is
to be considered, then the worker: for the work, the Lord is more inclined to
mercy then to judgment, and the works of mercy are more peculiar unto God,
then the works of judgment: therefore when the Lord punishes, Of the
difference of working in the good and evil spirits*
he is said to bring forth, zar maghashehu, opus extraneum, his strange or
foreign work, Isa. 28.21. therefore Satan is made the minister, not of Gods
peculiar work of mercy, but of Gods strange work of judgment: whereof the
good Angels sometime are ministers also, but oftener of mercy: and they are
chiefly employed in punishing of the wicked: but Satan is used both in
punishing them, and in chastising also and trying the servants of God, as we
have Job for an example. Secondly, concerning the worker, the service of the
Angels is acceptable unto God, because they do it both willingly, and to a
good end, being moved with a zeal unto Gods glory, but Satan is forced
against his will many times, and what he does, though God turn it to his
glory, yet Satan does it of malice and envy unto man, and therefore his
service and ministry is not absolutely accepted and pleasing unto God. 5.
Further, there is a double work to be considered in the evil ministering
spirits, for either they are ministers of outward punishments only, as in
vexing and afflicting the body, so they work by immission, and sending from
God, or they also egg and tempt unto evil, so they work only by the
permission and sufferance of God: Borr. Vatab. both these ways was Saul
assaulted by Satan: for both his body was vexed, and his mind tempted.

12. Quest. v. 14. How Saul was vexed of the evil spirit.
1. Some do think, that Saul was troubled only with melancholic and
frantike fitts: corripuit eum per quaedam intervalla melancholicus furor, the
rage of melancholy did invade him at times: and this was the spirit that
troubled and vexed him, the spirit of fury and envy: as in Scripture the
spirit of infirmity is taken for the infirmity it self. Osiand. But there
was more in Saul, then fitts of melancholy, as the phrase shows, that an
evil spirit from God vexed him: it was therefore more then a natural work.
2. This therefore was Saul's malady, first the conscience of his sin troubled
him: Borr. then he was tormented with the spirit of envy and ambition, being
grieved with the loss of the kingdom, and by this vexation of his mind, he
fell into fury and frenzy: Pelican. further Satan thus disquieting his
mind, did work also upon the distemperature of his body, and his melancholy
passions might help thereunto: Pelican. beside, Satan as Josephus thinks,
might vex for the time and torture his body, that he seemed sometime to be as
it were suffocated of the spirit. In this miserable taking then was Saul: 1.
perplexed with the conscience of his sin: 2. tormented with ambition and
grief for the loss of the kingdom: 3. hence was bred melancholy, and
thereupon frenzy, and immoderate rage: 4. his body also as vexed and
disquieted by the evil spirit, wherewith he seemed as it were possessed for
the time. Pelican.

13. Quest. v. 16. Of the force and wonderful operation of David's music, in
allaying of Saul's malady.
1. Because it is said, that Saul should find ease, by the playing with the
hand upon the harp, and that when David played, the evil spirit departed, we
must not think, that musical soundes and melody have any force to drive away
evils, Pelican. no more then it was like, that Tobie drove away the devil
with the perfume of the broyled liver of a fish: for, as the Apostle says, The
weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.4. spiritual evils are
not chased away with carnal means. Such a like conceit there was in time of
superstition of bells, that the sound of them was good to purge and clear the
air of evil spirits. 2. But Music has a wonderful force, in working upon
the affections: either to stir them up, if it be loud and running music,
such as is used in war, or to allay them by soft and sober music: as
Pythagoras is said by such music to have restored a frantike young man to his
wits: so Terpander, Arion, and Ismenias the Thebane musician, are reported to
have reduced barbarous and savage men, to a civil kind of life. Borr. 3.
David's pleasant harmony therefore first naturally allayed Saul's melancholy
passions, and cheared and revived his dead and pensive spirits, which were the
instruments of Satan's working. Pelican. 4. And beside this, David by his
godly songs and prayers did also prevail to chase away the evil spirit that
concurred with that natural distemperature in Saul: as Josephus well notes,
that David with his voice and instrument did sing sacred hymns: the sound of
the music allaied the natural passion, the voice of the sacred hymn did
cause an intermission of Satan's work. 4. Here in this David was a true type
and figure of the very Messiah, by whose sweet voice many devils were cast
out in the days of his flesh, and now by the voice of his Gospel Satan is
cast out of the souls and hearts of men: not for a time, as out of Saul, to
return again, but he is for ever vanquished and subdued unto us. 5. But
howsoever David's music were effectual for the time present, this was but an
easing of Saul for the time, it was no perfect cure: wherein appears the
carnal counsel of Saul's servants, that only provided for his corporal ease,
not seeking for his spiritual comfort: they should first have sent for Samuel
the Lords Prophet, to have prayed for Saul, and comforted him in God, and then
have provided a musician for his recreation. Osiand. Much like unto them, are
such carnal friends and assistants of them that are sick in these days, who
first counsel them to seek out unto the Physician, the Minister and man of
God, is the last that is consulted with for the health of their souls. 6. Yet
herein they deserved commendation, that though they saw evidently that Saul
was vexed with an evil spirit, yet they did not seek to expel one devil
with an other, or to run unto witches, as many in these days use to do,
Against running to witches.
therein showing their great impiety and infidelity against the Lord: from
which kind of deuillish* professors Saul was always auerse, and even after
his falling away, did banish such out of Israel: which example may be a good
admonition unto such witchmongers, that if Saul not in Gods favor, yet hated
sorcerers, they can not think that they are in Gods favor, loving those whom
the Lord hates.

14. Quest. v. 18. How David came to be made known to Saul.
1. Whereas it follows, thou answered one of his servants, and said, I have
seen a son of Ishai, Iunius thinks that this might be Jonathan, who had
the first notice of David: but then it seems he should not have been called,
one of Saul's servants, or young men: and beside it may be gathered, chap. 18.1.
that Jonathan had then only the first sight and knowledge of David, when his
heart was knitt unto him. It was rather, as it should seem, some of Saul's
ordinary followers and servants, that gave this intelligence of David. 2. And
further, whereas Iunius thinks, that David was known now to be a warrelike
man by that exploit which he did against Goliath, which story following in the
next chapter, he takes to be set out of place, and to have been done before
this: it is not necessary so to apply these words, which rather may have
relation to his more then warrelike feats, in slaying the lion and the bear,
which might be done before this, Gods spirit beginning to work in him. 3. Gods
providence herein appears, in bringing David to Saul's court, that he might be
acquainted with the affairs of estate, before he took upon him the kingdom:
Borr. as also that David's patience, humility, wisdom, might be diversely
exercised and tried: that first he might be humbled, and afterward exalted.
Genevens.

CHAP. XVII.
1. Quest. v. 4. Why Goliath is called habenaim, between two.
1. THe most Interpreters understand it to be so spoken, because he came
between the two armies, A.P.V. supplying the word armies: but because he is
said to come forth from the Philistims camp, it should seem superfluous, to
add, between the two armies: as also for the same reason, the Chalde reading,
from between them, seems not to be so proper, because he is said also to
come forth from the army of the Philistims. 2. But the Latin translatour
reads spurius, a bastard, without any show of reason, or ground. 3. Some
think it to be spoken of his great stature, that he was as big as two,
Pelican. but the description of his great stature follows afterward. 4.
Therefore I rather approve Iunius reading, that he is called habenaim, that
is, duellator, because he challenged any hand to hand, that the combat might
be between two; as his challenge is set out and proclaimed, v. 8, 9, 10. Give
me a man that we may fight together: so the Sept. give the sense, reading
(...), a mighty man, a champion: for the word benaim, being of the masculine
gender, can not agree with machanoth, armies, or camps, being of the
feminine: and the article set before habenaim, notes some special description
of the man.

2. Quest. v. 4. Of Goliaths stature.
1. Whereas it is said in the text, that he was six cubits, and an hand
breadth high, that is, counting after the common cubit, three yards and an hand
high, Josephus is deceived that makes him but four cubits high, and an hand
breadth, lib. 6. de antiquit. c. 10. 2. It is like, seeing this Goliath was of
Gath, that he was of the generation of the Anakims, who being expelled out of
Israel, yet remained in Azzah, Gath, and Ashdod, Josh. 11.22. Osiand. 3. As his
body was huge and vast, so was his armor: his brigandine or brestplate,
called kashkashim, of the similitude of fish skales, weighed five thousand
shekels of brass, which counting after the common shekel, which was half an
ounce, amounts to an 156. pound, 4. ounces, and his spear head, weighing
six hundred shekels, makes 18.3. quarters: Genevens. wherein appears the
great strength of this giant, whose armor and weapons, if all of them were
reckoned, weighed not less then 200. pound weight: more then any other could
bear: yet he was able to walk up and down with it, and to weild himself and
his armor: yet this armor of proof could not defend him from the stone out
of David's sling: for there is no strength nor counsel against God.

3. Quest. v. 6. Whether it were Goliaths shield, which he carried between his
shoulders, or what other part of his armor it was.
1. The most do here read, a shield of brass between his shoulders:
A.P.L.S.B.G. but his shield was borne before him by his armor bearer, v. 7. as
captains have their pages that bear their targets: and the word chidon, Josh.
8.18. is by Montan. and Pagnin in that place translated a spear, not a shield.
2. Some think that it was the hinder part of the helmet, which hung down
between the shoulders, and covered them as a shield: Vatab. but that part of
the helmet, which comes out, uses to be before for safeguard of the face,
which if it were turned behind would be combersome 3. Iunius calls it
humerale, a shoulder piece: but the same word, Josh. 8.18. and Ierem. 6.23. he
takes for a spear: and whereas v. 45. David says to Goliath, thou come to
me with a spear, and chidon, if it had been the shoulder piece, that was not
in David's sight, he would rather have spoken of his brigandine or brestplate,
that was before him, and in his view. 4. Therefore I rather prefer the
reading of the Chal. which calls it a spear or iauelin of brass: both
because the word is so taken, Josh. 8.18. where Joshua lift up his spear for a
sign, and Job 41.19. where it is said, that the Leuiathan of the sea laugheth
at the shaking of chidon, the spear: Josephus also says, he carried his
spear between his shoulders. It seems therefore that he had both a spear
or lance in the one hand, and a iauelin or trunchin of brass, which he carried
between his shoulders with the other.

4. Quest. v. 8. Why Goliath says, Am not I a Philistim.
1. Ionathas Syrus thinks, that this Goliath was that Philistim, which had
before killed Eli his sons, and taken the Arc, and therefore he says in a
vaunting manner, Am not I that Philistim: but that exploit seems to have
been done to long before, almost forty years: considering also that the
brother of this Goliath was slain by one of David's worthies, toward the end
of David's reign, 2. Sam. 21.19. which was very near eighty years from the
death of Eli his sons. 2. The most read, Am not I a Philistim: but it had
been no great matter, for him to be a Philistim: the Israelites had no cause
to be afraid of every ordinary Philistim. 3. Therefore Vatablus reads well,
Am not I, Pelisteus ille, that Philistim: and as the Chalde interprets, Am
not I Goliath the Philistim: that is, that famous Philistim, which has done so
many great exploits among them? Vntab.

5. Quest. v. 10. Of Goliaths challenge, that provoked Israel to fight hand to
hand.
This kind of challenge is much displeasing unto God, as proceeding of pride,
and tending unto mischief: 1. which use of putting the trial of the common
cause upon the hazard of two, or some few, was taken up first among the
Gentiles: as the Romans and the Albani did set out each of them three
champions, that by their adventure, the general cause of both nations should
be swaied or carried, which of them should have dominion over the other, and
which of them should be in subjection. 2. And for the most part it is found by
experience, that they which provoke and challenge others, to such kind of
single combats, which are called monomachies, are foiled, and go by the
wurse. So Abner provoking Ioab to set out some of his men to fight, which he
calls playing, (and upon his motion twelve were sent out of each side) was
put to the wurse: likewise in the same place and at the same time, Asahel
pursuing Abner, and provoking him, whom he instantly entreated to give over,
and not to urge him, was slain by Abner. 2. Sam. 2. The like success had the
giants of the Philistims, which challenged Israel in the days of David: Abishai
slew Ishibenob: Sibbechai encountered Saph, and Elhanah, Lahmi the brother of
Goliath, and Jonathan overcame a giant, with six fingers and toes upon each
hand and foot, four and twenty in all: all which were champions set forth by
the Philistims to challenge Israel, 2. Sam. 23. 3. The reasons why such
monomachies are unlawful, are these. 1. Such do tempt God, wilfully offering
themselves to danger: as it is found among the decrees ascribed to Nicolaus I.
Monomachiam sectantes tentant Deum, They which follow monomachie do tempt God:
and this Canon is repeated in the decrees, part. 2. cause. 2. qu. 5. c. 22. 2.
Such are lifted up in pride, and do boast of their strength. 3. Men in this
case are hired and waged to be champions, and so they set their life to sale.
4. They encounter together rashly and in rage, and so many times end their
days in wrath and malice, which is a most fearful thing. What is to be
thought of monomachies, that is, of sole and singular combats.
5. Upon such co^bates the death of the one party assuredly follows, and so
they are guilty of murder and shedding of blood: these four last reasons are
well touched in the Later. Counsel, p. 1. c. 20. in these words, and to this
effect: Detestabiles ferias vel nundinas, quas torneamenta vocant, etc. fieri
prohibemus: Those detestable solemnities, and as it were faires, which they
call turneaments, we forbid to be held, in the which soldiers use to be hired,
and to make ostentation of their strength, do rashly encounter together,
whereupon follows the slaughter and deaths of men. 6. By this we may see,
what is to be deemed of that old use, which has been frequent and common in
times past, when men for trial of their titles, or to purge them of some
defamations, would hire their champions to try it out at the swords point.
Much also to be misliked is that outrageous challenging of one an other into
the field, and that many times upon very small or no occasions: wherein they
sin against God in their presuming upon their strength, against their
brethren, in seeking their destruction, and against themselves, in putting
their life willingly into danger, being forced thereunto by no necessity at
all.

6. Quest. v. 12. Of the age of Ishai.
1. Some read, he was taken for an old man in the days of Saul: B. G. because
the words are thus in the Hebrew, he was an old man going among men: as though
this should be the meaning, that he went for an old man among men, according to
our English phrase: but the word ba, going, is taken in an other sense, for
growing and going in years, as it is said of Abraham, he was going, or
growing in days. 2. Some interpret, that he was counted among those that bare
office: but, the mentioning of his eight sons rather gave occasion to speak
of his age, then of his authority. 3. But the Chalde reading, he was numbered,
bibechiraia, among the choice, or young men, makes a clean contrary sense:
for Ishai is here directly said to be old, and aged in respect of other men. 4.
Wherefore the meaning of these words, going among men, signifies that he was
going and grown in years, as the Latin reads, grandaevus, aged, and
Iunius, provectus, grown: where must be supplied out of other places,
baiammim, in days, or years.

7. Quest. v. 15. Why David was sent back from Saul to feed his fathers
sheep.
1. Iunius, who thinks that this story is transposed, and that David had
first killed Goliath, before he went to serve Saul; thus reads, that David
went and came from Saul's company, or retinue: that is, during this battle he
often went and came being sent of his father to visit his brethren in the
camp. But this is not like, that David was sent unto the camp before that
time, when he encountered with Goliath: for then he could not choose but to have
heard the boasting speeches of the vain glorious Philistim before, seeing he
came forth morning and evening, and all the host did ring of it: and the word
being meghal, which signifies, de cum, from with Saul, shows rather that
David was come from being with, or following of Saul. 2. Therefore the meaning
rather is, that David who had gone before to Saul, and was entertained of him,
at this time was returned home to his father: which some think was done,
because Saul was now recovered of his mad fitts, and had no need of him, and
so sent him home again: Osiand. but it appears to be otherwise, c. 18.10.
that Saul was not cured of his fitts, which came upon him again: some think
therefore, that Saul sent David away by turns, as his fits intermitted, and so
sent for him again: Borr. but that is not like, for Saul entertained him into
his service, and made him his armor bearer, which shows that he stayed still
with Saul, and went not away, before this time: therefore it is more likely
that these two were the causes of David's return, first because during this
war, Saul attended rather upon warrelike feats, then musical sounds, and
therefore was content to dismiss David: Pellic. his mind being wholly bent
upon war, was not so much disquieted with other cogitations: As also, because
Saul had three other of Ishai his sons, being content with them, as Josephus
notes, he sent home David to be a comfort to his aged father. 3. Now herein
Gods providence appears, that would not have David (whom he had appointed for
the confusion of Goliath) to be brought up in the feats of arms, but still to
lead a rural and pastoral life, that this victory being atcheiued by so
weak a means, might wholly be ascribed unto God. Bor. And David's humility is
manifest, who having lived in Saul's court, acquainted with a delicate courtiers
life, could frame himself again to this rusticall trade of keeping sheep: as
Moses in the like case having lived 40. years in Pharaohs court, spent as many
more in keeping his father in laws sheep.

8. Quest. v. 16. How Goliath vaunted himself 40. days together.
1. God so disposed, that forty days should be thus spent, that thereby
occasion should be offered of sending David unto the camp, to visit his
brethren, by whom the Lord had appointed this conquest of Goliath should be
obtained. Borr. 2. Likewise the more the Israelites were in fear, and the
greater that their perplexity was, the more famous was the victory and
deliverance, which they did not expect. Osiand. 3. Further herein evidently
appears the great change and alteration that was in Saul, how the spirit of
God had forsaken him, and of a valiant and courageous man, and of an heroical
spirit, he was grown to be a dastard and coward, that whereas before in one
day he had slain almost 40. thousand of the Philistims, he now is 40. days
together afraid at the sight of one man. Pelican.

9. Quest. v. 18. Wherefore David is bidden to take a pledge of his brethren.
According to the diverse significations of the word harabah, there are diverse
expositions of these words. 1. It signifies a sorting or mingling, and so some
read, learn with whom they are ranked and sorted: Lat. but it is like, that
Ishai did know of what company they were, and under what captain, seeing he
sends him a present of ten fresh cheeses. 2. Vatablus takes it to be spoken
of those diverse things which he carried with him: but that is prescribed before
what he should bear with him. 3. The word therefore here properly signifies a
pledge: of the same signification, with the Hebrew word herabon, Genesis 38.17.
where the word arrhabon, a pledge or earnest penie, seems to be derived: so
interpret Ar. Page And they which take it for a pledge, some expound it of the
token, which he received to go in and out to his brethren in the army without
suspicion: Pellic. some of the pledges, which his brethren had laid to pawn
for their necessities: as the Septuag. much what to that sense read, know,
(...), what things they need: but the fittest interpretation is, that he
should bring some token or pledge from them, as a sign of their welfare: Iun.
as the Chald. paraphrast interprets, thou shall bring their welfare, that is,
bring tidings how they fare: or bring commendations from them. Osiand.

10. Quest. v. 19. Of the valley of Elah, where the camp of Israel lay.
1. Some do make it an appellatiue word: but because there is great
uncertainty what kind of tree Elah should signify, some taking it for the
Terebinth or turpentine tree, as Hierome, some for the chestnut tree, some for
Ilex the holme tree, some for an oak, Iun. and Vatab. with the Septuag. I
think it is more safe to retain the Hebrew word, as A.P.B.G. especially seeing
it is the proper name of the valley: it is most like to be so called of the
oaks there growing. 2. Where it is said, they were in the valley, it must not
be so strictly taken, that they pitched in the valley it self: Reconcil*
for the host of Israel stood upon a mountain, and the Philistims on an other
mountain over against them, v. 3. but they encamped toward or upon the valley,
which lay between both the camps, as Josephus notes. 3. The most read, they
were fighting with the Philistims, A. P. L.S. but seeing the Israelites fled
away at the sight of Goliath, and he for the space of 40. days together
vaunted himself, it is not like that the armies had yet met, or that they
skirmished together, as Osiander thinks: but only had set their battle in
array, the one against the other, v. 21. therefore the better reading is, that
they were bellantes, Iun. or belligerantes, Vatab. or ineuntes bellum, Chal.
they were warring rather then fighting: for the word lacham signifies both.

11. Quest. v. 20. To what place of the camp David first came.
1. Some take the word mahegalah, for a proper name: the Latin translatour
calls it Magala: but c. 26.5. where the same word is used, there he
interprets it tentoriu^, Saul lay in his tent: it was not then a proper name
of a place, for Saul also had his mahagal, that is, such a place of the camp.
2. Some take it for vallum, the trench or fort. A.P. 3. Some for locum
castrorum, the place where the tents were. Chal. Vatab. 4. Others read, he came
within the compass of the host: B.G. but yet David was not come to the host,
as v. 22. he went from hence into the host. 5. Therefore, that place is meant
hereby where the carriage with the carts, and other impediments lay: hagalah
signifies a cart, as 2. Sam. 6.3. mahaghalah the compass or circuit, where
the carts stand, and sometime it signifies, the tract or beaten way made with
carts, as Isai 26.7. the Septuag. sometime express it by the word (...), which
signifies rotunditatem, the roundnesse or compass; sometime by the word
(...), a cart, 1. Sam. 26.5. It seems it was the place where the carts and
carriage lay, which was as a fort and defense unto the camp, for it is said, v.
22. that David left his things there with the keeper of the carriage. And Saul
lay asleep in that place, where the carriage and other such things lay, that he
might be in more safety and security, for fear of David's breaking in upon
him. 1. Sam. 26.5. Iun.

12. Quest. v. 25. Of the rewards, which Saul offered to him that would
encounter with Goliath.
1. It is fit and requisite, that rewards should be propounded unto those which
shall offer their service in the defense of the Commonwealth: for although we
can not deserve an everlasting reward at the hands of God, yet a temporary
reward may be deserved at the hands of men: and such rewards may be respected
and aimed at, though chiefly the glory of God, and the good of his Church,
ought to move every one to perform his duty. 2. Now the rewards which Saul
proclaims are three, to join him in affinity in making him his son in
law, in endowing him with riches, and enfraunchising his house: as in setting
it free from taxes and other impositions, Genevens. and so advancing it to the
state of nobility. Chald. Iun. 3. But herein Saul's inconstancy and leuitie
appeared, who was liberal in promising, but slow in performing, as it is
evident in his unkind carriage toward David afterward. Martyr.

13. Quest. v. 26. Whether David were moved with the reward to fight with
Goliath.
1. David was not incited or stirred up by the hope of the reward, which yet a
private man may safely respect, but the honor of God, and the love of the
people of God moved him: and therefore where he says, What should be done to
the man that kills this Philistim? he says thus in effect, what need any
such reward to be promised, the indignity which the people of God, and the
reproach which they bear at the hand of this Philistim, is sufficient to
provoke any man. Iun. 2. And David yields two reasons of this his resolution,
one taken from the person of the Philistim, who was an uncircumcised person,
and a stranger from Israel; the other from the person of the Israelites, who
were the people of the living God: and therefore this reproach was not to be
endured. Iun. 3. So the honor of God, and the reproach of the people moved
him, not the consideration of the reward: as Chrysostom says, non vincebatur
David his pollicitationibus, David was not won with these promises. hom. 20.
ad Romans Whereof this may be an argument, that coming before Saul, he makes no
mention of any reward, neither requires any grant or promise from the king.
Martyr.

14. Quest. v. 28. Of Eliab David's eldest brothers unkind behavior toward him.
1. Some think, that Eliab might speak thus of love to David, that he should
not put himself upon so great a danger: ex Martyr. but by the rough words
which he uses, and untrue surmises, it is evident that Eliab spoke of envy,
and with great indignation. 2. And this might be the cause, why Eliab envied
David, because he was advanced to the kings service and court, and he being
the Elder brother was neglected. Martyr. 3. And David is blamed for that,
wherein he was to be commended, that leaving his flock with a keeper for a
time, at his fathers commandment, he came to visit his brethren: yea, he
takes upon him to judge David's heart and affection, imputing that to his pride
and malice, which proceeded from the spirit of God in him. Martyr. 4. Thus
David first was envied of his own brethren, herein being a type of Christ,
who was rejected of the Jews, being as it were the eldest brethren, and was
received of the Gentiles. Pelican.

15. Quest. v. 28. Of these words of Eliab to David, With whom have thou left
those few sheep in the wilderness? upon what occasion it is lawful for a
Pastor to leave his flock.
This care and charge which David had of his flock, does (being morally
applied) show, what duty is required of the spiritual Pastor toward his
people, and what causes of absence are allowable, and when he ought not to be
absent: First, that Pastors ought not long to absent themselves from their
charges, but their necessary occasions of absence being once over, they are
bound in conscience to return to their places, these reasons grounded upon the
word of God, and agreeable to the continual practice of the Church of Christ,
do evidently convince.

1. Great is the danger, which accrueth and grows unto the Pastors
themselves, if any of those souls, which are committed to their charge, do
perish in their absence through their negligence: as the Prophet Esechiel
shows, When I shall say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall die the
death, if thou do not speak, and admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked
man shall die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand:
Esech. 33.8. I do wonder how negligent Pastors, when they do read this place,
can pass it over without trembling, seeing what danger they incur, in
omitting to admonish the people committed unto them: for as Hierome well says,
Detrimentum pecoris, ignominia pastoris: The loss of the flock, is the shame
of the shepherd: Epist. ad Furiam. even his everlasting shame and confusion,
without Gods great mercy.

2. The absence and negligence of the Pastor, proceeds from want of love
toward the flock, and he which loves not the flock, loves not him whose
flock it is: and therefore our Savior says to Peter, If thou love me,
feed my sheep: and therefore Damasus said well, Omnis negligenter pascens
toties sibi commendatum dominicum gregem, convincitur summum non amare
pastorem: Every one negligently feeding the Lords flock, so often commended
unto him, is found not to love the chief shepherd. Damas. Epist. 4. And he
that loves not Christ, how can he be assured of Christ's love toward him again?

3. Let the inconveniences be considered, which do grow by the Pastors absence,
the people will soon fall away from zeal to coldness, from virtue to vice:
where good seed is intermitted to be sown, thistles and weeds will spring up
in stead thereof. This the Apostle found by experience in the Church of the
Galatians, while he was absent from them: as he says, It is good to love
always earnestly in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you:
and again, I would I were present with you, that I might change my voice: for
I am in doubt of you. Galat. 4.18.20. It seems, that while the Apostle was
present, the Galatians were very forward and zealous, but in his absence there
zeal and first love abated: and therefore he wishes he were among them, that
he might change and apply his voice to admonition, or exhortation, as every
man's case required. This is that which Ambrose feared, being upon some
necessary occasion absent from his Church: Eram de vobis anxius, trepidus ne
quis me absente per negligentiam caederet, ne quis diaboli insidijs laberetur:
I was careful for you, fearing least in mine absence any might fall through
negligence, and slip through the lying in wait of Satan. sermon. 28* And
Augustine complains, that while he was absent from Hippo, the citizens had
lost a certain godly custom among them, vestiendi pauperes, of clothing and
coating the poor. Epist. 138. Whereby it is evident, that good things will
soon be discontinued, and grow out of use, where the Pastoris not present to
call upon the people.

4. Add hereunto, that the more diligent the spiritual adversary is, to
spoil the flock, the more careful the Pastor should be to watch over it. Now
the Devil, as S. Peter says, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking whom
he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. And the wolf then is most busy to invade the
flock, when the Pastor is not near at hand to defend them. Therefore Saint
Paul says, I know this, that after my departure grievous wolves shall enter in
among you, not sparing the flock. Act. 20.29. So Ambrose well says, Lupi
explorant pastoris absentiam, quia praesentibus pastoribus oves Christi
incursare non possunt: The wolves do watch the Pastors absence, because while
the Pastors are present, they can not invade the sheep of Christ. lib. 7. in
Luc. And verily what other cause can be yielded, that in many places of this
land, the people are corrupted in religion, and Seminary Priests, and Iebusite
Friars do creep in to pervert and seduce many, then the negligence and
absence of many Pastors in their cures and charges.

5. Further, how necessary the presence and residence of Pastors and Ministers
in their Churches is, appears by the excellency and price of that object,
wherein their cure and charge lies: for they are watchmen not of men's bodies,
but of their souls, and must give account for them. Hebr. 13.17. If a steward
and dispenser of things temporal must be faithful, as Jacob did watch his
flock by day and night, and whatsoever perished he made it good, Genesis 31.39.
how much more careful, circumspect, and vigilant ought the dispenser of things
spiritual to be? The Imperial laws have provided that Advocates should not
evagari, stray out of the cities and places where they practiced. Cod. lib. 2.
tit. 7. leg. 2. and for soldiers it is provided, milites non tractent aliena
negotia: They should not busy themselves with other men's affairs, but attend
upon their own calling and charge. Cod. lib. 2. tit. 13. leg. 7. If they which
do but fight for men's bodies, and such as plead for men's goods, must give such
diligent attendance, much more is the same requisite in those, that are charged
with men's souls. But now a days, this at many hands is counted so ordinary
and easy a thing, to be the Pastor of souls, that a man will require more
diligence at his servants hands about his cattle, then many do perform in
the feeding of souls: God, in his good time, open the eyes of such, that they
may see the great danger, which they by their negligence and carelessness cast
themselves into: and that they may feel the heavy weight of the burden of
souls, that they may deliver their own souls.

6. Lastly, not to heap up more arguments in so evident a matter: This is not
the least thing, which should move Pastors to be resident among their people:
because they give great offense by their unnecessary absence, to the Church of
God, as seeking rather to feed upon them, then to feed them: as the Prophet
Esechiel complains of such idle shepherds, Ye eat the fat, and cloth you
with the wool: ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the sheep.
Esech. 34.3. Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, I seek not yours, but you.
2. Cor. 12.14. But such as care not for Christ's flock, do evidently
proclaim, that they seek not them, but theirs. Of this kind of scandal and
offense, Augustine had experience in his people of Hippo: of whom he thus
writes, Populus Hipponensis cui me deus servum dedit, ita est ex omni part
infirmus, vt pressura etiam levioris tribulationis poterit aegrotare, eum modo
cum regressus sum, periculose scandalizatum comperi de absentia mea: The people
of Hippo, whose servant the Lord has made me, is so altogether weak, that a
little trouble is able to make them very sick: I found them at my return,
dangerously scandalized with my absence. Epist. 7. If the people took offense
at Augustines necessary absence: for without just cause that holy man would
not absent himself: much more grievous is the offense, which is justly given
by unnecessary absence.

Of lawful and just causes of the Pastors absence.
Now, whereas it has been thus showed, that the presence and reside^ce of
Pastors is necessary, both in respect of the great danger, which they incur
thereby, the cause thereof the want of love, the inconveniences which grow
unto the people, the vigilancie of the spiritual adversary, the price and
excellency of their charge concerning souls, and the public offense and
scandal, yet are there some occasions, which may lawfully draw the Pastor for
a time from his people: and especially these four.

1. He may be absent for the public service of the Church, as in being
present in general or provincial Counsels, in helping to settle and compound
the variances and differences in other Churches, and such like profitable
employments. As S. Paul, when a man of Macedonia appeared unto him in a vision,
saying, Come and help us, took it for a sufficient warrant for him to go
into Macedonia, to pla^^ the Gospel there, Act. 16.9, 10. So, (although in this
behalf the calling of Apostles and Pastors is much different, the one being
not limited, the other tied to a charge) yet it is a good occasion of absence,
when the necessity of other Churches calls for help at some Pastors hands.
As Ambrose says, Non dubito fratres contristari vos, quotiescunque absentem me
a vobis necessitas facit: I doubt not brethren, but that you are grieved, when
as necessity makes me absent from you. Ser. 39. And in an other place:
Alterius Ecclesiae necessitatibus evocatus, minime vobis solitum studium
dependisse videor, being called forth by the necessary business of an other
Church, I seem not to have bestowed on you my wonted care. Ser. 28.

2. An other cause of absence is, when the Pastor personally is sought for, and
can not remain among his flock, without peril of his life, and when his
sheep are become wolves, to rise up against their own shepherd. David though
accounted king over Israel, being personally pursued by Saul, with whom the
Ziphims of his own tribe conspired, 1. Sam. 23. fled out of the land: and S.
Paul being sought for in Damascus, was let down in a basket by a window. 2.
Cor. 11.33. Athanasius, (whose life was sought for by his enemies the Arrians)
did leave his Church of Alexandria, and gave way for the time, hiding himself
for the space of six years in a dry cisterne, and four months in his
fathers tomb: And he himself makes this Apology: Quis mihi mirabiliter and
divinitus erepto vitio vertat, quod non in manus me quaerentium reiecerim, etc.
Who can blame me being miraculously delivered, that I did not cast my self
into their hands which sought me. Tripart. hist. lib. 6. c. 22. This occasion
of absence is allowed by the ancient practice of the Church: Si non suo vitio,
sed plebis contradictione aberit a parochia: If he be absent not by his own
default, but the contradiction and opposition of the people. Antiochen. can.
18. Who doubts therefore, but that those holy Confessors in the late days
of persecution in England, which fled out of the land, seeing the life of the
Pastors and Ministers was chiefly sought for, therein were warranted to do as
they did, being by this means preserved by Gods providence for the
restoration of the Church afterward*

3. A third lawful cause of absence and discontinuance for a time is, for
recovering the health of body: for many diseases are helped by the change of
air: and in this case it is lawful for a man, if the place be such, as
agrees not with the state of his body, to leave the charge altogether, being
called unto an other. This cause stayed Epaphroditus from the Church of the
Philippians, whom, as soon as he was recovered, S. Paul sent unto them, that
they might rejoice when they saw him. Philip. 2.25.28. The Ecclesiastical
histories make mention of Sylvanus, who was made Bishop of Philippolis in
Thracia by Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, but being of a thin body,
and not able to endure the cold of that country, was removed from thence to
Troas, in an hotter climate. Socrat. lib. 7. c. 37.

4. A Minister or Pastor may upon his necessary private occasions lawfully for
a time be absent, as in following necessary suits of law to defend his right,
which require his personal attendance, or in attending upon some court of
justice, where he is impleaded. So S. Paul by appeal was sent to Rome, there
to make answer for himself before Caesar. The Canons of the Church were herein
at the first very strict: first, it was not permitted that any of the Clergy,
ne propter causam suam quamlibet intraret in curiam, for any cause whatsoever
should go into any court. Council. sub Silvest. 1. c. 16. Afterward more
liberty was granted, that they might go unto the Courts and places of
judgment, vt aut viduis and pauperibus succurrant, aut de verbo dei iudices
admoneant: to succor the widows and poor, or to admonish Judges of their
duty out of the word of God. Cabilonens. sub Carol. c. 11. And this liberty
was further enlarged, that one might depart from his cure, maiorum authoritate
inductus: being drawn and fetched by authority. Pelag. 2. Epist. 2. It was
also decreed, Council. Sardicen. that Priests and Deacons in Thessalonicoru^
civitate non diutius morentur, quam constituta tempora per Episcopos: should
stay no longer in the city of Thessalonica, then the time appointed by the
Bishops. They were permitted then to stay so long about their business, as was
thought fit, and was limited unto them. But as these four necessary occasions
premised, do excuse the absence of Pastors for a season: so yet they are
limited and confined with these four restrictions.

1. The Pastor must see, that he pretend not a necessity without necessity:
but it must be indeed a more urgent cause, that draws him from his urgent
business at home: for the attending upon his flock is a necessary thing, and
it must not be intermitted but upon a great necessity: as Cyprian shows,
Quoniam sic rebus vrgentibus detinemur, vt long isthinc excurrere: and diu a
plebe, cui de divina indulgentia praesumus, abesse non datur facultas: because
we are so detained with urgent business, that we can not go far away or be
absent from the people, over the which God has set us. lib. 4. epist. 6.

2. The Pastor must provide, that when necessity calls him from home, his
absence may by others for that time be supplied, that the Church be not left
destitute. This was Augustines rule, They which in time of common danger
reserve themselves for better times, do well; cum alij non desunt, per quos
ministerium suppleatur, ne ab omnibus deseratur: when as others are not
wanting, by whom the ministry may be supplied, that the Church be not
forsaken and left destitute of all. Epist. 180.

3. Augustine in the same Epistle seems to give an other caveat, propounding
the example of David; Ne se committeret praeliorum periculis, and lucerna in
Israel extingueretur, a suis hoc petentibus sumpsit, non praesumpsit: David
that he should not offer himself to the danger of battle, and so the light
of Israel should be put out, he presumed not of himself, but assumed it as
desired of the people. In such necessary absence and discontinuance of the
Pastor, the consent of the people were fit to be had, though it be not always
necessary: that as the Apostle would have the man and wife, to be sequestered
for a time the one from the other, but, yet with consent: 1. Cor. 7.5. so a
mutual consent in the absence of the Pastor from his Church, to the which he
is as it were married and espoused, were requisite: and so less offense would
be taken at it.

4. This time of absence upon the former just occasions would not be long: as
before the Apostle would not have the married couple one to defraud an other,
but for a time* Ambrose says, Paucorum dieru^ occupationibus detentus coetui
vestro videor defuisse: being detained from you by the employment of a few
days, I may seem to have been wanting unto your assembly. Sermon. 28.
Sardicen. con. c. 14. it was decreed, Episcopus per tres dominicos non amplius
absit ab Ecclesia: that a Bishop, should not be absent above three Lords days
from his Church: meaning, whereas he was not by any urgent necessity detained.
And where there was cause of absence, the cause ceasing, they were eftsoone to
return to their charges. Now, as these causes before alleged, may excuse the
necessary absence of Pastors, not continually, but for a time: so these that
follow, which by some may be pretended, are no sufficient allegations for the
Pastors absence.

Causes pretended by some, not sufficient to warrant or excuse the Pastors
absence:
1. When there is public persecution raised against the Church in general by
hostile invasion, the life of the Pastors being not personally sought, when as
well the people are persecuted as the Pastor, in this case he is not to fly,
and leave his flock: as David when the Lion and bear invaded his flock, did
not turn his back, and leave them to be a pray, but manfully withstood them
and delivered his flock. But where as our Savior bids his Apostles, when
they were persecuted in one city to fly unto an other: Augustine wisely
answeareth, making a difference between personal and public persecution:
Fugiunt Christi servi, quod praecepit, seu permisit, cum eorum quivis
specialiter a persecutoribus quaeritur, etc. let the servants of Christ flee,
as Christ did command or permit, when any of them is specially sought for by
the persecutors: In communi autem omnium periculo, qui indigent, ne ab his
quibus indigent, deserantur: but in the common danger of all, let not them
which stand in need be forsaken of them, whom they have need of. August.
epist. 180. For by this mark our Savior describes an hireling, who when he
sees the wolf coming, flees and leaves the flock. Ioh. 10.12.

2. An other instance may be given of the plague and pestilence, Whether it be
lawful for a Pastor in the time of pestilence to leave his flock.
when a contagious sickness has invaded the parish, whether the Pastor in this
case may not go aside to preserve himself from danger. In this case a
difference must be made between private men, and such as bear public office,
the one being free, the other bound: for they which are not tied by any office
or administration to attend upon the Church or Commonwealth, may as freely
escape from the pestilence by changing of place, as from the sword: but
otherwise, neither the Pastor from his flock, nor the Magistrate from his
government, can with any better conscience flee away, then the husband from the
wife, the father from the children: for all these are comprehended under the
Apostles rule: Let every man abide in the same vocation, wherein he is called,
1. Cor. 2.20. Therefore he which is called to govern, rule, or teach, must not
leave his standing and charge, for that were to depart from his calling.
Gregory 3. did give a good resolution in this case, writing thus to
Bonifacius, who was desirous to be satisfied, whether in the time of
pestilence, they which were yet untouched, might not escape from the danger,
fatuum hoc videtur, non enim valet quispiam Dei effugere manum: This seems a
foolish part, for no man can escape Gods hand. Ecclesiastical histories make
mention, that in that great and contagious pestilence under Galienus, and
afterward under Maximinus the Emperors, the Gentiles, and Christians were of
far unlike behavior: for the Gentiles left their dearest friends half dead
and alive, and suffered them to lie unburied, and fled away: but the
Christians stayed, performing all duties of charity, not only to themselves,
but even to the Gentiles, which were forsaken of their nearest friends.
Nicephor. lib. 6. c. 20. etc. 28. Eusebius. lib. 9. c. 8. Cyprian upon this
occasion, as it seems writ his book de mortilitate, persuading Christians
not to be afraid of the plague: and among other he uses these three most
notable persuasions. First, Mortalitas ista, vt Christi hostibus pestis est,
ita Dei servis salutaris excessus est: this mortality, as it is a plague to
the enemies of Christ, so it is an wholesome departure unto the servants of
God. It skilleth not, if a man be prepared, what death he dies of, for he is
sure howsoever he dies, that he goes unto rest. Again, says he, mentes
humani generis examinat, etc. it examineth men's hearts, and tries their
charity, whether masters will forsake their servants, one kinsman an other,
the physicians the sick. God sends the pestilence to take trial of men's
charity, and faithfulness in their several callings, which if the plague do
fray them from, a greater plague remains for them. Thirdly, Exercitia sunt
nobis ista, non funera, contemptu mortis praeparant ad coronam: these are not
dead corses, but lively experiments unto us, by the contempt of death preparing
us to the crown of martyrdom. By such and the like persuasions, that holy
Martyr dealt with the Christians, not for fear of the pestilence to forsake
their duties and calling.

Therefore upon the former reason it appears, that the plague or pestilence
is no sufficient impulsive, to drive the Pastor from his charge and calling.
But whether the Minister is bound in particular personally to visit all, which
are infected, it is an other question: wherein I incline rather to think that
he is not so bound: 1. because he is the Minister of the whole congregation,
which is to be attended upon, which he cannot do without great danger, if he
go to every infected house. 2. he is to respect his own family, and not to
bring them into danger: which if he should be careless of to provide for the
safety and good of his family, herein he should come far short of the very
Infidels, and be much worse herein then they, as the Apostle insinuates, 1.
Timoth. 5. 3. unless God have given unto him such an especial confidence and
assurance, whereby he feels himself as it were called to this extraordinary
work of charity, as some I confess have had, and may yet have, it is
presumption for a man to offer himself to the stroke of Gods Angel: seeing
Balaams ass declined the way where the Angel stood with a drawn sword: which
shows, that where our special calling and duty holds us not, we may
safely decline all occasions of danger.

3. A third (...) of absence is, that a man may have diverse cures, and so can
not yield his corporal presence and attendance unto them all: but this
allegation may be retorted: for the having of many cures and Churches, does not
excuse the Pastors absence, but for the same cause it is unlawful to possess
many Churches, because the Pastor can not be present to do his duty to all:
which reason was used in a Synod of Mentz, c. 64. Cum vnus pluribus ecclesiis
curam impendere necessariam nequeat: seeing one can not sufficiently care for
many Churches. But such will ask what Scripture we have against them: I would
therefore that these texts were diligently considered, as first, Esech. 34.4.
from whence this argument may be enforced, they are no good shepherds that do
not strengthen the weak, nor heal the sick, nor bind up the broken, nor
seek that which was lost: but such as hold many Churches, and attend not upon
the flock, can not perform these duties: for how can they being absent,
confirm the weak, restore the bruised in conscience, and bring home them that
are seduced? Again, they are no good shepherds which feed themselves, and
feed not the flock, Esech. 34.8. which live of the tithes and offerings of
the people, but give them not spiritual food again: but such are they which
yearly receive an hundred, two hundred, or more pounds out of a parish, and
scarce give them once a quarter a sermon: what is this else, but, negotiationis,
and turpis luchri proprium, a kind of merchandise and gain, as it is called
Nicen. council. 2. c. 15. If such should examine their conscience, they will
find, that it is not the love of Christ, or of the flock, but the love of
lucre and commodity, and a mere covetous mind, that makes them hunt for so
many Churches: they are not my words, but uttered in the Laterane Council
held under Alexander, part. 1. cap. 13. in very corrupt times, Quia nonnulli
modum avaritiae non ponentes, etc. plures ecclesias nituntur acquirere, etc.
because some finding no measure of their covetousness, do seek to get many
Churches. Further, seeing in Scripture Ministers are called (...), Ephesians. 4.11.
Pastors, shepherds, the very name shows how unfit, yea and impossible a
thing it is, for one to watch over many Churches, seeing one shepherd can not
feed or keep more then one flock. Lastly, Ministers professing the Gospel,
should be ashamed herein to come short of that care which the superstitious
Romanists have professed: as in the Synod of Colen under Adolphus, Medium. 3.
c. 9. thus it was decreed: Prohibendum est otiosum illud and insatiabile
studium coacervandi multa beneficia, etc. That idle and insatiable desire of
heaping together many benefices having cure of souls is to be restrained: And
then these reasons are added, Undo populus fidelis graviter scandalizatur,
spoliantur Ecclesiae debitis ministerijs, fundatorum frustratur voluntas, qui
laborare in Ecclesia volunt excluduntur, etc. Whereupon the faithful people is
grievously scandalized, the Churches spoiled of the due services, the mind of
the founders is frustrate, and they which would labor in the Church are
excluded. These four great inconveniences, or rather annoiances, do accompany
and follow non residencie, and pluralities: 1. The offense and scandal of the
people of God, who are much grieved, to see how greedy many are to eat the
milk of the flock, and yet are careless to feed them again: but the
Apostle would have us to give no offense to the Church of God, 1. Cor. 10.32.
and our Savior Christ pronounces woe unto those, by whom offense comes,
Matthew. 18.7. 2. By this means the Churches are not duly served, but the word
of God upon this occasion is precious in many places: he that enjoys two or
more Churches, in some of them must needs take wages, and do no service: S.
Paul says in deed to the Corinth. I robbed other Churches, and took wages of
them, to do you service, 2. Cor. 11.8. But three things are here to be
considered: 1. that Paul was an Apostle, and was not tied to any particular
Church: 2. that where he had preached, he left them sufficient Pastors and
teachers of their own, to water that which he had planted: 3. he robbed them
not against their will, they voluntarily contributed toward the relief of the
Apostle, yet so as sufficient remained for the maintenance of their own
Pastors. But all things are unlike in this robbery of Churches, which is used
now a days: so that, what the Apostle said in a good and commendable sense, in
these is verified to their reproach, that they rob some Churches, to do
others service: which kind of robbery, if it be well considered, carries with
it a greater inconvenience, then any other wrong in a man's goods: for that
tends but to the damage and loss of the helps of the bodily life; but this
brings with it a worse consequent, in depriving the soul of the necessary
food thereof.

3. A third inconvenience is, that the mind of the first founders is
frustrate: whether we understand the first founder of tithes, which was God
himself by his servant Moses; or the late founders since the time of the
Gospel, godly and Christian Emperors, and faithful and believing people, who
all gave tithes to the Church, to this end, that they might receive spiritual
things for temporal: and as they impart unto the Pastor of their outward
goods, so he should dispense unto them of his spiritual graces: therefore the
Apostle calls it a communicating concerning the matter of giving and
receiving. Philip. 4.15. 4. Lastly, by this occasion of non residence and
pluralities, many sufficient and profitable men are excluded, who would labor
willingly in the Lords vineyard, but that no man hireth them. It is not in this
case, as when the halt and lame waited about the poole of Bethesda to be
healed: every one as he was strongest, stepped in first, and the diseased
creeple was excluded, Ioh. 5.7. for many that are lame in respect of their
gifts, do thrust into the poole of the Church, before others that are sounder:
And as the fort of Sion, was held by the blind and lame against David, 2. Sam.
5.8. so is the Sion of the Church occupied by some both blind and lame in their
gifts, and the Seers are kept out. Thus that saying of S. Paul is fulfilled now
a days: They exclude you, that you should altogether love them, Gal. 4.17.
They which appropriate many Churches to themselves, exclude the people from
other Pastors, that they should only depend upon them.

4. A fourth allegation and excuse will be this, that many do give necessary
attendance upon their Lords, in their families, and in doing service unto great
men, and so are forced to be absent from their Cures. But as the former excuse
sauoured of covetousness, so this of ambition. It bewraieth a discontented and
aspiring mind: for if the Apostle Saint Paul's rule were followed, Godliness is
great riches, if a man be content with that he has, 1. Timoth. 6.6. such would
set up their rest, being thankful for that lot and portion, which God has
sent them, not aiming at a fairer mark. And, if they which thus allege would
thoroughly examine themselves, they will find, that it is not the love of the
service or attendance which they give, but their own aspiring mind, which
draws them from their Cures: they seek with Diatrephes, to have the
pre-eminence among their brethren, and by their service to attain unto the
ancient places of the Church. Otherwise Noble men might be served with those,
which have no charges; at the least they might have their turns, as the
Chaplins of the Kings Majesty's honorable household, and so need not,
notwithstanding their attendance, to be long absent from their flocks: for it
seems a very unreasonable thing, that they should receive their wages in one
place, and perform their service in an other. Concerning this ambitious desire
of men in aspiring still unto greater places, Leo has a notable decree,
Epistol. 82. c. 8. Si quis mediocritate sedis suae despecta, administrationem
loci celebrioris ambierit, non solum a cathedra pellatur aliena, sed carebit
and propria, vt nec illis praesideat, quos per avaritiam concupivit, nec illis,
quos per superbiam sprevit: If any Bishop (and by the same rule any other
Minister) despising the (...) of his own seat, do aspire unto the government
of a more famous place, he shall not only miss of that, but want his own,
that he may neither be set over those whom he ambitiously coueted, nor over
those, whom he proudly despised. But yet this decree touches not those, which
either, exhortatione sacerdotum, by the advice and persuasion of the Ministers
in general, Anther. decret. or maiorum authoritate inducti: being induced by
the authority of the chief governors, Pelag. 2. Epist. 2. are called and
removed from their places: otherwise for Pastors to frequent cities, and to
live in famous places, absenting themselves from their charges, to hunt for
greater preferment, it affords them no excuse, but makes them more
inexcusable: As it was well decreed in the Chalcedon Council, Can. 23. de
Clericis, qui diutius in vrbe Constantinopolitana immorarentur, decrevit
synodus, etc. Concerning Clergy men, which stay long in the City of
Constantinople, the Synod has decreed, that the defender of the Church of
Constantinople, do command them to depart, and if they be unwilling, compel
them. Thus much by occasion of Eliabs words to David, reproouing him for
leaving of his sheep, of these three points: 1. of the necessity of the
presence of the Pastors with their sheep: 2. upon what just occasions they may
be absent: 3. what excuses of absence are not sufficient. Now further, because
it is said before that David had left his sheep with a keeper, v. 20. and
Eliab asks with whom he had left his few sheep, v. 28. as seeming to rest
satisfied for that, if he had deputed any in his place to take care of his
sheep: this question also would briefly be touched, whether the Pastors
absence may be fully and sufficiently supplied by the deputation of others in
their stead.

16. Quest. Whether the Pastors absence may be supplied by others.
Against this custom of substituting others, which are called Vicars or
Curates in the Pastors place: first, that place in the Gospel is urged by
Damasus, of the good shepherd, which calls his own sheep by name, and
leads them out: and the sheep hear his voice: they know not the voice of a
stranger, Ioh. 10.3. and he proves the same by the example of our Savior,
Ipse, ipse inquam ovem perditam quaesivit, iuvenit, and proprijs humeris
reportavit: he, even he himself I say, did seek the lost sheep, and found
it, and carried it home upon his own shoulders. Luke 15.5. Damas. epist. 4. the
consideration hereof, gave occasion that it was thus decreed, Praecipimus, ne
conductitijs praesbyteris Ecclesiae committantur: We enjoin that Churches be
not committed to hireling Priests. Eugen. decret. 11.

2. An other reason may be grounded upon the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 9.7. Who
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? A wrong then is
done unto such as are Vicars and Deputies, that laboring in feeding of the
flock, they should not eat of the milk of the flock: they do the service,
and an other takes the reward: wherein a double wrong is committed: for both
the people is wronged, who do give, and receive not: whereas the Pastor and
the people ought to communicate in the matter of giving and receiving, Philip.
4.15. the one to give spiritual and receive temporal things, the other to
give temporal, and receive spiritual: likewise the poor Curate is wronged,
that labors for an other: he endures the heat of the day, and the other
goes away with the penie. It would be considered, whether that place of Saint
James touch them not, concerning the keeping back of the hire of the
laborers, which have reaped your fields: Iam. 5.4. for this is the Lords
harvest wherein they labor, and much more worthy are they of their hire, then
he that labors in the corn.

3. The Fathers of the Church have in times past judged it an unnatural thing,
that a Pastor should put forth his sheep to an other to f^ede. Damasus
compares them thus: Meretricibus similes videntur, quae natos statim infantes
suos, alijs nutricibus educandos tradunt, vt suam citius libidinem expleant:
They seem to be like unto harlots, which do put forth their infants, as soon
as they are borne, to other nurses to bring up, that they may sooner fall to
lust again. And Espenceus alleges this saying out of one Peraldus, Valde
ridiculus fuerit, qui vxorem ducat frigidus, eius vicaria modo opera
foecundandae fiducia: He were a vain man, that would marry a wife being unapt
for generation, trusting that she may become fruitful by an others help: So
he resembles them, that are married and espoused to a Church, and use the help
of others in getting spiritual children unto God. Espenc. lib. 3. digress. ad*
1. Timoth. c. 22.

4. Beside this great inconvenience follows by such substitutions, that
Church duties are neglected, spiritual exercises intermitted, and Pastors
careless of their own calling, entangle themselves with other temporal
affairs: the Apostle says, No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, 2. Timoth. 2.4. much more should he that is entered into
Christ's service and warrefare, neglect this spiritual business, and employ his
time otherwise. For according to the saying of the Poet, Excussi proprijs,
aliena negotia curant, they which neglect their own, do meddle with business
not appertaining unto them: of S. Peter they are called (...), intent upon
other men's matters, 1. Pet. 4.15. 3. Herein also I could wish, that our
righteousness exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: Espenceus
before named, a grave writer of that side, alleges this out of Eckius, who
though an enemy unto the truth, yet thus complained of the abuse among them:
Nostrates praelati Apostolicum ordinem invertere, dum spiritualia graviora,
quam quae subeant, rati, in Pontificalibus Suffraganeorum, in Iudicialibus
Officialium, in absolve^dis peccatoribus Poenitentiariorum open vtuntur, in
praedicatione Monachum aliquem proferunt: Our Prelates do inuert the
Apostolic order, while, thinking spiritual things to heavy for them to
undergo, they use the help of Suffraganes in their Pontifical duties, of
Officials in matters of judgment, of Penitentiaries in absoluing of sins, in
preaching they set out some Monk: but if any temporal business fall out, or
matter of profit, that is referred to the Bishop himself. Eck. hom. 2. de
Stephan. And he which sees not, that such kind of deputations has done much
hurt both in Ecclesiastical discipline, and civil government among us,
observes nothing.

5. Further, it is very evident and apparent, that the substitution of Curates
and Vicars has in times past been the occasion of bringing in one devise,
that I fear me, will be a baine to the Church, both in our time, and our
posterities: I mean, of the founding and erecting of Impropriations: for when
the Laity saw, that Clergy men possessing many benefices, did substitute in
their places poor Curates, for a small stipend or salarie, doing little or
nothing themselves, they were glad to take the hint, and devised to alienate
the tithes of Churches to secular uses, and to endow (I might rather have said
undo) Vicarages, with some small tithes.

6. Lastly, I would that speech of Iodocus a famous preacher sometime of
France, were well remembered, who though he spoke pleasantly, yet uttered the
truth: that such as did feed their sheep by vicars, adibunt per vicarios
paradisum, in persona inferos: shall go into heaven by their vicars, but into
hell in their own person: Espenceus writes, that being a young man, he had
heard Iodocus often to inculcate this saying in his sermons: for why is it not
as well just with God to reward idle careless parsons by their vicars, as for
them to do their duty by vicars?

But this notwithstanding, which has been said, against the perpetual
substitution of Vicars and Curates, yet all deputation is not to be taken away
in the Church: for as in the Commonwealth and Civil state, the King and chief
magistrate can not possibly do all himself, but must needs have officers and
ministers, to whom we are commanded to yield obedience, as sent of him, (1.
Pet. 2.14.) and he of God: So also in Ecclesiastical affairs, it is fit there
should be subordinate ministers for the necessity of the Church. As Moses
going up to the mount, left Aaron and Hur his deputies, Exodus 24.14. So the
Evangelists were as the Apostles substitutes, for them and in their place to
teach and exhort the people: as S. Paul sent Timotheus to Thessalonica, to
stablish and comfort them touching their faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. so he left Titus
at Creta, to continue to redress the things that remain. Tit. 1.5.

But in these substitutions in Ecclesiastical duties, these three conditions
are requisite: 1. That they should not be perpetual, but for a time, during
the necessary occasion of the Pastors absence: which necessity being served,
the Pastor should have a desire to return and visit his flock: and to say, as
S. Paul to the Romans, I long to see you, that I might bestow upon you, some
spiritual gift, Romans 1.11. and as Greg. Nazianzen. did write to the
Bizantines, desydero vos filij, parique a vobis mensura, desideror: children, I
do long for you, as you in like manner long for me. A good Pastor, as one
says, should be like unto an old beaten hare, longa cursitatione defessus,
cubilibus suis emori, being weary of long chasing abroad, to return home,
and to die as it were in his own borrow. Espenc. vbi supra.

They must have a care, when they are necessarily called from home, to leave in
their place, such as are sufficient to guide the people, and to instruct them
in their absence: not to make such a bad choice of their curates, as Jeroboam
did of his priests, of the lowest of the people, which were not Levites, 1.
king. 12.31. that is, not instructed in the law of God: but to refuse (with
Job) to set such with the dogs of their flock, Job 30.1. not to commit the
oversight of their flock unto such. Ambrose to this purpose, thus writes to
the Bishop of Come: Comcusium iam plerique caeperunt credere ministerio tuo,
sed qui dedit credentes, and adiutores dabit, quo and tibi excusandi auferatur
necessitas, and mihi crebrior tuae praesentiae refundatur gratia. Most of the
people of Come have begun to believe by your ministry, but he that gave
them to believe, shall give unto you helpers, that the necessity of excuse may
be taken from you, and that I may oftener enjoy your presence. Epist. 5. It
should seem that this godly Bishop, being much desired by Ambrose, excused
himself, that he could not come, having none meet to supply his place at home:
and therefore Ambrose thus writes unto him.

3. They which are thus substituted in the Pastors absence, being as it were
his coadiutors and fellow helpers, should receive sufficient maintenance from
the flock: and not be shifted off with a tenth part or less, of the Pastors
stipend: the ordinary Gloss upon Gratian fitly to this purpose applies that
text in Moses, Deuteronomy. 23.25. that no man should put his sikle into an others
corn: haec messis nostra est, and vos vultis falcem in eam mittere: this is
our harvest (say they which instruct the people) and you, that take no pains,
will thrust in your sikle. Again, the Apostle says, They which wait on the
altar, must be partakers of the altar, 1. Cor. 9.13. nunquid de eo, cui non
serviunt? What, shall they then live of that altar, which they do not serve?
Gloss. in Gratian. cause. 13. qu. 2. can. 1. But of these digressions
sufficient, now I will return unto the text.

17. Quest. v. 29. Of David's words to his brother, Have I not business.
1. The Hebrew phrase is, is there not a word, or matter: for so the word dabar
is taken for both: which Vatablus expounds, as though he should say, they
were but his words, he had done nothing: but David would not so extenuate the
business, which he had in hand, or seem to call in that which he had said. 2.
Some give this sense: is it not a common brute in every ones mouth? what have I
done then more then other? Martyr. and the Chalde insinuates so much, reading
thus; is it not a word, which I have spoken? but David seems to take no
knowledge here of any such thing, which he had heard or said in the camp,
neither does Eliab object unto him that, but only finds fault with his
coming to the camp: wherein David goes about to satisfy him. 3. Others make
this the meaning: I have not spoken words only, but I will perform it in
deed, and so would read it without an interrogation: this is not a word, that
is, only: Pelican. but this had been to exasperate his elder brother more,
if he should before him have showed his purpose: whose anger David with a
peaceable and mild answer declineth. 4. Some do understand it of the word or
commandment of God, he came not of his own head, as David says afterward to
Goliath, I come unto thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, v. 45. Borr. but
David saw that his carnal brother was not fit, to have any such secret
concerning Gods counsel to be revealed unto him. 5. Wherefore, dabhar is
better here translated, matter, cause, or business: and so David excuses
himself because he came about his fathers business, and of his message. B.G.
Iun. Osiand. 6. But in that David gives place to his brothers wrath, and does
not answer him again, but goes away from him, it teaches us, not to add
fire to fire, rage to rage, but to give way, and to bear our brothers
infirmities: as S. Peter says, Not rendering evil for evil, nor rebuke for
rebuke. Martyr.

18. Quest. v. 34. Of David's confidence to go against Goliath, upon his former
experience of Gods assistance.
1. David uses three reasons to persuade Saul, that he should overcome the
Philistim: first, from his former experience, in that he had in the defense of
his flock slain a Lion and a bear: secondly, he builds upon Gods covenant,
he was circumcised, and so within Gods covenant and protection; the other was
uncircumcised, and so a stranger from the covenant: thirdly, from the sin
and blasphemy of Goliath, for the which the Lord would be revenged of him.
Martyr. 2. But whereas David having experience of two former deliverances out
of two great dangers, does adventure upon the third, this example is not
simply to be imitated by us, that we should in like manner animate our selves
by former experience, to enterprise things beyond our power: for David beside
his experience, had also the word of God for his warrant, both by the Prophet
Samuel, that he should be king of Israel, and by the secret instinct of the
spirit, which stirred him up to this action. Mart. There be two things
therefore which must concur, to make the argument of experience strong:
first, that we have a good cause, The argument of experience of Gods mercy, how
it does assure us.
as David here had, and that we are warranted by our calling, as David was,
being appointed to be the captain of the Lords people: herein the children of
Benjamin failed, who maintaining a bad cause, did flatter themselves because
they had twice overcome the Israelites, they should fall before them still,
Iud. 20.32. secondly, we must also have the warrant of Gods word, for our faith
must be built upon the word: this Sampson wanted, when he encouraged himself
in his former experience, when Dalilah had caused his locks to be clipped off,
that he would go out, as at other times, but he wanted the assistance of Gods
spirit, as before: the text says, he knew not that the Lord was departed from
him. Iud. 16.20. 3. Though therefore the argument of experience without the
inward motion of Gods spirit, does not warrant us for a particular deliverance,
as from the famine, the pestilence, the sword: yet generally it is a good
persuasion to build our confidence upon: that we are assured in general, that
God will keep us and deliver us, as he has done: as the Apostle says, Who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us: in whom we trust,
that yet hereafter he will deliver us, 2. Cor. 1.10. though always, without
some special assurance, we cannot resolve of every particular danger.

19. Quest. v. 36. Of David's words, This uncircumcised Philistim: whether
David's circumcision were a sufficient warrant unto him.
1. As David holds the Philistim to be without defense, being uncircumcised,
so he does encourage himself because he was circumcised, and so within Gods
covenant. Osiand. 2. But he looks not unto the bare circumcision: but as it
had relation unto the covenant: for otherwise there were many circumcised
carnally, that belonged not to the covenant, and many uncircumcised, which were
the servants of God: Mart. as appears in Job. 3. As circumcision then was a
mark and cognizance of Gods people, so is baptism now: as David's circumcision
did defend him from Goliath, so baptism does now shend us from Satan: Osiand.
but not the washing only of the flesh, but as it is a seal of the covenant of
grace in Christ: as S. Peter teaches, that baptism prefigured in the Arc of
Noah now saves us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but in that
a good conscience makes request unto God. 1. Pet. 3.21. It is faith then,
whereby being justified, we are at peace with God, Romans 5.1. which is sealed
and confirmed by baptism, which is the victory of the world, 1. Ioh. 5.4. and
consequently of Satan.

20. Quest. v. 37. Whether Saul did well in suffering David to go and fight
with Goliath.
1. Some think that Saul did rashly, having neither the word of God to warrant
him, nor the direction of the spirit, to suffer David being a young man to
encounter with such a puissant giant. Mar. 2. Osiander thinks, that he spoke
not this, ex fide vel pietate, sed ex consuetudine, of faith or piety, but of
custom. 3. I rather approve their judgment, which neither think that Saul
herein did rashly; neither that he spoke only of custom, but that he saw
evidently by the examples by David alleged, that God was with him: Genevens.
and so though not of faith, yet being convinced by the evidence of the fact,
and of a zeal to the people of Israel, as was said of him in an other case, 2.
Sam. 21.2. did encourage David to go on in this enterprise. Saul was not
ouerseene in admitting David to this combat: he had rather sinned, if he had
inhibited him to proceed in this exploit. If Saul had stayed David from going
forward, he had sinned: he sinned not therefore in giving him leave to
undertake this service: neither did Saul speak this to David, go, and the
Lord be with thee, of custom: but though himself were destitute of the spirit
of God, he does see the evident power thereof in David, and therefore so he
speaks unto him: this sudden change in Saul, being before unwilling, and
now very forward in this service, shows, that Saul saw now more, then he did
before, and spoke out of some judgment, though not from a true faith.

21. Quest. v. 38. Whether David put on Saul's armor.
1. They which translate, madav, his armor, think, that it was David's armor
made fit for him, which Saul had given him: because otherwise Saul's armor (who
was a very tall man, and David but a youth) was not meet for David. Iun. But
this is not like, that the armor was fit for David, because as he says, he
was never accustomed unto armor before: and upon the sudden it is not like, it
could be fitted to him. 2. Osiander thinks that this armor, was not that
which Saul used to wear himself, but it was brought out of his armorie or
storehouse: so also Martyr. But as c. 18.4. Jonathan is said to have given
David, madav, his attire, that is, which he did wear, so is it to be taken
here. 3. Others think, that David might be now well grown, that Saul's armor
might very near fit him: Pelican. but it is evident in this chapter that
David was but a very youth: as Saul calls him, v. 33. 4. Again, Pellicane
thinks, that in those days armor was not made so fit or apt for the body,
as it is now a days, and therefore a great man's armor might serve a less:
but, it had been to combersome for soldiers to wear armor not fit for their
bodies: for so it would rather have been an hindrance and impediment unto
them, then an help and furtherance. 5. Therefore I rather approve their
reading, that translate madav, vesture, or raiment, B.G.A.P.C. but it was not
Saul's ordinary raiment, but his soldiers attire: not the stiff armor, but
some other robes and ornaments, which might serve David's body, such as
Jonathan afterward bestowed upon David, c. 18.4. so Josephus thinks, that
Saul put upon him his own brigandine or brestplate: which might be of the
fashion of Goliaths, which was of male, kaskasim, like unto fishes skales:
which might very well serve for a less body then Saul's.

22. Quest. v. 39. How David says, he was not accustomed to wear armor,
seeing he was Saul's armor bearer.
1. If Iunius opinion and judgment be received, who thinks that David was
not received into Saul's service, nor made his armor bearer, till he had done
this exploit against Goliath, and so the history to be transposed: then the
solution of this doubt is easy, that it was no marvel, that David being
brought up among sheep, had never tried to go with armor: but herein I must
needs dissent from that reverent learned writer, as has been partly showed
before, qu. 7. and shall be further discussed toward the end of this chapter,
qu. 30. for immediately after this victory Saul hated David, and suffered him
no more to return, c. 18.2.8. but at the first entertainment of David, Saul
loved David, c. 16.21. and he returned again to his father. c. 17.15. 2.
Therefore the better answer is, that though David had been before appointed to
be Saul's armor bearer, yet it seems, that he had never gone with him to any
battle, before he returned to keep his fathers sheep, and so had no cause to
use any armor himself. Osiand.

23. Quest. v. 39. Why David put off Saul's armor and weapons.
1. David would have used them, if they had been meet for him, but perceiving
that they would be rather an impediment unto him, then an help, he lays them
aside: wherein appears Gods providence, that would not have David use any
external defense, that the glory of the victory might only redound unto
God. Martyr. 2. And further, as there was a difference between the spirits of
David and Saul, wherewith they were led, so also their armor was diverse,
Saul trusting to his helmet and brestplate, but David reposing his confidence
upon God. Borr. 3. Herein David was a figure of Christ, who not by outward
pomp and worldly power, but by spiritual weapons conquered Satan. Osiand. 4.
This example of David is no warrant to the fantastical opinion of the
Anabaptists, who do not think it lawful, for Christians, to wear any
armor, or to wage battles.

24. Quest. v. 40. Of David's weapons which he used.
1. David takes only his sling, and certain smoothe stones: for by such
means the Lord brings to pass mighty things: as Moses with his rod
brought waters out of the rock, Eliseus with salt healed the waters, Christ
with spittle cured the blind: that the glory and power of God might more
fully be made manifest in the blessing of so simple means. Mart. 2. These
weapons David uses, wherein it seems the Israelites exercised themselves,
having been forbidden by the Philistims the use of all iron weapons. Pelican.
3. He takes more then one, even five stones, that if at the first throw he
failed, he might cast the second, and so the third if need were. Osiand. 4.
The typical application of these five stones to the five books of Moses,
whereby Satan is vanquished, is somewhat far fetched, and therefore I will
not stand upon it. Pelican.

25. Quest. v. 42, 43. Of Goliaths approaching unto David, and of his speech.
1. Goliath dispiseth David for three things, because he saw he was a youth,
and wanted strength: fair and comely, and so effeminate without courage: and
beside he was unarmed, and not well weaponed. Mar. 2. He curses David by his
gods: as it is too common a thing with soldiers to begin their battle with
cursing: Osiand. even as the Papists do curse us with bell, book, and candle,
in the name of their gods and idols. Mar. 3. Goliath breaths nothing, but
inhumane and savage cruelty, to give the flesh of David to the birds of
heaven, and beasts of the field: wherein the Goliath of Rome imitateth him, in
suffering the bodies of the Saints and Martyrs to lie unburied, nay, which is
more, he raketh in their graves, and pulls out their bones. Mart. 4. But
Josephus is here deceived, and puts to the text, who imagines, that after
Goliath had said, Am I a dog, David made answer, Yea, worse then a dog:
and that Goliath was thereupon further incensed, and uttered those threatening
words: for it appears by the text, that Goliath first had made an end of
his speech, before David began to answer him.

26. Quest. Of David's answer to Goliath.
1. David is confident upon God, both acknowledging his power, he was the Lord
of hoasts, and had all creatures visible and invisible at his command, to be
revenged upon his enemies: as also he was assured, as of the power of God, so
of his ready help, who had entered into a league and covenant with his people,
and had in former times wrought wonderfully with them, and promised to be with
their armies. 2. And David confidently upon this ground, both of Gods power,
and gracious assistance, pronounces three things to fall out: that God will
deliver the Philistim into his hand: some do translate the word sagar, shall
close thee in my hand: A.V.S. but it rather signifies to deliver, as it is
taken, c. 23.11. Will the Lords of Keilah deliver me up into his hands? and so
read here Chal. Page Iun. Lat. secondly, he says he shall take off his head:
thirdly, he prophesies of the overthrow of the whole host of the Philistims,
that he will give their carkeises to the fowls of heaven. 3. Now David knew
that these things should fall out, partly by ordinary, partly by
extraordinary means: the ordinary were two, the badnesse of Goliaths cause,
who had railed upon the God of the host of Israel, and therefore God would not
suffer such blasphemy to go unpunished: and the end, that all the world
might know that the true God was worshipped in Israel: the extraordinary
means was the spirit of prophecy, which David was endued with, whereby he
could foretell of the manner of Goliaths destruction, and that he should take
away his head from him. sic fere Martyr.

27. Quest. v. 49. Of the victory of David, and the overthrow of Goliath.
1. Goliath at the first called David unto him, but being provoked by his
speech, he makes have toward him: then David speedily put a stone into his
sling, and hit him in the forehead, and overthrew him: wherein three things are
admirable: first, that David at the first throw could hit so uncertain a mark:
for Goliath stood not still, but was in motion: secondly, that with a small
stone he did ouerturne such an huge body: thirdly, that the same entering into
his forehead did slay him outright: Martyr. This was done by more then David's
skill, though he were expert in flinging, as it is said of the Beniamites,
that they could cast a stone at an hairs breadth, and not fail, Iud. 20.16.
for the Lord directed the stone, and gave such strength unto it: Pelican. it
light upon his forehead the place of sense: Borr. yea, it pierced into his
brain: Joseph. the word tabah, signifies to sink, as when a thing is drowned
in the water: so easily the stone entered, as into the water: Iun. and was all
hid in his forehead. 3. Thus it pleases God to use weak means, to confound
the strong: as Shamgar with an ox goad slew six hundred, and Sampson with the
iawbone of an ass, a thousand of the Philistims. 3. Some of the fathers, which
ascribed too much to the external sign of the Cross, give this note, that
Goliath was smitten in the forehead, Controv. Of the sign of the Cross.
because it was not fensed with the sign of the cross: to this purpose Ambr.
sermon. 88. But then the badge of their profession was not in the forehead, but
in their foreskinne: the Israelites were no more signed there, then the
uncircumcised Philistims: but herein Augustines judgment is to be preferred,
Sermon. 33. who speaking of signing with the Cross, says, Deus non delectatur
pictoribus, sed factoribus: that God is not delighted with painting of the
cross, but with doing: that is, believing in the cross, and living
thereafter. It was not then the barenes of Goliaths forehead, but the force of
David's faith, that obtained this conquest: as David is numbered among those that
by faith subdued kingdoms. Hebr. 11.32. sic fere Martyr. 4. Further, in that
David did cut off Goliaths head with his own sword, it shows that God does
oftentimes turn the enemies weapons upon themselves: as the arts and
disciplines which were invented by the heathen, the Christians use as helps to
convince them of blindness and ignorance: the Canons, decrees, testimonies of
the fathers, which the Papists stand upon, the Protestants apply against their
errors. ex Martyr. 5. And as David here cutteth off Goliaths head with his own
sword, so Christ does convince the wicked by the testimony of their own
conscience: as the Apostle says, Their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing one an other, or excusing, Romans 2.15. Borr.

28. Quest. v. 54. Of the carrying of Goliaths head to Jerusalem.
1. This David did not with ostentation to get praise to himself, but to
stir up the people by the sight of this monument, to give praise unto God:
Mar. neither did he care for the spoil of the enemy, as soldiers use of a
covetous mind to rifle those that are slain: but he contented himself with
these monuments of the adversary, that the praise of God might be set forth
thereby. Pellic. 2. Some take Jerusalem to be the same, that Nob was, where we
read that Goliaths sword was laid up, c. 21. but it is evident, Isa. 10.32.
that Nob and Jerusalem were two diverse places. 3. Josephus somewhat inuerteth
this narration: for he says, that David laid up Goliaths head in his tent, and
consecrated his sword unto God, lib. 6. c. 11. but the text says, that he
carried his head to Jerusalem, and laid up his armor in his tent. 4. But it
seems, that David presently did not carry Goliaths head to Jerusalem, but
afterward, when at the beginning of his reign, he removed the Arc to
Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 6. Iun. 5. But this laying up of Goliaths head in Jerusalem,
is no warrant for the Papists to reserve their relics and bodies of Saints,
and other their monuments: Contr. Against the laying up of relics.
for David did this by the warrant of Gods word, and the direction of his
spirit: again, this was peculiar only unto those times, when the people were
trained up also under other rudiments and ceremonies: as the Lord commanded the
Tables of stone, the pot of Manna, and Aarons rod to be kept, to be a monument
to the people of Israel: further, these things were then reserved to a far
diverse end, not to be adored and worshipped, but to be a memorial only to
the people of the Lords deliverance: but the Romanists do grossly yield
adoration to such things. Martyr.

29. Quest. v. 54. What tabernacle David laid up Goliaths armor in.
Whereas c. 21. mention is made of the sword of Goliath, which was laid up in
the Tabernacle before the Lord, this doubt arises how David is said to lay it
up with the other armor of Goliath in his own tabernacle. 1. Some think,
that he laid the^ up first in his tent, which he had in the camp: or in his
own house at Bethlehem: Vatab. and that afterward from his own tabernacle they
were carried to the Lords tabernacle: Osiand. but it is not like that David
coming as a stranger to the camp, had there any tent of his own: and to
Bethlehem he returned not, c. 18.2. 2. Some take this for the Tabernacle of
God, that Goliaths armor was at the first laid up there: Pelican. but it had
been improper to call Gods tent, David's tent. 3. Others therefore are of
opinion, that Goliaths armor and weapons were divided, that his armor was
kept in David's tent, but his sword was laid up in the Tabernacle of God:
Kimch. but the word celee comprehends generally as well his weapons and
armor, and therefore it is like, there being no special mention made of
Goliaths sword, that it was placed and laid up among the rest of his armor. 4.
Therefore the more likely opinion is, Reconcil.
that this is understood of that Tabernacle, which David prepared and pitched
for the Arc at Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 6.17. and 1. Chron. 15.1. which is called
his tabernacle, because he provided and prepared it for the Arc: here then a
prolepsis, that is, a preventing of the story, is to be admitted: David is
said to do that here, because it belongs to the argument of the same story,
which he did afterward, when he brought the Arc to Jerusalem: so the like,
Exodus 16.34. whereas Aaron is said to have placed the pot of Manna before the
Testimony, which was not yet made; neither did Aaron then place it there, but
afterward. sic Iun. In the mean time it is like, that the armor of Goliath
was laid up in the Tabernacle of the Lord at Nob, from whence David received
the sword of Goliath, c. 21. which afterward he put in the Tabernacle at
Jerusalem.

30. Quest. v. 55. How Saul could be ignorant of David, whom he had made his
harnesse-bearer before, asking, Whose son he was.
1. Iunius thinks, as is showed before, qu. 23. that David's encounter with
Goliath went before his first entertainme^t with Saul, and so his opinion is,
that this story is transposed: and that Saul had no knowledge of him before,
when he asked this question. But this interpretation can not stand: for these
reasons: 1. because it is said, c. 18.2. that Saul took David that day, and
would not let him return to his fathers house: immediately after this exploit
Saul kept him with him: but if David had first encountered with Goliath before
his entertainment with Saul, it had been untrue: for Saul sent to his father
for him, c, 16. Iunius answeareth, that this v. c. 18.2. is to be referred to
the story, c. 16. of Saul's sending unto Ishai for his son, and that day is
to be understood: and therefore he begins the 18. chap. at that verse. But
this construction seems very strange, after so long interruption and
breaking off, to refer that day, rather to the chapter precedent, then to the
verse precedent: where mention is made of the knitting of Ionathans heart to
David: especially seeing there is no particular mention made of any day, c.
16.19. when Saul sent for David. 2. After David's first entertainment Saul loved
him, c. 16.21. but immediately after this victory, when they returned in
triumph, and the women commended David beyond Saul, Saul thereupon was
exceeding wroth, and began to be jealous of David, c. 18.7, 8. Iunius
answeareth, that this meeting of the women playing and singing, was at some
other time, when Saul returned from vanquishing the Philistims, and not from
the slaughter of Goliath. But this can not be: for David is said to have
returned the^ from the slaughter of the Philistim, c. 18.6. which Iunius
translateth, Philistims in the plural, otherwise then in the original, to
avoid that objection: and when is it like else, that they should give the
pre-eminence to David, but immediately after the slaughter of Goliath, when yet
the memory thereof was fresh? 3. Presently after this triumph Saul being
afraid of David, put him from him, and made him captain over a thousand, c.
18.13. and he was no more his harnesse-bearer, but he set him over his men of
war, v. 5. but after his first entertainment he was his armor bearer:
therefore David's first service unto Saul, went before this combat with
Goliath. 4. David the morrow after the triumph (Saul being in his fit) is
said to have played with his hand like as at other times, c. 18, 10. but if
David had not been before entertained, he should not have used to play before
Saul at all. 5. We are not easily to admit such disorder and confusion in the
sacred stories, without great cause, and some apparent inconvenience and
absurdity, which can not be avoided, without such dislocation of the story:
but no such thing is feared here: therefore upon these reasons, I can no ways
give assent unto Iunius in this place.

Therefore holding the order of the story to have been so done in time, as it
is set down: there are diverse solutions of this doubt: how Saul could possibly
be so ignorant of David, by whom he had received such comfort in his agonies
and fitts. 1. Some think, that Saul knew David, but not who his father was:
but that is not so: for he had sent to Ishai by name for his son, c. 16.19.
2. Others suppose, that he knew his fathers name, but now enquireth of his
tribe and family: but Saul knew that before also, it was told him before, that
Ishai his father was a Bethlemite. c. 16.18. 3. Kimchi thinks that he
enquireth after the quality and condition of his father, whether he were a
warlike man, having such a valiant son: but the text shows, that he asked
simply whose son he was, not what manner of man his father was. 4. Some
ascribe this forgetfulness of Saul to the multitude of affairs, wherewith Kings
are occupied, and so grow obliuious, Vatab. some to the absence and
discontinuance of David, who was now again reduced to his pastoral life,
Osiand. But it is most like that this is to be imputed to Saul's distempered
brain, that was oftentimes molested with mad and frantike fitts, and such
persons, as we see by experience grow so obliuious, that for the time they
forget their nearest acquaintance and friends: and for Abner, it is no marvel,
that he being a martial man, and having occasion often to be abroad, took no
such special notice of David. Mart. Pellic. Any of these, especially the last,
may be rather held to be the causes of Saul's forgetfulness and oblivion, then to
imagine the story to be transposed.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the friendship between Jonathan and David.
THree things are expressed in this verse, the occasion of this love and
friendship, the firmness of it, Ionathans soul was knit with the soul of
David; the faithfulness of it, A description of true friendship.
he loved him as his own soul: which three are requisite in true friendship.
1. The occasion was general, the virtue and value of David, and the great
grace which was in him, both in his doings, and sayings, and the particular
similitude and likeness in them of religion, love of their country, valor: for
both of them, Jonathan c. 14. and David here, had adventured their lives in the
defense of Gods people. There are three things, which engender friendship;
profit, pleasure, virtue: the first two do not beget true friendship, for as
soon as the profit or pleasure cease, friendship is gone: but virtue only
makes love and friendship to continue. ex Mart. 2. Therefore Ionathans
friendship being grounded upon David's virtue, remains firm, and continues,
their hearts were, as it were, tied and linked together: nothing but death
could separate that mutual love: nay, after Ionathans death, David remembered
the league between them made, in showing mercy unto Ionathans posterity: now
whereas two things are required in friendship, as Aristotle shows in his
Ethics, that it should be mutual, of one toward the other, which is the
difference between love and friendship: for one may love, where he is not
loved again: but friendship always reboundeth the like good will again: the
other thing is, that this mutual love be made apparent and professed between
them: for there may be secret good will, and inclination of affection between
two, but before it be professed and protested between them, it is not properly
friendship: both these concurred in this friendship: for Jonathan loved David,
and was beloved again: and they professed this friendship by making a mutual
league. 3. Then the third thing follows observed in this love, that is, the
force and efficacy of it: Jonathan loved David as his own soul, that is,
wished as well unto him, as to himself: he loved him, not that he expected
good from him, but to have one, whom he might do good unto. Therefore Seneca
epist. 9. ad Lucil. does worthily reprove Epicurus description of a friend:
that a man might have one, to help him when he had need, to sit by him when
he was sick, etc. and he well says, long suavior est amicitia, quae prodest
alteri, quam quae invatur ab alio: that friendship is sweetest, which helps
an other, rather then is helped of an other: so here Jonathan loves David for
his own sake, that he might show love and kindness unto him. Aristotle in part
defines friendship well: been velle alicui, non tua, sed ipsius causa, to wish
well unto a man, for his cause, not thine own: as here Jonathan wishes well
to David. But this is not all, yet there is a further thing to be considered:
that a friend is not to be loved for his own good, but propter deum, for Gods
cause: ex Martyr. for God was the worker of this friendship between Jonathan
and David: that he neglecting his own estate, and the hope of the kingdom,
and with the evil will also of his father, yet favored David: Pellic. wherein
Gods provident care appeared toward David, that he might have a friend in Saul's
court, to reveal his counsels and intendements from time to time against
David. Borr.

2. Quest. v. 1. Whether there be not degrees of love notwithstanding that
precept, that we should love our neighbor as our self.
1. Some think, that as Jonathan is here said to love David as his own soul,
that is, as himself, so we are bound by the commandment every one to love his
neighbor: because it is said, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
Osiand. but this precept does not take away the degrees of love: for then their
should be no special friendship among Christians: the precept then is to be
understood, not of the quantity of love, that we should love every one that is
our neighbor, in that degree and measure of love, which we love our selves:
for that were unnatural, for a man not to prefer himself before an other:
but of the quality and condition of love: that we must love our neighbor with
the same simplicity and true affection, wishing him no more hurt, then to our
selves. 2. But that there is even in Christianity a difference of love, and
that a special and peculiar friendship with one more then with an other, may
stand with religion, it may be thus showed: our Savior Christ himself whose
affections were most pure, did love one of the Apostles beyond the rest: John
is called the Apostle in the Gospel, whom Jesus loved: further, S. Paul says,
that men should first learn to show godliness to their own house, and he
says, that it is an honest thing, and acceptable before God, 1. Tim. 5.4.
there are degrees then in showing of our love: first, we are bound to those, to
whom nature has made us near, if their evil conditions do not disparage
the nearenes of their blood: if natural love has such pre-eminence, even so
also moral civil love, which is grounded upon virtue, may admit degrees.

3. Quest. v. 8. Of Saul's hatred toward David.
1. Saul is given over to be tormented of his own affections: at once he is
invaded with anger, fear, and envy, which brings forth hatred at the last:
first, he is angry with the women without cause: for they had ascribed unto
David no more then he deserved, for in killing Goliath, he had done as great
service as ten thousand could have done: and they gave unto Saul more then he
deserved, as Chrysostom shows, homil. de Davide and Saul: for Saul had
continued 40. days in the camp, suffering the Philistim to make his vaunts,
and did nothing; yet least they should seem altogether to disgrace Saul, they
say Saul has slain his thousand. Next unto his anger follows his fear: he
begins to be jealous of his kingdom, saying, What can he have more, saving
the kingdom? then he falls to envy David, and to be suspicious of him: he
had an eye unto David, from that day forward, v. 9. and last of all he hates
him, and deuiseth mischief against him. Martyr.

2. This envy which Saul bare unto David, Of the nature of envy.
brought these enormities with it: first, he therein opposed himself against
the will and counsel of God, who had determined and set it down, that David
should be King: David did not so, who being driven out of Jerusalem by his
son, does meekely submit himself to the Lords pleasure, saying, If he say
thus unto me, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am, let him do to me
as seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.26. Secondly, Saul is violently carried
with this stream of envy to hate David's virtues, even that, for the which
David was worthy to be loved. Thirdly, this envy tended unto Saul's own hurt,
it was as a fire in his bosom, and as a worm continually gnawing upon him,
not suffering him to have any rest: so envy is a sin against God, against
man, and most of all the envious person sins against his own soul. Borr.

4. Quest. v. 10. How Saul is said to have prophesied.
1. Some do interpret, that he was mad, Chal. but to play the Prophet simply
is not to be mad. 2. Some think he is said to prophecy, because he spoke in
his fitts he knew not what, he uttered strange words and phrases, far from
the capacity of other, as the Prophets uttered parables: as Avicenna notes,
that mad men in their fitts many times utter strange languages and words,
which they never learned, nor understood. Mart. 3. Some take it to be spoken
according to the opinion of the vulgar sort, who when men prophesied, thought
they were mad, as Iehu his companions called the young man, which Elisha sent
to anoint Iehu king, mad fellow, 1. king. 9. and those which were mad, they
thought did prophecy. Mart. 4. Some think that Saul here uttered sacred
psalms and hymns, as the two Prophets used to do: Osiand. but Saul's manner
of prophesying here, and that c. 10. and 19. when he prophesied among the
Prophets, was not all one: for there he did as the other Prophets, the spirit
of God coming upon him: but here the evil spirit vexed him. 5. Therefore, the
meaning is no more but this, that Saul was ravished as a man beside himself:
his speech for manner (though not for the matter) was strange, and his
behavior outwardly was such, as when the Prophets were stirred by the spirit
of God. Iun. Borr.

5. Quest. v. 11. Of David's escaping, when Saul east the spear at him.
1. Where it is expressed, that Saul said, (namely within himself, that is,
thought) as the word is taken often in the new Testament: as the Scribes and
Pharisees said within themselves, that is, thought: Borr. it appears, that
though Saul's head were troubled, yet he was not stark mad, but that he knew
what he did: some think, that as men in their sleep do dream of those
things, which they thought when they were awake, so mad men have relics of
their former evil thoughts remaining: but here Saul said, that is, thought
thus and reasoned within himself: he was not then altogether deprived of
reason: but we see the fruits of this his madd prophesying, as the spirit
wherewith he was moved, was a murderer from the beginning, so Saul intends
nothing but murder and mischeife. 2. Gods providence appears in delivering
David: that as God directed the stone out of David's sling to hitte Goliath, so
he guides the spear out of Saul's hand, that it did not touch David: though he
by Gods direction used the means also in declining the stroke. Martyr. 3.
Herein David was a type of Christ, who as David here by his sweet music
would have allaied Saul's madness, so by the sweet voice of his preaching sought
to cure the Scribes and Pharisees of their spiritual madness, and oftentimes
escaped their snares which they laid for him. Mart. 4. Beside it has this
moral use, that it is lawful for us, to decline and avoid violence and
danger intended, as David did twice at this instant, but not to offer violence
and revenge again. Osiand.

6. Quest. v. 13. Why Saul set David over his men of war.
1. Some think, that whereas Saul had set David before over all his men of
war, v. 5. he now to disgrace him, makes him but captain over a thousand:
but neither was David set over all the men of war, for that place Abner had:
Pelican. and that setting David over the men of war, is the same here
mentioned: for when Saul put David from him, he made him captain of a
thousand, and then he set him over his men of war: so Josephus says, ex
satellite tribunum fecit: of his harnesse-bearer, or one of his guard, he made
him a tribune or captain.

2. This Saul did, partly to provide for his own security, when David was
furthest from him, Joseph. partly to object and expose David unto danger, that
he might fall by his enemies, whom he did fight against. Mart.

7. Quest. v. 17. Of Saul's breaking promise with David concerning his eldest
daughter.
1. Saul's daughter was already by Saul's promise to be given unto David for
vanquishing of Goliath, Pelican. as Saul broke his promise before, so he does
again: for his eldest daughter was given to an other. 2. This marriage was
pretended to be an occasion of further danger unto David, for Saul does
condition with him to fight the Lords battles, pretending religion, where he
intended mischeife, that David might be overthrown in battle: marriage was
ordained for mutual help and comfort: but there is nothing of so good
institution, which is not perverted and abused by the hypocrites and wicked.
Mart. 3. Saul would have the matter so carried, as that he might be without all
suspicion, his hand should not be upon him: not so much to avoid sedition
among the people, or as Kimchi thinks, least he might afterward have been
brought into question of murder: but he pretends love, purposing mischeife,
that David might be the sooner overtaken, suspecting nothing: as then
hypocrites are most dangerous, when they make the fairest shows. Domitiane the
Emperor, to whom he intended the most mischeife, he would speak the fairest
unto: and Herod would have word returned concerning the child borne king of
the Jews, that he might go and worship, thinking indeed to murder the
infant. Martyr.

8. Quest. v. 18. Whether David dissembled, when he excused himself, saying,
Who am I, etc.
Seeing David was both anointed by Samuel to be king of Israel, and beside by
the vanquishing of Goliath, had made himself worthy to marry the kings
daughter, as Saul had proclaimed and promised: how could David so much abase
himself, as not meet for such a marriage? To this it is answered, that David
did not look unto that favor and grace, which the Lord had vouchsafed him, in
electing him to be king; but partly he considers the great dignity, which
was now offered him, partly his own tenuitie and mean parentage, and so in
respect of himself, without any dissimulation, he confesses himself unmeet
and unworthy: and this lowly and humble mind he still carried toward Saul: as
Saul at the first, when he was of a better spirit, did also excuse himself,
when he was first anointed by Samuel to be king. Mart.

9. Quest. v. 21. Of the meaning of these words, By the other thou shall
contract affinity with me.
1. Some read, for two things thou shall be my son in law: Lat. which some
expound, because David had either twice brought unto Saul the foreskinnes of
the Philistims, or he had brought him two hundred, whereas Saul required but
one: but as yet Saul had made no mention of any such condition. 2. Therefore it
is to be referred unto Saul's two daughters: which some interpret thus; that
whereas the Hebrew phrase is, in two, thou shall have affinity with me, they
understand one, as Kimchi, or, the other: that is, in one of the twain: but
then it should have been indifferent for David to take either of them, which
now could not be, the indifferency being taken away by the marriage of the
eldest already. 3. Therefore by two, is here meant the second, the cardinal
number, taken for the ordinal: as 2. king. 15.32. in the two year, for the
second: so here Saul means that by the twain, that is, the second of his
daughters, David should become his son in law. Iun. 4. Most do here read,
gener eris, thou shall be my son in law: but the word chatam signifies
generally to contract or join in affinity: Page Iun. as the construction of
the word shows with the preposition beth, with: by, with me: the sense rather
gives, thou shall contract affinity with me: then be a son in law-with me.

10. Quest. v. 25. Of these words, The King requires no dowry: of the use and
custom of giving of dowries.
1. Peter Martyr here observes, that in David's time, and before the law the
use was, not for men to take dowries and portions with their wives, but rather
to give unto them: and under the law he thinks it was the use for the women
to give their dowries: and he cites that place, Exodus 22.16, 17. where the law
is this, If a man entise a maid that is not betroathed, and lie with her, he
shall endow her, and take her to his wife: if her father refuse to give her
unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins: out of this
place he seems to infer, that dowries were used to be given with virgins.
But the contrary is evident by these words: the former verse is clear, that
he which lies with a maid not betroathed, shall endow her: and in case the
father of the maid will not consent, then not the father, but the other shall
notwithstanding give the dowry of virgins unto the maids father, as it
appears Deuteronomy. 22.29. for if the law had been for virgins to give and not
take dowries, they would not in practice have gone against the law. And whereas
the example of Pharaoh is objected, that gave in marriage with his daughter the
city of Gezer unto Solomon, 1. king. 9.16. it may be answered that Solomon had
married Pharaohs daughter long before that, c. 3.1. but dowries were used to be
given before marriage: neither is it called a dowry, which the Hebrews call
mohar, but it was shilluchim, a thing sent, or present: and beside Pharaoh was
a stranger to Israel, and therefore not tied unto their laws.

2. The use then was both before the law, and after, for men to endowe their
wives before marriage: so Abraham's servant gave tokens and jewels unto
Rebekah, but received none: Iaakob served 14. years for his wives: Shechem
says unto Iaakob, and his sons, Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will
give whatsoever you appoint me. Genesis 34.11.

3. Now the order concerning dowries was this: the man gave a dowry before
marriage to his wife, which was at her disposing, if her husband died, for her
maintenance, or for the education of the children: and such dowries were given
before marriage, after they could not be given, whereof Plutark gives this
reason, in quaestionibus connubialibus, because then the man and wife were as
one, and they occupied their good in common, they could not one give to an
other. ex Mart.

4. But whereas it was thus decreed in the Council of Arles, c. 16. Nullum
sine dote fiat coniugium: that no marriage should be made without some dowry:
which seems by the sequel to have been provided, to cut off clandestine,
that is, secret and stolen marriages: I see no cause why this canon should be
misliked, as Pet. Mart. takes exception to it: for it enioyneth not that
always the dowry should be of the woman's part: but in general, that there
should be solemn dowry given, which I understand rather to be in the man's
behalf: that by this means, in the solemn conueyance of such dowries, which
could not be done without witnesses, notice might be taken of such marriage: and
so privy and secret contracts prevented. Now because many poor couples meet
together, that have little one to endow an other with; the canon provides for
that: iuxta possibilitatem fiat d^s, that the dowry should be according to
their ability: there is no man so poor, but is able to endow his wife with
somewhat: answerable to this constitution, is the commendable order of our
Church observed in marriage, with all my worldly goods I thee endow. This
ancient custom of endowing the wives, reprooueth the covetous practice of
this age, which respects more in marriage, what the woman has, then what she
is: whereas, as Olympius well observed, non digitis, sed auribus and oculis
ducenda est vxor: a wife must be married not by the fingers, but by the eyes and
ears.

11. Quest. v. 27. Of Saul's demand, and David's bringing of the foreskinnes.
1. Saul for two reasons required this condition of David, both to bring him
into danger, that he might perish by the hand of the Philistims, and to
exasperate the minds of the Philistims against him, by whom they were so
cruelly handled: for David either circumcised them alive, or cut off their
foreskinnes when they were dead, and brought them unto Saul. Mar. 2. Josephus
mistaketh the story, for where as Saul required but an hundredth, he makes
mention of six hundredth: and he says David cut off so many heads of the
Philistims, not foreskinnes. 3. David shows his readiness in this service, for
both he brings the double number of that which was required, two hundred for
one, and he does it in a shorter time, then was set him. Pelican. 4. But
herein Saul's hypocrisy shows it self, who being himself of an
uncircumcised heart, pretends enmity against those which were uncircumcised
in the flesh, but indeed he hates most of all David, that was circumcised
both in the flesh, and in the heart.

12. Quest. v. 27. Whether it were lawful for David to cut off the foreskinnes
of the Philistims.
1. First, the private reasons, which moved David to condescend to this
condition were these two; his desire to have Michal for his wife, whom seeing
her to love him, he loved again, and that by this occasion he might cut off
the enemies of God, and of Israel. 2. The lawfulnes of this enterprise
appears, both in respect of the commander, which was Saul the king the chief
Magistrate, by whose authority wars must be taken in hand: and the person of
the enemies considered, who were professed enemies to the people of God,
continually vexing and molesting them. Mart. David also might consider his own
calling, who was anointed king, and appointed to be the captain and deliverer
of his people. 3. Thus through Gods goodness all things fall out contrary to
Saul's expectation: he thought to make his daughter a snare unto him, who
afterward was a mean to deliver him: and he exposes David to the rage of the
Philistims, thinking thereby to make an hand of him; whereas by the just
judgment of God Saul fell into the hand of the Philistims, but David escaped:
nay, he was preserved in their country from Saul. Mart.

13. Quest. v. 30. Of David's prosperous success against the Philistims.
1. Whereas it is said, when the powers of the Philistims went forth, etc. the
Rabbis think, that they took occasion to invade Israel, understanding of
David's marriage: for they were not ignorant of that law among the Hebrews, that
they were not to go war, the first year of their marriage: but this is an
uncertain conjecture, no such thing being expressed in the text, whether this
thing happened in the first year of David's marriage: Mart. it seems, rather
that the Philistims were provoked, and exasperated by David's hard usage of
them, in cutting off their foreskinnes. 2. Now it is said, that David
prospered in all his enterprises, as read the Chal. and Iun. the most read, he
was of more understanding, or behaved himself more wisely: the word sachal
indeed signifies both: but the first is fitter here, as before v. 5. and v.
19. David prospered in all his ways, because Jehovah was with him: they
indeed which have prosperous success, are prudent also in their business,
but they which are wise and prudent, do not always prosper: as Achitophels
wise and politic counsel against David prospered not: therefore because it is
said, that David's name grew into great price and estimation, it shows, that
his success was very prosperous, which made him famous.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Quest. v. 2. Whether Jonathan did evil, in bewraying his fathers counsel
to David.
1. Jonathan herein did not forget his duty toward Saul, either as his father,
or as king: for he knew, that God was rather to be obeyed then man: God had
commanded, Thou shall not kill: Saul bids him kill: Ionathans resolution was
herein godly, not to obey the cruel commandment of his father. Mar. 2. Nay,
herein he shows his faithfulness unto his father, in keeping of him from this
great wickedness in shedding of blood: Pelican. and further in persuading and
counselling Saul, not to be so hard against David, as afterward it follows.
Mar. 3. Wherein appears great difference between an unfeigned and a
dissembling friend: all the rest of Saul's servants seemed to honor and favor
David: but now when they saw that Saul's mind was fully bent against him, they
all held their peace, and seem to give consent: but only Jonathan, leaves not
his friend, who had less reason, in respect of the succession of the kingdom,
then any of them, to favor David. Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 6. Of Ionathans persuasion to Saul in David's behalf.
1. Jonathan deals with his father for David, urging specially these three
reasons: the first ab honesto, it was no credit or honesty for Saul to
persecute an innocent and harmless man, that had not offended him, nor sinned
against him: secondly ab vtili, because David was for his profit, and for the
defense of the people: he had done many worthy exploits in saving and
delivering Israel: thirdly, from Saul's own testimony, who had formerly
approved David's service, and commended it. 2. Saul by these persuasions was
moved, and swear that David should not die: but afterward contrary to his
faith and oath, he sought David's life: much like herein are the Romanists, who
have broken their promises and oaths, made unto Protestants: witness their
proceeding against Hus and Hierome of Prage, contrary to the Emperors safe
conduct: and the horrible massacre in France: for their position is, fides non
est servanda haereticis, that faith is not to be kept with heretics. Martyr.
The word of a Prince should be as the law of the Medes and Persians, not to
alter: how much more should their oath be firm? This careless keeping of
Saul's oath, did turn in the end to his own ruin and overthrow.

3. Quest. v. 13. Whence Michal had the image which she laid in the bed in
stead of David.
1. Some think, that the word teraphim here used, which signifies Idols or
images, is taken in Scripture sometime in the worse sense, for an idol abused
to superstition; sometime for any picture resembling man: Vatabl. and that this
image might be either some implement in the house thrown into a corner and
neglected, or such a mammet, as they make of clouts and rags to keep gardens
and orchards, commonly called skare-crowes. Mart. Pelican. But neither had
Michal any time to make such a mammet, this device being of the sudden, as
women's wit is present, and if it had been such, though it skareth crows, it
could not have carried such a lively shape to deceive men: it seems then to
have been some lively representation of a man, seeing that Michal thrusts
under the head thereof a pillow of goats skin with the hair, as the Latin
interpreter well interprets, pellem pilosarum caprarum, the hairie skin of
a goat: that it being put to the head of the image, might resemble a man's
hair: beside, to what end should such an image be kept in the house, and laid
aside being of no use? And further, I think, it cannot be showed that
teraphim is otherwise taken in the Scripture, then in the wurse part, for an
image or idol of superstition: as c. 15.23. to transgress is as superstition
and idols, the word is (teraphim) The same name is given to the images, which
Rachel stole from her father. 2. Josephus takes it not to have been an image,
but the heart of a goat, which lay panting under the clothes: but beside that
this is contrary to the text: so small a thing, could not be taken for the
body of a man. 3. Therefore the more probable opinion is, that this teraphim
was some superstitious relic, which Michal used secretly, without David's
priuitie, as Rachel kept hers, Iaakob not knowing, and others in his house, as
appears, Genesis 35.2, 4. Mercer. ibid. for though Saul were an enemy to
idolatry, and so Michal learned no such thing from him; yet she might else
where see such superstition: as there were witches in Israel, though Saul
publicly did inhibite them: thus both the Lat. and Chald. here read
simulachrum, but more evidently the Sept. (...), vain images: all which think
it was a superstitious image: which seems the more likely, because Michal
showed her self afterward a skorner and derider of zeal and religion in
David. 2. Sam. 6. Contr. Against the adoration or toleration of Images.
But this example no more serves either the Papists turn for the adoration,
or the Lutherans, for toleration of images, then the like president in Rachel:
whose images together with the rest Iaakob buried under an oak, Genesis 35.4. See
more of teraphim, Hexapl. Genesis c. 31. qu. 6.

4. Quest. v. 17. Of Michals excuse unto Saul, that David threatened to kill her.
1. In some things Michal is to be commended, in seeking to deliver David from
danger, and in preserving his life: therein showing the near conjunction
between man and wife, preferring her husbands safety, before the displeasure
of her father, according to the first institution: for this cause shall a man
leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, Genesis 2. and so the wife is to
cleave to her husband. Mart. 2. In some things Michal is to be excused: as in
using such means whereby to keep Saul's messengers in suspense, and in
protracting of time, that her husband might escape: as in pretending he was
sick, in laying in an image into the bed: in these things she is to be
excused: these pretenses tending to no hurt to any, but rather proceeding from
matrimonial love and duty. Pelican. 3. But in some things, she neither
deserves commendation, nor yet can be excused: as in laying such an imputation
upon her husband, as though he threatened to kill her: for she here three ways
offended: 1. in telling an untruth: 2. in raising a slander upon David, which
might breed a great offense and scandal: 3. in her fear and timorousness,
which was the cause of all this: wherein she should rather have imitated
Jonathan, to have spoken boldly to her father, even to his face in the defense
of her husbands innocence. It is written of Dyonisius the tyrant, who gave his
sister in marriage to one Polixenus, that when he being accused of treason,
was fled into Italy, the tyrant expostulated with his sister, why she did not
give notice unto him of his flying: then she made this confident answer, An
ita me degenerem putas, vt si scissem virum fugiturum, non fuissem vna
fugitura: Do you think me so undutiful and out of kind, that if I had known
my husband would have fled away, that I would not have fled away with him.
Michal herein came short of the example of this heathen woman. Mart.

5. Quest. v. 18. Whether Samuel did well in receiving David, whom the king
pursued as his enemy.
1. Such as are indeed traitors to the King and state, and do maliciously
practice or conspire against either, are not to be rescued and succored: for
such are worthily by the laws of all nations held to be no better then
traitors themselves, that shall give entertainment unto such: unless it be
with such an intent as Iael received Sifera, (not in that particular to lay
hand of them) but in general to deliver such persons up unto the state. 2. But
there is an other reason, and respect of those, which are without cause held to
be traitors: which neither are enemies to God, nor the King: as David bare no
malice unto Saul, nor intended any mischief against him, but suffered him to
escape out of his hands, when he might have killed him: Samuel therefore
understanding of David's innocence, and of Saul's unjust vexation of him,
doubts not to receive him. So Rahab gave entertainment to the spies, hid
them, when they were searched for, and preserved their lives: so Jonathan and
Ahimaaz were hid, which were sent as messengers unto David. 2. Sam. 17.19. And
now in many places Protestants and true professors are held as heretics unto
the state, who notwithstanding such cruel edicts, and unjust sentence, are to
be relieved and succored. Martyr.

6. Quest. v. 18. Of Naioth, whether Samuel brought David.
1. This Naioth, which is said to be Ramah Samuels city, was not far from
Ramah situate in the fields or territory thereof: Vatabl. the word properly
signifies, a solitary place in the pastures and fields, where the school of
the Prophets was: which was fittest for study and meditation: thither Samuel
takes David, that they might be more safe from Saul's violence, and that David
might find comfort in the exercise and meditation of the Scriptures. Pelican.
2. In this place there was a company of Prophets, and Samuel was chief over
them, being their instructor and teacher, and therefore else where they are
called the children of the Prophets: for though prophecy be the special gift,
and work of the spirit, yet it was fit that they which afterward should be
employed in the service of God, as it is like, that these were most of Leui,
should be prepared by godly instruction and education, for the further work of
the spirit in them. 3. Thus Samuel though he had given over the public
government of the Commonwealth, yet exercised himself in his prophetical
office still: not living to himself, as Sylla did, when he had resigned the
Dictatourship, nor following his pleasure, as Diocletian, after he had given
over the Imperial government. 4. Thus we see that the noble foundation of
Universities, and schools of learning, is grounded upon the example of the
Prophets: and so of ancient time it has been practiced, that in the chief
cities, there should be common schools and profession of learning, as at
Alexandria, and Antioch, many famous men taught publicly, as Pantenus,
Origene, Clemens. Mar. 5. But much unlike to this institution, Contr. Of the
unlawfulness of Monastical life.
were the celles and cloisters of Monks: for these were brought up in true
religion and worship of God, but the other professed idolatry, used invocation
of the dead, builded upon man's works, merits, and satisfaction: the scholars
of the Prophets were exercised in profitable studies, most of those Monasteries
were shoppes of epicurisme and idleness: they were trained up, to be afterward
employed in the service of God: these made Monkerie the end of their
profession, to live in cloisters all the days of their life, not suffering
themselves willingly to be drawn out of their celles.

7. Quest. v. 20. Of Saul's violence offered to the college of the Prophets,
and of the privilege of Sanctuaries.
1. Saul shows his cruel and bloody mind, in that he sends to take David
even from Samuels presence, and the College of the Prophets, (which was safe
even among their enemies the Philistims, c. 10.5.) yea, and if they refused, to
put them to the sword also, as is most like, as he did the priests of Nob: thus
neither reuerencing the place, nor the persons. Martyr. 2. Now concerning
Sanctuaries and privileged places: though they belonged specially to the
policy of the Commonwealth of the Israelites, having also some figurative
ceremony in it, as it may appear by that law, of the remaining of the
manslayer in the city of refuge till the death of the high Priest, who herein
was a type of Christ, Numb. 35.28. yet according to that president, it is
lawful that, for reverence unto the exercises of religion, and of Gods
worship, such places, as are consecrate to that end, should enjoy some
immunities, and privileges: as is still commendably practiced in this our
nation, that the Kings writ should not be served in Churches and places of
prayer, at the least no violent hands to be laid upon any in Church or
Churchyard. 3. But this gives no patronage to the unreasonable privileges,
which in time past were challenged unto Sanctuaries: by occasion of which
superstitious immunities, many foul and shameful enormities were committed:
And Popish Sanctuaries failed in all these respects: 1. in the number of them,
they were exceeding many: every Monastery lightly was a Sanctuary, whereas in
all the land of Israel, there were but six appointed for the whole nation. 2.
whereas the Sanctuaries and cities of refuge were appointed for inuoluntarie
and the smaller offenses, for those which trespassed not of malice, as they
which killed any by chance without any malice: yet they opened their
Sanctuaries to wicked persons, guilty of wilful murder, and other most
grievous crimes: whereas by the law of God, it was lawful to take such even
from the altar, Contr. Of the abuses of Sanctuaries and privileged places in
times past.
as Solomon commanded Ioab to be slain laying hold on the horns of the
altar. 3. the man which fled to the city of refuge, lost his privilege if he
were found without the borders of the city, Numb. 35. v. 26. but their
Sanctuarie-men they would take and rescue from the place of judgment, to
restore them to their Sanctuary. 4. the cities of refuge did not cut off the
Magistrates authority and power: nay, the Magistrate in the assembly or
congregation, was to judge, whether he were to be sent to the city of refuge
or no, that was pursued for blood, Numb. 35.25. so that the immunitie of the
cities of refuge, did not any way hinder the authority of the Magistrate: but
they in their Sanctuaries kept men, and defended them against the Magistrate
from the ordinary process of law. Therefore they abused such privileges and
fraunchises, and for these causes were worthily deprived of them.

8. Quest. v. 20. How Saul's messengers, whom he sent to take David,
prophesied: and of their sudden change.
1. Here the power of God mightily appeared, in changing of a sudden the
hearts of these messengers, who came with a full intent to apprehend David, and
to take him by strong hand: we read in Scripture of three kind of such
innovation and changes: some were suddenly stricken with Gods judgments, and
so stayed in their enterprise, as two captains with their fifties, that were
sent by the King to take Eliah, which were destroyed with fire from heaven: 2.
king. 1. some, though they escaped such sudden judgment, Of sudden changes
and innouations of men's hearts.
yet were astonished, and their affections changed: as the third captain
which was sent to Eliah submitted himself, and besought the Prophet for his
life, though he came with an intent to lay violent hands upon the Prophet, as
the other did: so the messengers whom the Pharisees sent to apprehend Christ,
had no power to do any thing unto him, but returned without him. Ioh. 7.46. A
third sort there is, which beside such sudden astonishment, have presently
been ravished with extraordinary motions of the spirit, as Saul of a
persecuter was suddenly turned to be an Apostle and preacher of the Gospel: as
also in this place, the messengers of Saul prophesied. 2. Such sudden
chaunges, though they are rare and not often seen, yet the Lord to show the
power of his spirit, shows sometime such examples in the world: the Ninevites
were presently reclaimed at the preaching of Jonas, so were many in the city
of Athens, by the holy labors of the Apostle Paul: Augustine was converted
from being a Manichee by hearing of Ambrose sermons, lib. 6. confess. c. 3. M.
Latimer used to go and hear M. Stafford his godly lectures to scoff at him,
but he was caught in a golden net, and began to savor the truth: yea, humane
persuasions have wrought present effects: as drunken Polemo went to deride
grave Xenocrates, with his garlands and other youthful ornaments, but before
he came away, he pulled off his garland, and became himself one of Xenocrates
scholars: much more effectual is the spirit of God, to work upon the heart of
man. God usually in these days turns not men's hearts on the sudden, that
there should be continual exercise of the preaching of his word, and of the
labor and diligence of those which hear unto their edifying. 3. These
messengers of Saul, when they saw the rest to prophecy, in singing of Psalms
and hymns unto God, they joined with them in that exercise: for like as the
load stone draws iron unto it, so spiritual exercises are able to affect the
hearts and affections of others. Mart.

9. Quest. v. 23. Of Saul's sudden prophesying.
1. When Saul had sent messengers thrice, and none of them returned: being
there detained, not for fear, as the messengers which Ioram sent to meet
Iehu, whom he commanded to turn behind him, but with reverence unto the
Prophets, and with a spiritual delight for the time in their godly exercises:
Mar. then he follows himself, not of any devotion, but of a malicious and
hateful mind to lay violent hands: Pellic. even he himself also by the way
is changed, wherein by experience is found true that saying of the wise man,
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, Prove. 24.1. 2. There is great
difference between Saul's prophesying at this time, and of his servants: and a
greater change in him, then in them: for first he was vexed and invaded by an
evil spirit before, so were not they: then he prophesies in the way before he
came to Samuel, so did not they until they came to Samuel, and the company of
Prophets: further, Saul when he came cast off his princely robes, or military
attire, all the day and the night: which is not expressed of the other: that
they prophesied in that manner, or so long. 3. And as Saul's prophesying in this
place, was much diverse from theirs; so also he is said here to prophecy in an
other manner and sense then he did before in his own house, c. 18. v. 10. for
first the cause was diverse, that proceeded of the evil spirit, this of the
good spirit of God, which came upon him at this time: Mar. then the effects
were diverse, there he meditateth mischeife, and casts a spear at David, here
David was present, and he has no power to touch him: further, there he is said
to prophecy only, because of some likeness in general, in his strange
behavior, as ravished beside himself, but here he prophesies in a further
degree, communicating with the rest of the Prophets in their prophetical
exercises. Iunius makes this prophesying and the other, c. 18.10. to be all
alike, and refers us here in the marginal annotatio^ to that place, c.
18.10. but I rather subscribe herein to Pet. Mart. whose judgment is seen
before, that this prophesying was of an other spirit, and so diverse from the
former.

10. Quest. v. 24. How Saul is said to have stripped off his clothes, and to be
naked.
1. It is not to be imagined, that Saul was indeed altogether naked, but he is
said to be so, because he had laid aside either his princely robes, as R.
Chimchi thinks, or military apparel, Iun. and was now as an other common
person: so Isai. 20.2. the Prophet is said to go naked, because he had put
off his sackcloath, which he had worn before: so Michal tells David that he
had uncovered, or made himself naked, 2. Sam. 6.20. because he had put off his
princely apparel, and daunced in a linen Ephod. 2. Some think that Saul did
not only put off his own garments, but put on some peculiar kind of vesture,
such as the Prophets use to wear: and Osiander affirms that it was
certainly so: Proculdubio aliam vestem, qua Prophetantes vtebantur, assumpsit:
Undoubtedly he took an other garment, which the Prophets used. P. Martyr
says, fortasse accepit alias vestes: It may be he took other apparel, to be
like unto the Prophets. But whence should Saul have that special kind of
apparel? for it seems that Samuel spoke not at all to him, nor gave any
direction for any such thing: and without his direction, the children of the
Prophets would do nothing: therefore his nakedness consisted only in laying
aside his upper princely robe, behauing himself now as any other common person.

11. Quest. v. 24. Whether Saul fell down naked all the day, and night.
1. The most do take it, that Saul fell down naked, (...), Septuag. Lat.
Genevens. B. that is, lay upon the ground, as Josephus, according to the manner
of others that are ravished of the spirit, having no use of their senses,
Vatab. but lie as in a trance: but this can not be the meaning: both because
the rest that prophesied used not this gesture: for Samuel stood in the mids
among them, verse. 20. and fell not upon the ground: as also it had been too
much for Saul to lie upon the ground a whole day and night: and further,
whereas their prophesying consisted in singing of Psalms, and praising God, as
the Chalde interprets, this gesture had not been so meet for that exercise.

2. Some other therefore think that Saul did not lie upon the earth all the
day and night, but at certain diurne and nocturne hours, appointed for prayer
and prophesying, he humbled himself upon his knees, as now is used to be done
in the service of the Church: that in reading some Psalms, they use to fall
upon their knees. Osiand. But who can think that this allotting out of
certain hours for prayer by day and night, is so ancient as Samuel; or that
such change of gesture in prayer was taken up then: beside that, Saul doing
thus at times, could not be said to fall all the day and night.

3. Therefore I here embrace the judgment of Iunius, who does interpret this
place according to the like, Numb. 24.4. where it is said, that Balaam fell,
that is, into a trance, or fell beside himself: so here Saul fell, not upon
the ground, but fell out of his wits, or beside himself for the time: in the
which state he continued a day and a night.

11. Quest. How Saul is said to have prophesied before Samuel, it being said
before, that Samuel came no more to see Saul. c. 16.35.
1. Some think the meaning to be, that Samuel saw not Saul in the habit of a
King: for now he had changed his apparel, and appeared in an other form:
some, that Samuel might be hid standing among the Prophets: but neither of
these are likely: not the first, for Saul appeared in his usual habit before
he stripped off his clothes: and in what habit soever Saul showed himself, he
was Saul still, and so seen of Samuel: nor the other, because it is directly
said, that Saul prophesied before Samuel, therefore he was not hid. 2.
Therefore the meaning is, that Samuel came no more to Saul with any message
from God, neither had any more familiar conference with him, as before: for in
this place Samuel speaks not to him, neither is there any intercourse at all
between them: Mart. Pelican. see more of this, c. 15. qu. 22. 3. But Josephus
is here deceived, who writes that Saul prophesied before David and Samuel, but
the text makes mention only of Samuel to be present: for in the mean time,
while Saul continued prophesying, David took the opportunity, and escaped
away.

13. Quest. Of the difference of true and false prophets, how they differ
between themselves, and from others, upon these words: Is Saul also among the
Prophets?
1. The first difference to be considered, is concerning the diverse offices of
Prophets, which were either ordinary, as in praying and interpreting the
Scripture, teaching, exhorting, as S. Paul takes the word prophesying, 1. Cor.
14.3. or extraordinary, consisting in the revealing of hid things, either
past, as Moses sets down the history of the creation: Christ told the
woman what she had done, Ioh. 4. or present, as Elisha could tell what Gehezi
had done being absent, Samuel told Saul what was become of his asses: or of
things to come, in which sense properly they were called Prophets: in respect
of these extraordinary parts and gifts, a Prophet is now to be considered.

2. The second thing to be observed, is of the diverse ways and means, whereby
the Lord revealed himself to the Prophets, which were three: either by oracle,
as when the Lord spoke by an audible voice, as when the Angel of God spoke to
Abraham, not to sacrifice his son, Genesis 22. or by dreams, as unto Joseph,
Math. 1. or by vision: which was of three sorts, either by inward revelation to
the mind and understanding, Of diverse sorts of visions.
as to Isaiah, when he was bid to turn back unto Hezekiah being sick, 2.
king. 20.4. or when some inward demonstration is showed, by some
representation, as Jeremy saw the almond rod, and the pot, Ierem. 1. and Peter
the four cornered sheet, Act. 10. or when some visible object is offered to
the sight, as when the hand writ upon the wall, Dan. 5.

3. Prophets then differed from Priests and other Pastors: the Priests had an
ordinary succession, being always of the tribe of Leui: the Prophets were
raised extraordinarily, and indifferently out of any tribe: the Priests were
tied to the service of the Tabernacle, so were not the Prophets: the Priests
were subject to error in their doctrine, so were not the true Prophets:
likewise they differed from ordinary Pastors, Doctors, Teachers: for the
ordinary teachers obtained their gifts of teaching and exhorting, by study,
labor, and industry: the Prophets were extraordinarily inspired of God:
though they were prepared by fasting, study, prayer, yet the gift of
prophesying came by secret inspiration from God. Martyr.

4. There was great difference between the true Prophets and the false: 1. One
note is given, that a true Prophet should be known, if his prophecy come to
pass, Deuteronomy. 18.22. 2. But because sometime the Lord to try his people, may
suffer the signs of false prophets to come to pass, an other surer note is
given, to try them by their doctrine: for if they shall persuade to any false
doctrine, as to Idolatry, or such like, they are not good Prophets, though the
effect of their prophecy follow, Deuter. 13.2. 3. The true Prophets are
inspired of God, the false for the most part are led by the false and lying
spirit, as Baals prophets were, 1. king. 22. 4. The true Prophets were men of
sanctified hearts and affections, and of good life and manners: the false
prophets were void of true faith, and men of corrupt life: as Balaam was
corrupted with money, and he gave counsel against the people of God. There is
also some difference between the false prophets themselves: for some of them
may have the gift of prophecy for the time from God, as Balaam, and Caiphas,
who are to be discerned by the former notes from true Prophets: some are
inspired of Satan, as Simon Magus, which by his sorcerie bewitched Samaria:
such was the Pythonisse at Philippi, Act. 16. and at the oracle of Apollo at
Delphos.

5. The true Prophets also differed among themselves: some excelled others in
authority and greatness of works, as Moses was preferred before the rest, that
there was not a prophet like unto him: Deuteronomy. 34. some in clearenes of
revelation, as David and Daniel concerning the manifestation of the Messiah:
some had the pre-eminence in regard of their office, as John Baptist being the
forerunner of Christ, and pointing him out with his finger, is preferred before
the rest.

6. Yea, the same Prophets were not always like themselves: for sometime they
spoke as men, not as Prophets, when the spirit of prophecy was not upon them:
as Nathan the Prophet, when David purposed to build the Lord an house,
encouraged him to go on, 2. Sam. 7.3. yet afterward the Lord revealed
otherwise unto him: so when the Prophet Hanani, had prophesied that after three
years the Lord would break the captivity of Babel, at the first the Prophet
Jeremy said Amen unto it, and wished it might be so: but afterward also the
Lord revealed an other thing unto Jeremy. Ier. 28.5.14.

CHAP. XX.
1. Quest. v. 3. Of David's oath: As Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives:
whether it be lawful to swear by any, but by the Lord only.
HEre the question is, which of these was the form of David's oath: for if the
whole be David's oath, then it would follow, that it is lawful to swear by the
soul and life of man, as by the life of God. But first it is evident, that it
is not lawful to swear by any creature in heaven and earth, nor by a man's
head. Matthew. 36. 1. As it was well decreed in the 4. Council of Carthag.
Clericum per creaturas iurantem acerbe obiurgandum: A Clergy man that swears
by creatures, we do decree to be sharply reproved: and if he continue in his
fault, to be excommunicate. 2. Yea, it was counted an horrible thing, to swear
by any part of God: Si quis per capillum dei, vel caput iuraverit, vel alio
modo blasphemia contra deum vsus fuerit, si Clericus, deponatur, etc. If any
do swear by the hair or head of God, or use any other blasphemy against
God, if he be a Clergy man, let him be deposed; if a lay man, let him be
anathematized. Cause. 22. q. 1. c. 10. If Christ be not to be dismembered by an
oath, which were as a crucifying of him again: much less are we to swear by
any part of a man, as by his soul, or head. 3. For this is a peculiar part of
Gods worship, to swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. therefore it is a robbery
unto God, to give that which is due to him, to any other. 4. In him by who^ we
swear, two things are requisite: that he should both know and understand the
heart, and therefore is called as a witness, that in our heart we speak the
truth; as also be able to take revenge of him that swears falsely. But these
two are only incident unto God, to know the heart, and he is the almighty and
powerful judge, able as to convince, so to punish all false swearers. 5.
Wherefore we condemn that superstitious use of the Romanists, in swearing by
Saints, Cantr. It is not lawful to swear by Saints.
for so they rob God of his honor: Origin against Celsus, lib. 8. says, Nec
per regem iuramus, perinde ac non alium deum crederemus, neque per fortunam,
etc. fit vtique vt nobis potius sit moriendum, quam per daemonis aliquid numen
iureiurando confirmemus: Neither do we swear by the King, as though we
believed no other God, nor by fortune, which is nothing, etc. so that it
comes to pass, that we ought rather to die, then to swear by the power of
any spirit. Plutarke propounding this question, why the Romans do not suffer
their children to swear by Hercules within doors, but thrust them out, among
other yeildeth this reason: Quia non est Deus indigena, sed peregrinus and
hospes: because he was not a country or native god, but a strange and foreign
god: and for the same cause they swear not by Bacchus in the house, because he
also was a foreign god. quaest. Roman. 28. The heathen had that light, that they
would not swear by those, whom they took not properly, naturally, and
principally to be gods. It were a shame therefore for Christians to swear by
them that are no gods.

Secondly, touching this example, wherein David joins both together, as
Jehovah lives, and thy soul lives: it follows not, because they are both
put together, that therefore David swears by both. 1. As, Exodus 14.31. It is
said, they believed Jehovah, and his servant Moses: it can not be hence
inferred, that we are to believe upon Saints: to believe is ascribed to both,
but not in the same manner nor kind: for they believed in God as the author and
performer of his promises, they gave credit to Moses, as the faithful
minister, and servant of God: so in these two clauses there is great
difference: David swears by God as a witness of his heart, and as the
Almighty and immortal Judge; he only protests by the life of Jonathan,
that it was as certain, that he was in danger, as it was certain he lived. 2.
For in an oath there are two things to be considered, the certentie of the
thing affirmed, and the penalty, which he wishes to himself, that swears
falsely: the first may be declared without an oath, by solemn protestation, or
lively demonstration of some thing present, beside God: as when we say, It is
as true, as thou live: or as the Sun shines, or is in the sky, or shall
set or rise: which kind of asseueration the Lord himself uses, Ierem. 31.35.
that as sure, as God gave the Sun to be a light for the day, and the courses
of the moon and the stars, so surely should Israel be a people for ever. But
the other, in calling him, by whom we swear to be our witness and judge,
cannot be performed but by an oath, and that only by the name of God: so that
this speech of David, As Jehovah lives, is as much in effect, as he says else
where, So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, 1. Sam. 25.22. which
form of oath afterward David alters thus, v. 34. As the Lord God of Israel
lives, etc. 3. And that not this whole sentence, but the first clause of it,
is only David's oath it appears, because sometimes, these clauses are
divided: the first being used apart by it self, is called an oath in
Scripture: as c. 19.6. As Jehovah lives, he shall not die: but the other used
alone, as thy soul lives, is never counted an oath, nor are they said to
swear, that so speak: as Anna, 1. Sam. 1.26. and Abner, c. 17.55.

2. Quest. In what cases, and how it is lawful privately, to take an oath.
1. Hieromes opinion is, that to swear, quasi infirmis lege fuit concessum, it
was permitted in the law in respect of their weakness: that as they did
sacrifice unto God, because they should not sacrifice to idols and devils, sic
iurare permittuntur in Deum, non quod recte hoc facerent, sed quia melius est
id exhibere deo, quam daemonibus: so they were permitted to swear by God, not
that they therein did well, but because it was better to exhibit (an oath)
unto God, then unto devils: so is Hierome cited upon the fifth of Matthew. Cause.
22. qu. 1. c. 8. But if to swear were an argument of weakness, and only
permitted in the old Testament; then should there be no use of it in the New:
whereas the Prophet speaking of the times of the Gospel, says, He that
swears in the earth, shall swear by the God Amen, Isa. 65.16. was the
Apostle Saint Paul weak, when he thus wrote: I call God for a record unto my
soul, that to spare you, I came not yet to Corinthus, 1. Cor. 1.23. Indeed to
swear shows weakness, not in him that swears, but in him that will not
believe without an oath: therefore the Lord has confirmed his promise by an
oath, for our more strong consolation: Hebr. 6.18. If not only the people of
God under the law, but now also under the kingdom of grace, have strong
consolation by the promise confirmed by Gods oath: then there is as well an use
of an oath now, as then.

2. Now concerning the lawful use of an oath, as publicly it may be made
before the Magistrate, for the deciding of controversies, Hebr. 6.16. and
between Magistrate and Magistrate, for the confirmation of some league and
covenant, as Iaakob and Laban did swear each to the other, Genesis 31. and by the
Magistrate it may be made to the subject, for the more security and safety of
his life, as Saul swear that David should not die, c, 19.5. as Princes lawfully
swear at their coronation, for the observation of the national laws: As also
by oath we may bind our selves unto God, as Abraham did, that he would take
nothing of the goods of the king of Sodom.

So also there is a lawful use of a private oath: and especially in these
three cases.

1. When in time of danger a mutual league and covenant is made, one not to
forsake an other, as David and Jonathan one swear unto an other, v. 17. so one
soldier may swear to an other, to be faithful unto him in the battle,
whether he live or die.

2. An oath may be made between two private persons, for the performance of
any service of weight and importance: so Eliah swear unto Obadiah, that he
would present himself that day unto the king, 1. king. 18.15. In this case it
is lawful for one leaving the world, to take an oath of his Exequutor for the
performance of his will, and testament: as Joseph swear unto Iaakob, that he
would bury him in his fathers grave. Genesis 47.31.

3. Thirdly, a man may swear privately for the manifestation or evidence of
some truth, to clear himself or to satisfy his brother, where the weight and
necessity of the cause requires it: as here David by his oath does assure
Jonathan of the greatness of the danger which he was in. And herein Augustines
rule is to be kept: quantum, ad me attinet, iuro, sed quantum mihi videtur
magna necessitate compulsus, cum videam non mihi credi, nisi faciam, and ei,
qui mihi non credit, non expedire, quod non credit: As for me, I swear, but as
it seems to me, being forced thereunto by great necessity, when I see I can
not be believed unless I do it, and that it is not safe for him, which is
hard of belief, that he believes not. de verbis Apost. sermon. 28. cited by
Gratian. Cause. 22. qu. 1. c. 14. Both which did here concur in David's oath:
for he saw that Jonathan was very confident, that there was no danger toward
David, and therefore he binds it with an oath: and beside it was very
material, not only for Jonathan in respect of his love to David, but unto
David in respect of his life, that Jonathan should be persuaded of this great
danger.

4. First then seeing there is such a commendable, yea necessary use of an
oath, both publicly, and privately: the Anabaptists fantastical opinion
falls to the ground, that allow not a Christian to take an oath before a
Magistrate. Again, in an other extreme they are worthy of reprehension, that
use oaths unnecessarily and profanely in their common talk: using more
irreverently the name of God, then they would of a mortal man, the Prince, or
their father, or of any other, whom they are bound unto: who remember not the
saying of our Savior, That whatsoever is more then yea, yea, nay, nay, (he
means in common talk) comes of evil. Matthew. 5.37.

3. Quest. v. 3. Whether Jonathan sinned* in being so hard of belief, that
his father intended mischeife toward him.
1. Some think that Ionathans affection might somewhat abate toward David
while he thought of the succession of the kingdom, which he began to
consider, was likely to come to David. Pelican. But no such thing can be
imagined of that good man: who loved David, as his own soul, and presently
after, v. 4. he promises to do for David, whatsoever he desired. 2. Therefore
it is rather to be imputed to the goodness of Ionathans loving nature, who
thought the best of his father: as love thinks not evil, as the Apostle
says, but believes all things, 1. Cor. 13.5. that is, takes and interprets
all in the best part. And two reasons moved Jonathan to be so confident:
first, because his father had once spoken unto him, to kill David, but made no
more mention of it afterward, which he thought he would have done, if he had
purposed any such thing, because he used to conceal nothing from him: Osiand.
secondly, he builded upon his fathers oath, which he had made, that David
should not die. Borr. 3. But David did well, having had so often experience of
Saul's hypocrisy, that he would trust him no further, as the saying is, then he
saw him. And though he for the time behaved himself as a Prophet, among the
Prophets, yet David not without cause did mistrust him still. Pelican.

4. Quest. v. 3. Of David's words, There is but a step between me and death:
whether David sinned in being timorous.
1. Some think, that David showed great weakness herein, being in a manner
diuina consolatione destitutus, destitute of divine comfort: as when he cried
out at an other time, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Borr. But it
can not be, that David should show so great infirmity, unless it should be
admitted, that he distrusted Gods promises: for he could not forget, what the
Lord had said unto him by Samuel, concerning the kingdom: whereof he made no
doubt. 2. Others therefore do excuse David altogether, saying, Non peccat
David, etsi timeat, that David sinned not, though he were afraid. Mart. But
David cannot here be altogether freed from humane infirmity, and doubting: as
the very words do show great passion, There is but a step between me and
death: and David's doubtful thoughts at an other time show as much: when he
said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. c. 27.1. 3.
Therefore I prefer the mean between these two, that as David was not
altogether void of divine consolation, so neither was he free from humane
weakness and infirmity, yet so, as that he still did comfort himself in God,
and relied upon his promises: as it appears by the 59. Psalm. which he made
about this time immediately upon his escape, when Saul's men watched his house,
and he was let down by the window, as the title of the Psalm shows: in the
which he thus professes his faith and confidence, v. 9. I will wait upon
thee, for God is my defense. 4. But yet there is great difference between the
fear of David here, and the fear of other the servants of God, and the fear
of the wicked: and in these three points: The difference between the fear of
the faithful and unfaithful.
1. the one in their fear, yet do not leave their faith and confidence in
God, though they are (...) for the time, yet they recover themselves by their
faith, as Iaakob though he were afraid of Esau his brother, yet he trusted in
God, and prayed unto him: but Saul, when the Philistims pursued him, utterly
despaired and slew himself. 2. The godly though they be in danger, attempt no
unlawful means; the wicked in their fear, care not how they may work
themselves out: as Saul fearing the loss of the kingdom, seeks to kill
David. 3. The godly are not so perplexed, but that in the mids of their
fear, they omit nothing appertaining to their duty, which may help them, as
here David uses Jonathan as a mean: but the wicked are at their wits end,
and know not which way to turn themselves, casting all means aside, and
resolve thus desperately, if we perish, we perish: as Hagar, when the water of
the bottell was spent, sought no further, but in despair cast the child aside
a good way from her, because she would not see his death. Genesis 21.15, 16.

5. Quest. v. 4. Of Ionathans liberal promise to David, to do whatsoever he
required.
1. There is some difference in the reading of the words: some read, whatsoever
thou say or desire, I will do. L.V. or, whatsoever thy soul desires, I
will do. B.G. but then the Hebrew conjunction should be superfluous,
veehesheth, and I will do it: some read, speak what is thy mind, and I will
do it. Iun. but here the words are inuerted, which stand thus in the
original, what says thy soul? mah the interrogatiue particle is placed
first: then this remains to be the best reading, with an interrogation: what
says thy soul, and I will do it for thee? S.ChapterA.P. for mah is a particle of
interrogation, or asking a question. 2. In the which general promise, Jonathan
must be taken to understand this secret condition: he would do any thing for
him, so it were not against piety or honesty: Mar. and so all such general
promises are to be understood. But Jonathan expresses no such condition,
because he had that confidence in David, that he would ask no dishonest or
unseemly thing.

6. Quest. v. 5. Of David's sitting at Saul's table, on the first day of the
month.
1. The Israelites had a solemnity upon the calends or first day of every
month, when they offered peace offerings, and thereof feasted together: yet
they were not to abstain from their bodily labor upon that day, saving in the
first of the seventh month, when they were commanded to abstain from all
servile work. Leuit. 23.25. Martyr. And beside the solemn sacrifice
prescribed to be kept every new moon, Numb. 28.11. they added peace offerings
and a feast. Genevens. Iun. And in the Kings Court the solemnity was kept
after the better sort, according to the dignity of the place and persons. 2.
Pellicane thinks, that Saul after he had prophesied in Naioth, began to be
more reasonable and friendly toward David, in admitting him to his table, as he
was accustomed. But that is not like: for Saul was not yet come from Naioth,
where he was a whole day and night: and David had this communication with
Jonathan the very same day while Saul was prophesying, whose place Jonathan
supplied in his fathers absence, and therefore David craves leave of Jonathan
to be absent. Iun. 3. But David was allowed his place at the Kings table,
being the kings son in law, and of great account in Israel: Osiand. where
his presence was expected, especially in their solemn feasts: and therefore
David knowing he should be missed, craves leave to be absent.

7. Quest. v. 6. Of David's excuse, that he was gone to Bethlehem to the yearly
sacrifice of his family.
1. Iunius only here reads, convivium anniuersarium, a yearly feast: all
the rest read, sacrificium annuale. P. sacrificium dierum: A. a sacrifice of
days: or victimae solennes: L. solemn sacrifices: to the same effect, and in
the same sense, Chapter and Sept. but the latter interpretation is more likely, for
these reasons: 1. the same word, zabach haiammim, sacrifices of days, which in
the Hebrew phrase is taken for a yearly sacrifice, is used in the same sense,
c. 1.21. where mention is made of Elkanah his yearly sacrifice. Borr. 2. It
appears that upon the first day of the month, they first sacrificed, and
feasted of their peace offerings, and therefore none that were unclean and not
purified could eat thereof; as Saul himself excused David's absence. verse. 26.
3. It was lawful to offer peace offerings, where the Tabernacle was not: as is
here evident: that Saul's feast consisted of such, because the unclean were
forbidden to eat thereof. But Saul dwelt at Gibeah, where the Tabernacle was
not: and now especially this was permitted, the Tabernacle and the Arc at this
time being asunder: see more of this before, c. 9. qu. ^. and c. 16. qu. 2.

2. Now concerning David's excuse: some think it was his infirmity and weakness
so to dissemble: Pelican. some that David in thus dissembling showed his
wisdom: Osiand. but in true godly wisdom there is no such dissimulation. It
is therefore most like, and none other thing can be gathered, but that this was
a true excuse: Iun. and that there was some such solemn sacrifice in that
family, for some notable benefit received. Martyr.

8. Quest. Of the best reading of the 12. verse.
1. Iunius reads thus: O Jehovah God of Israel, when I have searched out of
my father, etc. would I not send unto thee, etc. and the next v. thus: so do
Jehovah unto Jonathan, etc. if it seem good unto my father to bring evil upon
thee, as I will reveal it, etc. But in this reading, in the 12. v. he
interprets, velo, an non, would I not: where it signifies, and non, and I
send not: in the next verse he joins the imprecation to the affirmative
clause: as I do reveal: whereas the sense rather gives it should be referred
to the negative clause before going: if I do not send and reveal, God do so
and so unto me: better then God do so and so to me, as I reveal, etc. 2. An
other reading is, to put it likewise in the vocative case: O Lord Jehovah, when
I have groped, etc. if behold, it is well with David, and I send not, etc. the
Lord do so and more also unto Jonathan, etc. B. G. A. P. but in this reading
the person is changed: Lord in the 12. v. is put in the vocative, and in the
13. in the nominative, belonging both to the same sentence, and so the sense
should be imperfect. 3. Therefore, the better reading is, to begin also in
the nominative case: Jehovah God of Israel, and so to suspend the sense until
the beginning of the 13. v. Jehovah I say, do so unto Jonathan, etc. sic V. S.
Chald.

9. Quest. Of the truest reading of the 14. verse.
1. Some interpret the v. thus, reading affirmatively: and if I live, thou will
show me mercy: and if I die, thou will not cut off, etc. L.S. but in this
reading the negative particle velo, and not, thrice repeated in the verse
should be left out. 2. Some read thus: I require not this while I live, for I
doubt not, but thou will show me the mercy of the Lord, that I die not. B. G.
but here all these words, I require not, and, for I doubt not, are added,
being not in the original. 3. Iunius reads thus, with an interrogation:
would thou not while I live, would thou not show toward me this mercy of
the Lord, that I die not? but if velo should be here read interrogatiuely, why
not also in the next v. velo, and would thou not cut off thy mercy from
mine house: if the interrogation can not stand here, velo should seem so to be
read before: and the word halo is used, when the negative is put
interrogatiuely, not velo: beside, for the matter Jonathan feared not, least
David should put him to death, that he should need to say, that I die not. 4.
Therefore I here rather prefer Vatablus sense: If I do not show thee mercy,
then show me no mercy, neither alive nor dead: where the phrase, if I show not
mercy, is supplied out of the clause following, which is usual in the Hebrew
tongue, which is very curt and compendious. But this last sense is better
somewhat altered thus: if I do not show thee mercy, while I live then do not
thou show toward me the mercy of the Lord, no not when I am dead: for thus the
sentence to be distinguished, the perfect distinction athaah, determining the
first clause, ending at, while I live, gives great probability.

10. Quest. v. 17. Whether Jonathan swear unto David, or he caused David to
swear.
1. The most read, Jonathan again swear unto David: A. P.B.G.V. cum caet. but,
the word in hiphil, hashbiagh, signifies to cause to swear, especially being
joined with the preposition eth, a sign of the accusative case: for then it
signifies to adjure one, or cause him to swear: as in the same construction
it is used, c. 14.27. how Saul adjured the people, that is, charged them with
an oath: for when it is taken in the other sense, it is joined to the
preposition, lamed: as Genesis 47. v. vlt. Joseph did swear, li, unto him. 2.
Therefore Iunius better reads, adiuravit Jonathan Dauidem, Jonathan adjured
David: that is, required the like oath of him, which he had made: for Jonathan
had taken his oath before, and needed not take it again: and it is clear that
David also confirmed this league between them with a mutual oath: as the 42.
v. shows, that which we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord: and
again, 2. Sam. 23.7. it is said, the Lords oath was between Jonathan and
David: but no other mention is made of David's oath, but in this place. 3. Only
this will be objected, that the words following, because he loved him, that is,
David, yield a reason, that Jonathan should swear to David, rather then to
cause David to swear to him. But it may be answered, that this was an argument
of Ionathans love, that as he had sworn to David, so he requires the like
restipulation from him, desirous to make a sure and steadfast league with him,
whom he so dearly loved.

11. Quest. v. 16. Of these words: Jonathan made a covenant with the house of
David.
1. Some read, let Jonathan be taken away by the house of David. S. but the
word vaijchroth, he cut out, is of the active, not the passive voice: and the
preposition ghim, or hhim, signifies not by, or from, but with: others expound
thus, let David cut off Jonathan with his house: Vat. that is, if he perform
not this: but here the words are much inuerted: which stand thus in the
original, and Jonathan stroke or smote with the house of David. 2. Wherefore
the meaning is, that he smote or stroke a covenant, which word is wanting here,
as likewise c. 22.8. but usually the word berith, a covenant, is supplied: as
Genesis 15.18. and in many other places. Iun. Chal. Lat.

12. Quest. v. 18. Why David should be missed on the feast day, seeing Saul had
so lately sought to kill him.
1. Some think that the history is transposed: and that this fell out before
Saul had sent to kill David in his house, or that he had pursued him unto
Naioth where he prophesied: but that is not like: for the story follows in
order, how while Saul was prophesying before Samuel, David in the mean time
escapes, and goes to Jonathan, at which time he had all this communication
with him. 2. Others think, that Saul was obliuious, and very forgetful, by
reason his head was diste^pered, and would ask for David, not remembering that
he had so lately sought to kill him: as the Emperor Claudius was so
forgetful, that he would ask for them at the table, whom he had commanded
before to be put to death: but though Saul might be overtaken with such
oblivion, David was not, who first moved this doubt, that his father would
miss him. v. 5, 6. 3. Others are of opinion, that David might be reconciled to
Saul, yet he trusted him not, and therefore desires that his absence might be
excused: Mar. but Saul was not yet returned from Naioth, while David had this
conference with Jonathan. 4. This therefore is more likely, that although Saul
diverse times before in his fitts had attempted to kill David, and cast his
spear at him, c. 18.10. and c. 19.1. yet David was brought into his presence
again to play before him, c. 19.10. and he knew, that Saul in that regard,
would specially miss him upon the festival day: and this was the cause, why
he desires to be excused. And Saul also might imagine that David would forget
the injuries, which Saul did toward him, as he himself made small account of
them: according to the verse, Pulvere, qui laedit, scribit, sed marmore laesus:
He that hurts, writes his wrongs in the dust, he which is hurt in marble.
Osiand.

13. Quest. v. 25. Why Jonathan arose, the King sitting in his seat by the
wall.
1. Some think that Abner came somewhat late, and Jonathan for honor and
reverence unto him, gave place, and so he sat next unto the king: Vatab.
Osian. but it is not like, that the kings eldest son would give place to the
captain of the host, or that he would take it, specially in Saul's presence.
2. The Hebrews think, that David was wont to sit next unto Saul, between
Saul and Jonathan, and David being absent, he resigned the place to Abner: so
the Hebrews: but it is unlike that David was set before the kings eldest
son, though he were Saul's son in law: neither did any sit in David's place,
for it was still empty. 3. Josephus says, that Jonathan sat on the right
hand of the king, and Abner at the left: but this is unlike also: for to give
the right hand was a sign of pre-eminence, and the chief place, as Solomon
placed his mother at his right hand, 1. king. 2.19. and it should seem, that
the kings seat was uppermost, next unto the wall, and the rest sat at his
right hand. 4. Iunius thinks, that Jonathan in the Kings absence occupied his
seat, and now at the kings coming, he rises, and gives place: but neither
does this seem probable: 1. because it seems by the order of the words, that
Saul was first set in his accustomed place, before Jonathan arose: 2. it
appears by the words of the text, that Saul used only to sit in the seat by
the wall, and the king sat as at other times upon his seat: 3. the words
following, Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by the kings side, show that Abner
sat next to the king, as Jonathan was wont to do, who now being risen from
that place, Abner was next to the king. 5. Therefore it is more likely, that
Jonathan knowing his fathers qualities, and having experience of his sudden
passions and fury, would not sit next his father, Pelican. pretending some
other thing, to avoid the danger which he feared: for the next day, when Saul
being moved cast a spear at him, Jonathan could not easily have shunned it,
if he had set next unto him.

14. Quest. v. 26. Of Saul's excuse to himself that David was absent, because
he was not clean.
1. There is some difference of the reading of the words: some read thus, some
thing has happened unto him that he is not clean: Vat. but in the original
the word tahar, clean, is repeated twice: some thus, he is not clean, because
he is not purified: L.S. but the same word is repeated in the Hebrew: and to
read, he is not clean, because he is not clean, were a superfluous repetition
of the same thing: some thus, some thing has befalne him, though he were
clean. B. though he were clean, or else because he was not purified. G. but
here bilti rather signifies, not clean, then though clean: for so a
contrary sense would be made: therefore here somewhat must be supplied: he is
not clean, and because he is not clean, he comes not, Iun. which last words
may be supplied out of the next v. Wherefore comes not, etc. 2. There were
diverse legal pollutions, as by touching any dead thing, or by some flux:
Josephus adds, by companying with his wife: which made them for the time
unmeet to eat of the sacrifices: Saul might guess, that David was let by
some of them: which legal uncleanness continued but till the evening, Leuit.
11.39. and therefore Saul asks for him the next day: who like an hypocrite
had kept his body clean from such legal pollutions, but in the mean time,
his heart was defiled with malice and hatred. Mar.

15. Quest. v. 27. Why the second day of the month was observed as a festival.
Three causes may be rendered thereof. 1. Because the law was, that if any thing
remained of their free and frank offerings, which was not eaten the first day,
it should be eaten the next, but if ought remained until the third day, it
should be consumed with fire. Leuit. 7.16, 17. It is like therefore that Saul
having frankly offered, the feast was continued unto the next day. 2. Or this
they might do in respect of those which were unclean, and could not come the
first day, that the second days feast should be for them: as the like liberty
was granted for the passover, that they which could not take it the first
month being in their journey, or otherwise let, might keep it the second
month. Numb. 11. Mart. 3. Or Saul might keep two days feast, whereas the
common sort observed but one, in respect of his magnificence and princely
state: and therefore he says, Why comes he not, neither yesterday, nor to
day?

16. Quest. v. 29. Of Ionathans excuse: whether he therein spoke any untruth.
1. Jonathan charitably intending to do good to David, and no hurt to any, in
excusing David in this manner, is freed from any great imputation of untruth.
Mart. 2. And beside concerning the sum and substance of the excuse, that
there was a yearly feast at Bethlehem for David's family, it is like it was
true, and that David asked leave to go thither it was true also, as is before
showed, qu. 7. 3. But it seems Jonathan adds other circumstances, as that
David's brother sent for him: and that was the cause of his not coming: as
though David was gone thither: but David neither made mention of his brother
sending for him, nor that Ionatha^ should say, that David was gone thither, but
that he asked leave to go. Josephus adds further, that Jonathan should say,
that he was bidde^ likewise. Thus as Josephus adds to Ionathans speech, so
Jonathan seems to add unto David's: and therein showed some infirmity: he
was not accustomed to make such excuses, and therefore speaks somewhat
uncertainly and timorously. But of this kind of officious lies, more shall be
said afterward, in the end of the next chapter.

17. Quest. v. 30. Of Saul's vpbrayding Jonathan with his mother.
1. Some read, son of perverse rebellion: not referring it to Ionathans
mother, but unto Jonathan himself: who is called the son of rebellion, that
is, rebellious: A. P. Osiand. but the distinction soph pasuch, coming between
these two words, perverse, rebellion, do show that they can not agree
together as substantive and adjective. 2. Others do apply both unto Ionathans
mother, that she was perverse in rebellion, that is, rebellious: thou son of
the wicked rebellious woman. B.G. but for the former reason of the distinction,
these words are not to be put together. 3. Therefore the better reading is, to
refer the first to Ionathans mother: thou son of a perverse woman: the
other to Jonathan himself, supplying again the word son: of rebellion, that
is, thou rebellious: Iun. a rebellious son of a wicked woman: which some
interpret, as though he should object unto Jonathan, that he was a bastard, and
borne of an adulterous woman: Mar. but rather he obiecteth only the
stubbornnes of his mother, that was always contrary unto him, and so was her
son. Borr. Genevens. Thus this hypocrite accuses others, being most worthy
of blame himself: and thus he spares neither wife not son, but reuileth
them both shamefully. Iun.

18. Quest. v. 41. Whether David exceeded Jonathan in weeping: and how the
words are to be read.
1. The most read thus, they wept one with an other, until David exceeded:
B.G.S. the word gadhal, signifies to multiply or magnify: so B.G.A.P.V. and
they render these reasons, why David wept more then Jonathan, because he was
not only to leave the sweet society of his friend, but his wife, and which
was the greatest grief of all, to be a stranger among the people of God, like
to be exiled from his own country: Mar. some think he wept more, because he
loved more. Pelican. But beside that higdill in hiphil, in that sense, when it
signifies, to magnify, is not put absolutely, as it is here, but in
construction with some other word, as c. 12.24. higdhil gnimmachem, he has
magnified, or done great things toward you: and Joel 2.22. higdill lagnashoth,
he has magnified to do, that is, done great things: the reasons alleged are
not sufficient to justify that reading: for though David were in greater
danger then Jonathan, that was no reason why David should weep more, seeing
Jonathan loving David, as his own soul, was as much touched with the fellow
feeling of his grief, as David himself: but the contrary is rather evident,
that Ionathans affection was more ardent toward David, if there were any
difference at all in their love: for Ionathans heart was first knit to David,
and it began of his part: again, Jonathan adventured more for David, then he
did ever for Jonathan, he put his life in danger for David: and David himself
confesses, that Ionathans love toward him, exceeded the love of women. 2. Sam.
2.26.

2. Therefore Iunius reading in this place is the better: until he raised or
lift up David: for so both the use of the word will bear this sense, Psalm.
49.10. higdill, he has lift up his heel against me: and the circumstance of
the place gives it: for before it is expressed, that David fell upon his face
to the ground: then while David thus lay lamenting and complaining upon the
ground, Jonathan did lift him up: as Iosep. well notes, that he raised him from
the ground, embraced, and comforted him, as c. 23.17. he emboldened David,
saying, Fear not.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the city Nob, whether David fled to Ahimelech the high
Priest.
1. DAvid Kimhi says, that he learned of his father, that this Nob was the
city Jerusalem: ex Pelican. but this appears to be otherwise, Isa. 10.32.
where Nob and Jerusalem are named as two diverse places. 2. It was a city
situate in the tribe of Benjamin, not far from Anathoth, where the
inheritance lay that was allotted to this family. 1. king. 2.26. thither
Solomon sends Abiathar, when he removed him from the Priesthood. So Nehem.
11.32. Nob and Anathoth are named together, as being cities not far asunder.
Iun. 3. Here at this time was the Tabernacle, the altar, the table of show
bread, which was the cause that so many Priests gave there their attendance:
but the Arc was still at Kiriathiearim in the tribe of Judah.

2. Quest. v. 2. How the Priest here called Ahimelech, is said to be Abiathar.
Mark. 2.26.
1. Some think that whereas Abiathar was the son of Ahimelech, v. 20. that
first David might have some communication with Abiathar, and afterward with
Ahimelech: Mart. but seeing Abiathar is in the Gospel called the high Priest,
it can not be understood of the son, who could not be high Priest while his
father lived. 2. Therefore the better solution is, that both the father and the
son had each of them two names: they were both called Abiathar, Reconcil.
and Ahimelech: this may appear, 2. Sam. 8.17. Zadock and Ahimelech the son
of Abiathar, are said to be the priests under David, and c. 20.25. the Priests
were Zadock and Abiathar: the son is here called in one place Ahimelech, in
the other Abiathar: and so is the father called Abiathar, who in this place is
named Ahimelech: Genevens. Bez. in Mark. 3.26.

3. Quest. v. 1. How David is said here to be alone, and Mark. 2.26. he is said
to give unto those which were with him.
1. Some think to dissolve this knot, and answer this doubt, in saying that
David is said to be alone, not that none at all were with him: but that he came
without any guard of soldiers: but this answer satisfies not: for David
says, that he had appointed not his soldiers, but his servants, Reconcil.
and young men, to such and such places, whereby it appears, that he had not
so much as any servant at all with him: and Josephus says, he was neither
famulitio stipatus, nec servis comitatus, attended upon by his servants, nor
accompanied with his friends. 2. Therefore the meaning of that place in the
Gospel is, that David gave of the show bread, not to those which were then
presently with him, but to whom he came afterward. Mar. 3. And herein
appears the inconstancy of Courtly favor: David, who was before beloved,
admired, and reverenced of all, is now left and forsaken of all. Mar.

4. Quest. v. 2. Whether David were in fault, by this his excuse of the Kings
business, to bring the Priests and their city into danger.
1. Some excuse David here that he told the truth, saying, that the King had
commanded him a certain thing: for indeed God the great king of heaven, had
appointed him to be king: but neither does it appear that David had any such
meaning, and if he had, he had deceived Ahimelech notwithstanding, who
understood him to speak of the king. 2. Some do excuse David's fact herein,
that he did no more then any man would, that was in necessity: and that
neither he nor the Priest had done any thing unlawful: but that Doeg and Saul
only were the causes of the mischeife following: David was the occasion, but
taken, not given, as Christ's fleeing into Egypt was the cause of the death of
the infants. Mar. But if David showed some infirmity in devising an excuse,
which was not true, which can not be avoided, then he must needs be in some
fault also for the danger that followed, seeing the Priest was induced by that
pretense to do as he did, whereby he came into that danger. And further, if
David had not feared, nor thought of any such peril, that might have ensued,
he had been clear: but seeing he himself suspected it, as he says, he knew
the same day Doeg would tell Saul, c. 22. 22. and yet did it: it can not but
show some infirmity in him. Christ's example is not like: for there Joseph was
admonished by an Angel in his dream to flee into Egypt: neither was the like
danger there foreseen, which was suspected and feared here. 3. Therefore, as
David himself confesses, that he was the cause of the death of those persons:
so we need not fear to affirm it. And though our Savior justifies David's
eating of the show bread upon this necessity, as Osiander reasons: yet every
circumstance of this action is not there justified: though it were lawful,
hunger compelling him, to eat the show bread, against the ceremonial law: yet
no necessity was to compel him to tell an untruth, against the moral law. I
rather therefore herein subscribe to the judgment of Pelican. Genevens. that
this was an infirmity of David, to teach us, that none has his justice of
himself, but receives it of Gods mercy. Genevens. 4. And further, that David
committed here some oversight, it may appear by that place, 2. Sam. 23.15.
where David thirsting for the water of Bethlehem, as here he is hungry, three
men adventured their lives to break through the host of the Philistims, and
brought unto David of that water, who would not drink it, because it was the
price of their blood, but powered it out unto God: there David in the like
necessity would not drink that water, the danger being over, much less
would he have before commanded them to do it, where he saw apparent danger:
and here if David had forborne, when he suspected the danger, the occasion of
so great cruelty would have been cut off. 5. But yet God in his providence so
disposed of this action, that both by this occasion the just sentence of God
was executed upon Eli his house, Mart. as also in this example, the liberty of
the Gospel was showed against the ceremonies of the law, which the Messiah
should bring. Borr.

5. Quest. v. 4. Of the difference of things common and profane, and hallowed.
1. Things some are sacred and profane in their nature, which can not be
changed: things sacred, which can never be profaned, that is, turned to a
profane or unclean use, are the gifts of the spirit, virtue, love, faith,
patience, and such like, but they remain sacred and holy in their nature, and
are only given unto those which are become sacred being sanctified by the
spirit of God: some things are polluted and unclean in their own nature, as
the corruption of man, vice, sin. 2. Some things are not sacred in their
nature, but according to the institution, as the ceremonies of the law, which
now are profaned and abrogated by Christ: Borr. so the elements used in the
Sacraments, are sanctified by the word for that spiritual use: but that holy
action being finished, they return to their nature: such was the show bread
here given unto David, it was holy by the ceremony, but as profane and common
in regard of David's necessity.

6. Quest. v. 5. Of the hallowed bread, called the show bread.
1. The law hereof is set down, Leuit. 24. both concerning the matter whereof
it should be made, of the finest flower, how much should be in every loaf,
how many loaves 12. in all: where they should be placed, and how long they
should there continue from Sabbath to Sabbath: and in what manner they should
be presented, namely, with incense. 2. They used four kind of breads: the
first was common bread, the second such as the people used in their sacred
feasts: the third, such as the Priests eat in their families: the fourth was
the most holy bread, which it was lawful only for the Priests to eat within
the Tabernacle. 3. The holy bread called the face or show bread, because it was
always in the presence of God, was a type of the true bread Christ Jesus, that
came down from heaven. It also shadowed forth the Eucharist of the new
Testament, which is celebrated with bread. And there was the same signification
of their Sacraments with ours, saving that ours are more clear and manifest,
being a memorial of Christ already exhibited, whereas theirs did shadow him
out being to come. Mar.

7. Quest. v. 4. Whether it were lawful for the Priest to give unto David
hallowed bread.
1. Seeing our Savior Christ does justify and allow this fact of David,
Matthew. 12.4. there can be no further doubt or question made thereof, but that
David might both safely eat thereof, the necessity of hunger urging him, and
that the Priest might lawfully give thereof unto him. 2. The reason hereof is,
that ceremonies and external rites must give place to charity: for as the
second table must give place to the first, as Abraham being commanded of God
to kill his son, (which he did in purpose and counsel) though it be
forbidden in the second table to kill, yet Abraham was to yield his obedience
to God, which is commanded in the first table: so the ceremonial law is wholly
to give place to the moral, when as both can not be kept together: as the
health, life, and safety of man, wherein our love and charity is seen, is to
be preferred before a ceremony: our Savior healed upon the Sabbath day,
because the ceremony of rest, was to give way unto charity: the Macchabees
therefore were in error, that refused, necessity so compelling, to fight upon
the Sabbath day: so here the Priest and David both should have sinned, if he
should have suffered David to perish, and David should have chosen rather to
die, then to eat of the hallowed bread. 3. And this liberty, which first was
brought in by Christ, and by him communicated to his members, is grounded upon
the will of the author and instituter of the ceremonies, who would have all
moral duties preferred before them: as he says, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice. 4. Here then their superstition is reproved, The breach of
ceremonies not to be more severely censured then the breach of the moral law.
which prefer the observation of ceremonies, before moral duties, as the
Pharisees which neglected Gods commandments, to establish their traditions: as
if a Jew should die, rather then eats swines flesh, in case of necessity: or
among the Papists, a Carthusian should choose rather to starve, then to eat
flesh: so in Popery, they will rather suffer their Priests and Votaries to
burn in lust, and to commit uncleanness, then to permit them to marry: they
would punish a man more for eating flesh in Lent, then for committing
fornication: which censuring of the transgression of ceremonial observations,
beyond the breach of moral duties, is displeasing in the sight of God,
wheresoever it is practiced. 5. But yet this is a different case, when the
breach of a ceremony, carries with it the transgression of some moral duty:
for in that case a man ought rather to die, then to be forced to that
transgression, where there is no necessity: as the Jews did well to offer
themselves to death, being urged by cruel Antiochus, then to eat swines
flesh, because it would have showed a renouncing of the law, and flat
disobedience to Gods commandment: so for a Christian to eat things sacrificed
to Idols for his necessity, when it may be done without offense, is lawful,
as S. Paul shows, 1. Cor. 10. but to eat it, in approbation of an idol,
being thereunto compelled by the enemy, were a denial of his profession. sic
fere Martyr.

8. Quest. v. 4. Whether the Priest did well in requiring of David abstinence
and cleannes from women.
1. Some think, that this was a preposterous and ridiculous question, as
Hierome calls it: for what if David had not been free from lying with women,
namely with his wife: (for other women the Priest means not, for David being
an holy man, the Priest could not suspect of inco^tinencie) would he have
suffered David rather to starve, then to eat of the show bread? Again, there
can be no precept showed in all the Scripture, that the company with the wife
did contaminate: to this effect Pet. Mart. who seems to deny that the
matrimonial act, did bring so much as a legal impuritie with it: But this can
not be denied, that by Moses law, there was an imputation of some legal
uncleanness unto carnal copulation: as both appears by the analogy of that
precept, Exodus 19.15. where the people are commanded not to come at their wives
for three days, being to appear before the Lord in Mount Sinai: Iun. as also
by that law, Leuit. 15.18. which place is truly translated thus: A woman, when
a man lies with her by carnal copulation, they shall both be washed with
water: which place, though Pet. Mart. contend to be understood of such as had a
flux or running of their seed: yet by comparing it with Leuit. 18.20. it will
appear, to be taken in the other sense: where the same words, shichbath
zaragh, is taken for carnal copulation, semen concubitus: But this was no
uncleanness in nature, but only in the ceremony, as it appears by the
clensing and purgation, which was only ceremonial by water. And the reason of
this precept was, that by this means, they should live temperately and soberly
in marriage, and not give themselves over unto fleshly pleasure: seeing after
every such act they were unclean to the even.

2. But in the other assertion, that this question propounded by the Priest at
this time, was rash and unseasonable, I rather consent with P. Mart. then unto
Iunius, who seems to think, that the Priest consulted with God herein, and
was directed by his oracle to require this preparation. Indeed the Priest
consulted with God for David, c. 22.10. and it seems by the Lords appointment
gave him the victuals and the sword: but concerning that condition of legal
purity, the Priest required it of himself: the Lord knew how it was with
David at that time, and what if David had been unclean, he must not have
starued: and for as much as lay persons were unclean by the law, in respect
of eating of the hallowed bread, seeing necessity dispensed with one part of
the ceremony, it might also with the rest.

3. As they are in one extreme, which will not admit so much as a legal
impuritie, which is no disparagement to marriage, seeing the virgin Marie after
that holy birth, was also purified according to the law, from a legal
imputation: Luke 2.22. So they are further wide in an other extreme, that
would make it an Evangelical impuritie, forbidding any immediately after such
carnal knowledge, to communicate in the Eucharist: As it stands thus in the
decrees fathered upon Hierome, Sciatis fratres charissimi, quod quicunque vxori
debitum reddit, non potest vacare orationi, nec de carnibus agni comedere
licet: Know ye brethren, that whosoever renders the due to his wife, can not
give himself to prayer, nor eat of the flesh of the lamb. Cause. 33. qu. 4.
c. 1. For if the duties of marriage hindered prayer, then they must altogether be
omitted, and so consequently marriage it self abolished, seeing we ought to
pray continually, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. No day nor night is
to be intermitted without prayer: then by this reason, men that are married
should refrain both day and night. Indeed the Apostle would have them that
married to abstain for a time with consent, to give themselves to fasting and
prayer, 1. Cor. 7.5. but he means extraordinary prayer, such as is joined
with fasting, not ordinary and daily prayer, which is not to be intermitted:
then as abstinence is to be used from meat, to make our prayers more fervent,
so also from wives: but the ordinary exercise of prayer is no more hindered by
matrimonial duties, tempered with sobriety, then by natural offices in the
sober use of meat and drink. Concerning the other point of such abstinence
before the receiving of the Sacrament: as I deny not, but sometime it may be
convenient, not in respect of any uncleanness in the thing, but in regard of
that intemperancie and lust, which often concurreth with it, so neither is such
abstinence to be held necessary for all: for if marriage be in it self an holy
thing, as being of Gods institution, the use of marriage in it self also is
holy, being not by man's corruption defiled: as the Apostle says, Marriage is
honorable among all, and the bed undefiled, Heb. 13.5. how then can that which
is in it self, holy, honorable, and undefiled, defile a man, and make him
unfit for holy things? And in this case, that rule of the Apostle holds,
omnia munda mundis, to the clean all things are clean. Tit. 1.15. Whether it
be requisite to forbear the matrimonial duties, before the receiving of the
communion.
But yet because many times that matrimonial duty may be an impediment to
spiritual meditation, and it draws with it carnal delight, it is not
inconvenient, nay it is very fit therein to use that abstinence, which is in
meats and drinks: that as he that can endure to be so long fasting, to
receive the Sacrament as his first sustenance, does not amiss, who also may
eat first, if his strength serve him not: for as Augustine says, Liquido
apparet, quando primi acceperunt discipuli corpus and sanguinem Domini, eos non
accepisse ieiunos: it is evident, that when the Disciples first received the
body and blood of Christ, they did not receive it fasting. lib. resp. ad
Ianuar. c. 6. So they which can use their strength in the other kind of
abstinence, do therein well: yet here none are to be forced, but to be left
unto their godly discretion. In this point, that resolution of Gregory is
excellent: Si quis sua coniuge, non cupidine voluptatis captus, etc. If any man
use his wife, not taken with lust of pleasure, but for procreation sake: de
sumendo corporis and sanguinis Dominici mysterio suo relinquendus est arbitrio,
quia a nobis prohiberi non debet accipere, qui in igne positus nescit ardere:
concerning the receiving of the mystery of the body and blood of Christ, he
is to be left to his own discretion, seeing he is not to be forbidden to take
it, who can be in the fire and not burn.

4. But the Romanists do yet press this place further, that if it were
required of David, that he had kept himself from women, before he did eat of
the hallowed bread: then it is fit that the Priests of the new Testament should
always abstain, and be perpetual virgins, seeing they continually consecrate
the Sacrament: to this purpose Bellarmine alleges out of Hierom. lib. 1. de
Cler. c. 19.

Contra. 1. I confess that some of the Fathers do make such collection,
being much addicted to the praise of virginity: but Hierome among the rest,
is too far carried that way too much to the disgrace of marriage: as he says,
Quale bonum est, Contr. Single life not to be imposed upon the ministers of the
Gospel.
quod prohibet accipere corpus Christi? what manner of good thing is that,
which hinders to receive the body of Christ? May not the like be said of
meat, quale bonum quod impedit ieiunium? what kind of good thing is that,
which hinders fasting? Therefore we must not so much consider, what they write
according to their own fancies and inclinations, but how it is grounded upon
Scripture, that they write. 2. This collection is very weak, to reason from
the legal observations, to Evangelical constitutions: that because the law
commanded a certain purity ceremonial, that men should be obliged thereunto
under the Gospel. 3. Nay, this reason enforced not the Priests of the law
themselves, which daily ministered in the beginning, before they were in David's
time sorted out into their courses, and yet it was permitted unto them to be
married. 4. Further, if virginity should be imposed upon them, which daily
minister the Eucharist, then upon them also which daily receive it, as the use
was of some Churches in Augustines time, of the which custom he writes thus,
Quotidie Eucharistiae communionem percipere, nec laudo nec vitupero, omnibus
tamen Dominicis diebus communicandum suadeo: Every day to communicate in the
Eucharist, I neither commend nor discommend, but every Lords day I persuade to
communicate. de Ecclesiast. dogmat* c. 53. If all these should have refrained,
that did communicate every day, then in those places there should have been no
marriage at all.

8. Quest. v. 5. What David means, when he says, The vessels of the young
men were holy.
1. The most do interpret these words of the bodies of the young men: for so
are the bodies of Christians called vessels: as 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. That every one
of you should know, how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor: and in
the same sense, women are called the weaker vessels: sic Mar. Bor. Pelican.
Genevens. and so they make this to be the meaning, that the young men had kept
themselves from women, and so their vessels, that is, their bodies were holy.
But David had spoken before sufficiently of the purity of their bodies in that
behalf, having said, that women had been secluded from them three days: for
so long it was, since David came from home, it was now the third day: therefore
David having signified so much in plain terms, there was no cause he should
deliver the same again in obscure words, seeing he was in have, and went in
danger of his life, and had no time now to speak any thing superfluously. 2.
Vatablus understands their garments by their vessels: but there was no
occasion offered for David to speak of their clothes: therefore Iunius better
understands here by vessels, the instruments which were necessary for their
journey, as their bags and sachels, and such other necessary impleme^ts: so
is the word chelei, vessels, taken c. 9.7. the bread fails in our vessels.
Therefore whereas the Priest first asked, whether they were kept from women:
David makes a full answer, that not only their bodies were clean, which
should receive the hallowed bread, but the vessels also, wherein they should
carry the bread, were kept from pollution. And that the vessels are taken in
this sense, appears by the use of the same word in the end of the verse,
where the bread is said to be sanctified in his vessel, that is, in the dishes
and instruments, wherein it was put.

9. Quest. v. 5. Of the meaning of the next words: And it is in a manner
common, specially seeing other shall be (...) this day in the vessel.
1. Some understand the first words of the profane way, making this the sense,
that although their business, whereabout they went, were profane and worldly,
not belonging to religion, yet, it, that is, the bread, should be sanctified in
their vessels: that is, their bodies being clean: Osiand. some apply it to
the way and journey it self, that though they could not choose, but meet with
diverse pollutions and prophanations in the way, yet their present necessity
did sanctify the bread unto them, that is, make it lawful for them to eat
it: Pelican. some, refer the latter part to themselves, that they after they
had eaten the bread, should be more careful to be sanctified in their
vessels: Genevens. some thus, the bread should be kept in his pureness in their
vessels, wherein they carried it: it should not be profaned by any pollution.
Vatab.

2. But, the words are better translated, and it is in a manner common, that
is, the bread: 1. for in that sense it is called before, chol lechem, common
bread: it is not like, that the Priest would speak in one sense, and David in
an other. 2. Beside, derech, the way, is of the feminine, chol of the
masculine, therefore they must not be joined together as substantive and
adjectiue. 3. It is usual in Scripture, to take derech in that sense, for
ratio, or modus, a manner, or respect: as Isa. 10.26. After the manner of
Egypt. 4. That which is said to be profane, is the same that is sanctified in
the vessels, but the bread is said to be sanctified: for so v. 4. the
opposition is between chol lechem, and lechem kodesh, common bread, and
hallowed bread: this then is the meaning, that the bread was in a manner
common, that is, unto the Priests, specially seeing that (for so the words
veaph chi, rather signify, then how much more: Iun. A.P.) other bread, was
sanctified in the vessels: that is, upon the Sabbath new hot bread was
consecrated, and the old was taken away for the Priests use. Iun. This to be
the best interpretation is evident, both by Ahimelechs question before-going,
and by the words following: for Ahimelech made two exceptions to David's motion:
first, the bread was hallowed bread, and so not for any but the Priests to eat
of: and then, it might be that they were not clean from women. David
answeareth to both these: for the second which he touches first, he
answeareth, that not only themselves were clean in that behalf, but the
vessels also and instruments of their journey were pure: for the first he
tells the Priest, that the hallowed bread, when it was taken from the dishes,
and other put in place thereof, was in a manner as common bread to the Priests,
and so it might be lawful for David also in respect of his necessity to eat
thereof. The words also following show this to be the meaning, where mention is
made of taking away the show bread the same day from before the Lord, and
putting hot bread in stead thereof. v. 6.

10. Quest. v. 7. Of Doeg the Adomites staying in the Tabernacle.
1. Whereas Doeg is called, as the most read, an Edomite, yet in the original
he is said to be an Adomite, either of Adam a city of Nephthali, Josh. 19.36.
Iun. or rather of Edom: for the transmutation and change of pricks and points
is usual in the Hebrew: he was an Edomite by nation, but in profession an
Israelite: as Ahimelech one of David's followers is in the same sense called a
Gittite. c. 26.6. Iun. Mart. 2. This Doeg was stayed before the Lord, either
for the religion of the Sabbath, or by occasion of some vow: Iun. he stayed not
in the inward, but in the outward court, whether the people had access. Mar.
3. This his being there about a religious office, was the cause, by his wicked
accusation, of the cruel murder following: yet was not the exercise of
religion the cause, but his bloody mind abusing religion: Pellic. for
hypocrites though they pretend sanctity, yet do retain malice in their
hearts still. Osiand. 4. This Doeg is fitly by some made to be a type and
forerunner of Judas, who betrayed Christ, and brought his Apostles into danger,
as here Doeg accuses David, and works the overthrow of the innocent Priests.
Mar. 5. Yet Gods secret providence is here to be considered, which by this
means makes good his sentence against the house of Eli. Borr.

11. Quest. v. 9. Of the meaning of these words, Behind the Ephod.
1. The most do so take these words, as though the Priest should describe the
place, where Goliaths sword lay wrapped up in a cloth, behind the place,
where the Ephod, the high Priests garment lay. Genevens. Vatab. Osiand. But to
this interpretation it may be excepted: that if Goliaths sword were wrapped up,
it is like the holy Ephod, whereto was annexed the brestplate with twelve
precious stones, with the Vrim and Thummim, lay not open and uncovered, to be a
mark to find out the sword by: and again, the Ephod was kept and laid up in
the holy place, whether it was not lawful for David to come, yet here the
Priest does bid him take it: and further, the Priest gave it him, c. 18.10.
David took it not: which it should seem he did, if these words did carry any
such sense. 2. Therefore the meaning rather is, after the Ephod, that is, after
he had applied the Ephod and consulted with God: whereof mention is made, c.
22.10. but in no place but this, is it touched, that he consulted with God:
beside thus interpret the Chalde, and one Ieshaia an Hebrew interpreter: the
like phrase also see Deuteronomy. 24.20. thou shall not gather the grapes after thee,
that is, after thou have made an end of gathering. Iun.

12. Quest. v. 9. Whether David sinned in taking Goliaths sword.
1. Some think that David offended in taking that sword to convert it to
profane uses, which was consecrated unto God, as a monument of that great
victory against Goliath: and by this means in bringing the Priest into
danger. Pellic. 2. But, although it be acknowledged, that it was David's
oversight, in the presence of Doeg, whom he suspected, to ask and receive
these things of the Priest, as is showed before, v. 4. And beside, it might
have given occasion also to have endaungered David's person among the
Philistims, when they saw Goliaths sword: yet simply in using the sword, there
being no other, David is excused by his necessity, as before in taking of the
show bread. As the Jews to redeem their peace, gave unto the Chaldeans the
vessels of silver and gold, and were not reproved therefore by the Prophets.
And who doubts but that the Church may and ought, where there is no other
remedy, to sell the Church vessels to redeem poor captives. Mart. Beside,
David took this sword the rather, to put him in mind of Gods former
deliverance, that he might by the sight thereof be stirred up to wait upon him
still. Osiand. And further it is not unlike, but that David afterward when he
was King, restored this monument again. Mar. 3. By this example of David it is
gathered, against the fantastical opinion of the Anabaptists, that it is
lawful for the servants of God, where their cause is good, to wear armor and
weapons. Mar. And much unlike unto this high Priest, who had no other armor or
weapons but Goliaths sword, are the high Priests of the Church of Rome, that
profess themselves to be warriors, and wage battle: being more addicted to
war then prayer, to weapons then works. Osiand.

13. Quest. v. 13. Of David's changing of his behavior before Achish, whether
he offended in so dissembling.
1. The word here used tagham, signifies properly the outward taste, and by a
metaphor, the inward faculty of discerning: some read, he changed his speech.
P. B. his countenance. L.S. his sense. A. his habit. V. his show. I. any of
these interpretations may safely be received: but the best is, he changed his
discretion: for so the word is used, c. 25.33. blessed be thy discretion or
counsel, says David to Abighail: he altered his countenance, words, and
behavior.

2. Now to decide this question, whether David did well herein, many things
must be considered. 1. There is great difference to be made between
dissembling in words, which properly is to lie, and in signs: for signs are
not so properly ordained to express the mind, as words are: it may be lawful
for a man to dissemble in his behavior, when he can not in speech. 2. There
are three things in the act of semblance or dissimulation to be observed, the
mind of him that dissembleth, the thing and subject wherein, and the end: for
first, if he dissembleth to save himself, of a distrustful or diffident
mind, he sins: not, if using this as a mean, he still depend upon God, and
trust in him: as David did in this place, as is evident, Psalm. 34.6. He cried
still unto God, even when he changed his behavior, as the title of the Psalm
shows: secondly, in some things it is utterly unlawful to dissemble, as in
religious matters: as for a man to make a show of religion, to aspire to
honor, as hypocrites do: as Simon Magus was baptized: or for one to dissemble
his religion, as to bow to an Idol, which he hates in his heart: thirdly, if
his dissimulation tend to an uncharitable end: as Cain spoke fair to his
brother, to entise him into the field, there to kill him. If the outward
semblance or pretense, which one makes fails in any of these, it is
unlawful: otherwise it is not condemned: as David observed all three: he put
his trust in God, it was not in any religious matter, which tended to the
denial of his faith, but in his civil behavior: neither did any receive hurt
thereby, but he intended his own deliverance without damage to any. So our
Savior used a kind of semblance, when to take trial of the disciples
humanity, he made show, as though he would have gone further: but Peter
offended, and was justly reproved of S. Paul, Gal. 2. that in a religious
matter dissembled, withdrawing himself from the Gentiles, with whom he had
eaten before, for fear of them of the circumcision, and so made a difference
between the believing Jews, and the believing Gentiles.

3. Some to excuse this fact of David, say, that for the time David was stricken
with a fit of madness or frenzy indeed, and so dissembled not: but the
text, showing that David changed his behavior, makes it his own voluntary
act: some say, that David did it by a divine instinct. Pelican. But we not
seek any other defense, then this before alleged, taken from the manner and
nature of this dissimulation. Some make herein David a type and figure of
Christ, who was counted of the Jews as a Demoniake, and one beside himself:
and S. Paul shows, that the Gospel was esteemed as foolishnes among the
Grecians. 1. Cor. 1.23.

14. Quest. Whether any kind of lie be lawful.
1. There are three things which must concur in the telling of a lie: first,
that there be untruth in the matter, which is uttered: secondly, that he which
tells an untruth, have a purpose to deceive: thirdly, that he take a pleasure
and delight in it: the first belongs to the matter of a lie, the other
concern the form. Mart. But these three are thus further to be distinguished:
that in every kind of lie all these are not necessary: as the first, and the
third: for if a man have a purpose to deceive, though unwittingly he speak the
truth, he is guilty of a lie: as Augustine says, August. Enchir. 22. cited
Cause. 22. q. 2.4.
Nec vllo modo liber est a mendacio, qui ore nesciens verum loquitur, sciens
autem voluntate mentitur: He is not free from lying, which with his mouth
unwittingly speaks the truth, but yet wittingly intended to lie. So the third
is wanting in some kind of lie: as when one lies of necessity, to save his
own life, or his brothers: but without the second there can be no lie: as
Augustine says, Qui dicit falsum, quod putat verum, non fallit, sed fallitur,
non itaque mendacij, sed temeritatis arguendus est: He that tells that which
is false, supposing it to be true, is deceived, rather then deceives, and is
to be reproved rather for his rashness, then for lying. August. ibid. And in an
other place he gives this reason: Illud quod non habet duplex cor, ne
mendacium quidem dicendum est: that which has not a double heart, is not to be
counted a lie. As if a man receive a sword of one, and promise to deliver it
again, and afterward the owner of the sword being mad, requires it, and he
refuses to restore it: in this case he is no liar nor deceiuer: for he did not
once dream, furentem posse repetere, Augustan Psalm. 5. cited Cause. 22. qu. 2.
c. 14.
that he could ask it in his madness: to this purpose August. Gelasius
puts an other case, non mentitur, qui animum fallendi non habuit, he lies
not, which had no mind to deceive: as Paul, when he purposed to go into
Spain, and Peter when he said Christ should not wash his feet: for neither of
them thought at that time otherwise to do, Cause. 22. qu. 2. c. 5.
then they said: where then there is not animus fallendi, no mind or purpose
to deceive, there they can not be said to lie.

2. The diverse kinds of lying are to be considered. Augustine makes these
diversities of lying: 1. in doctrina religionis, when one makes a lie in
matter of religion: which he calls capitale mendacium, a capital lie, and it
is worst of all, admitting no excuse. 2. Cum nulli prodest, and alicui obest,
when one by his lie profits none, but hurts some. 3. Quod ita prodest vni,
vt obsit alteri: a third kind is, when a lie hinders one, and profits an
other. 4. Quod fit sola mentiendi libidine: a fourth kind of lie is, which is
made only of a desire to lie and deceive. 5. Quod fit placendi cupiditate,
which is done only with a desire to please. 6. The sixth kind is, quod nulli
obest, and prodest alicui: which hurts none, and yet profits some: which is
of three sorts, either when a man by his lie preserves his own life, or
chastity, or saves his brothers goods or life: so Augustine makes eight
kinds of all: the worst he makes the first, and so the rest in their degree,
as they come nearer to, August. lib. de mend. c. 14. cited Cause. 22. qu. 2 c. 8.
or further off from the first. But none of them are lawful: the first is a
detestable kind of lying: the second is unlawful, because we must not do
wrong to any: the third, quia nulli cum alterius iniuria consulendum est: we
must not provide for one with an others hurt: in the fourth, the very desire
and mind to lie is vicious: and for the fifth, seeing the truth must not be
uttered to please men, much less must we lie to please men. Neither is the
last kind allowable: for as much as the chastity of the mind, is to be
preferred before the chastity of the body: neither is the truth to be
corrupted for any man's temporal commodity.

3. But all these kinds are more co^pendiously reduced to 3. heads. There is
mendaciu^ perniciosum, iocosum, officiosum: a pernicious lie, that tends
only to hurt: a pleasant lie, to delight: and an officious lie, to help: unto
the first of these belong the 4. first kinds rehearsed, which may be thus
distinguished. A pernicious lie, is either in matters of religion, which is
worst of all, as Ananias and Saphira lied unto Peter concerning such things as
was given to the religious use of the Church, Act. 5. and Peter lied in denying
his Lord and Master: or it is in other humane and civil affairs: wherein a
lie is pernicious to others, or to the lier himself: to others it is more
pernicious, when hurt only comes by the lie, and no good to to any, as Doeg
accusing the high Priest, as though he had conspired with David against Saul,
c. 22.1 3. not making mention how David induced the high Priest to do as he
did, coming in the Kings name: this lie was mischievous altogether: the less
pernicious, when good comes to some, but with hurt and damage to others: as
David uttering an untruth to Ahimelech, that he came upon the kings business,
did help himself, but brought Ahimelech into danger. The lie pernicious unto
a man himself is, when he lies, not for any advantage, but upon a custom and
delight, which he has in lying: as the old Prophet lied unto the man of God,
to bring him back to eat bread: by which lie, no profit or advantage at all
did accrue unto him. 1. king. 13. The fifth kind, is iocosum mendacium: an
untruth uttered merely not in earnest, as Joseph's steward, when he had found
his masters cup in Benjamins sack, made them believe, that his master could
divine. Genesis 44.5. The sixth belongs to the officious kind of lying: whereby
either one does good to themselves, as Rachel by her sudden and present
excuse, (if it were not with her as she pretended, for otherwise it was not
untruth at all) delivered her self from the blame of her father: or they do
good to others, as the midwiues in preserving the Hebrews children, and Rahab,
in delivering the spies from danger. Josh. 2.

4. Now even these two sorts of glosing, which is either in sport, or to do
good, though they be more tolerable then the rest, yet are not simply
justifiable: as may appear by these reasons: 1. according to S. Paul's rule,
none must do evil, that good come may come thereof: for then a man might
steal, to give alms with, as well as to tell a lie to do good. 2. it
hinders the common society, when faith and truth is not preserved among men.
3. it brings such into evil name, that upon what good pretense so ever, they
sometime tell a lie, they bring themselves into suspicion, and loose their
credit, that afterward, when they speak the truth, they can not be believed.
Mar. Augustines resolution is here excellent: Duo sunt mendaciorum genera,
August in Psalm. 5. cited Cause. 22. qu. 2. c. 14.
in quibus non est magna culpa, sed tamen non sunt sine culpa, cum aut iocamur,
aut vt proximis prosimus, illud primum non est perniciosum, quia non fallit,
secundum ideo minus est, quia retinet nonnullam benevolentiam: There are two
kind of lies, wherein there is no great fault, though they be not without
fault: the pleasant lie, or that which profits others: the first is not very
pernicious, because it deceives not: for he knows to whom the lie is made,
that it is spoken in sport: the other is less pernicious, because it retains
a certain love and good will.

5. So then we may safely subscribe unto Augustines judgment, concerning the
nature of a lie: quisquis esse aliquod genus mendacij, quod peccatum non sit
putarit, seipsum decipit: who so thinks there is any kind of lie, which is
not sin, deceives himself: which his judgment is agreeable to the
Scripture, for the Apostle says, no lie is of the truth, 1. Ioh. 2.21. This
conclusion then is most true, that every lie is sin: but every thing, that
may be taken for a lie, is not a lie: wherein these distinctions are to be
observed: 1. that there is great difference between semblance in gesture and
behavior, and untruth in words: it may be lawful to dissemble, when it is
not to lie, as is showed before in the 13. qu. 2. that which contains some
untruth in words, is not to be held to be a lie, where there is no mind nor
purpose to deceive, as is before showed in the beginning of this question. 3.
as Augustine says, aliud est mentiri, aliud verum occultare: it is one thing
to lie, an other to hide and conceal the truth, which at all times, and to all
persons, is not to be uttered: whether by silence altogether to keep the truth
secret, as our blessed Savior did before Pilate, being asked what the truth
was: or in part to forbear, not uttering the whole truth, as Samuel did, when
going to anoint David king in Ishai his house, he said he went to sacrifice. 4.
the last consideration is, that no man take a liberty to lie, by the example
of some of the Patriarchs and Fathers under the law: for he which pretends
any such defense, may as well say, sibi raptum alienarum rerum, and
retributionem iniuriae, quae infirmis illis concessa sunt, Cause. 22. qu. 2. c.
19.
nocere non posse: that the taking of other men's goods, and the recompensing of
wrong, which were granted to them for their weakness, can not hurt him now:
as Gregory says, lib. 18. moral. c. 3.

CHAP. XXII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of David's saving himself in the cave of Adullam.
1. THis cave was situate in the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.35. whereof mention
also is made, 2. Sam. 23.13. thither David came, thinking to find relief and
comfort in his own tribe. Mar. 2. But yet David herein showed his weakness, in
trusting to defend himself by rocks and caves, and such other places, as he
is reproved afterward by the Prophet Gad, v. 5. Iun. 3. Some think that at
this time David made these two Psalms, 57. and 142. as the title shows:
Osiand. But these Psalms seem rather to have been indicted, when he was in
the cave or hold of Engedi, 1. Sam. 24.1. Iun. Mar. for the title of the 57.
Psalm shows, that David, when he was in that cave fled from Saul: but at
this time he did not directly flee from Saul, but came from the Philistims
country. 4. Josephus says, that David sent from this place to his father and
brethren, showing where he was: which might very well be, because they came
unto him: for otherwise they could not have found him out: Saul for hatred unto
David began to deal hardly with his kindred: and therefore in disdain, he
called him the son of Ishai: herein David shows his dutiful affection unto
his parents, that he was careful to provide for them in the mids of his
affliction. Mar.

2. Quest. v. 2. Whether David did well in receiving those unto him, which
fled away for debt.
1. It may well be, that all those, which came flocking to David, to the number
of 4. hundredth, came not all with a sincere mind, as acknowledging David to be
the Lords anointed: for David himself suspected them: as he says unto them,
1. Chron. 12.17. that if they came peaceably unto him, his heart should be knit
unto them; but if they came to betray him to his adversaries, God would behold
and rebuke it: Josephus also says, that some came, rerum nouarum cupidi,
being desirous of change and novelties. But if any such came unto David upon
any sinister pretense, it made not David's cause the worse: our Savior had one
Judas among his Apostles, and some followed him only to see his miracles, and
now many hypocrites seem to profess the Gospel: yet is not the cause and
profession it self thereby disgraced. Martyr. 2. But howsoever some of them
might come rather to seek their own, then David's wealth, yet their cause was
good in general: they were not such a band of ruffians and rakehels, as wicked
Ahimelech hired to kill his seventy brethren, Iud. 9. but such as were
oppressed and wronged, and perplexed in mind, and under the extortioners hand:
the most read, cui erat creditor, he that had a creditor, and was endebted:
which some excuse thus, that these indebted could not obtain their right, and
so fell into other men's danger: or being in debt, if they had possessions and
lands, those might satisfy their creditors: if they had nothing, their own
tenuitie and poor estate might excuse them. Mar. But the word nosheh of nasha,
signifies also an oppressor, extortionour: and such persons endebted are
understood, which were under the extortioner and usurers hand: Iun. that were
cruelly handled and extorted upon for their debts. 3. Herein David was a type
of Christ, who called unto him all those which were heavy laden with the
burden of their sins, promising to ease them. Borr. Osiand.

3. Quest. v. 3. Of Mizpeh in Moab, whether David went, and where he left his
parents.
1. Beside this Mizpeh in Moab, there were four places beside of that name, as
is showed before, qu. 7. in chap. 7. it was also called Malle, that is, a fort,
1. Macchab. 5.26. as Iunius reads there, following Josephus. 2. David
commended his father and mother to the king of Moab: some think, because he
was allied by the mothers side by Ruth to the Moabites: but that kindred was
somewhat too ancient: others think, that Moab became Saul's enemy since the
overthrow at Iabesh Gilead by Saul: but that was the king of the Ammonites, not
of the Moabites: some Hebrews think, that this king of Moab did put David's
parents to death: ex Pellic. but that is not like: for it is said, they dwelt
with the king of Moab, that is, was honorably entertained, as Josephus says:
the reason why this king favored David was, for that Saul was his enemy, as
appears, c. 14.48. which was the cause also that David afterward found
entertainment likewise among the Philistims, chap. 27. Iun.

4. Quest. v. 5. Of the Prophet Gads coming to David.
1. This Gad was the same Prophet, that came to David after he had numbered the
people, and offered him three choices: 2. Sam. 23. of him mention is made also,
1. Chron. 21. and 2. Chron. 29. it seems that David used to consult with this
Prophet, to be directed by him, and to be informed of the Lords will: Mar.
wherein the Lords mercy appears to David, that leaves him not in the mids
of his affliction destitute of the word of God: Osiand. whereas Saul yet
flourishing in authority and wealth, was forsaken of God. Mar. 2. Some think
that this hold, which Gad advises David to leave, was not far from the cave
in Adullam: Osiand. but the text shows it to be otherwise: for the cave of
Adullam was in the tribe of Judah, and now David was not in Judah, but in Moab,
in the hold of Mizpeh. 3. After David's return into the land of Judah, Saul
began more eagerly to persecute David, and to be incensed against the Priests:
and this fell out after the counsel of the Prophet: but Gods word was not the
cause of that cruel murder: but it was an occasion, whereby Saul's malice and
hypocrisy was discovered. Mart.

5. Quest. Of the use and necessity of Prophets in times past.
God saw it needful under the law to sustain his Church with Prophesies, and
continually to send them Prophets for their instruction and strengthening
until the Messiah came: which calling of the Prophets the Lord sees not to be
necessary now as then: for these reasons. 1. The Church of God was to be
nourished in the hope and expectation of the Messiah, by the reviving of
prophesies: but now Messiah is exhibited to his Church. 2. The visible Church
of God then was limited unto one nation, unto whom Prophets might be sent,
whereas now the Church is dispersed over the world. 3. The people of Israel,
being then the visible Church, and so hated and envied of the whole world, in
that respect had need of Prophets to be encouraged by them. 4. Beside the
Jews were curious, and inquisitiue of things to come, and therefore to stay
them from running to Soothsayers, and wizzards, the Lord sent them Prophets to
resolve them. 5. They had then only the five books of Moses first, and
afterward the Prophets: and till the Scriptures were full, a supply was to be
made by Prophets: for after the books of the Prophets were written, and added
to Moses, after Malachies time, they had no more Prophets: much less now, the
new Testament being joined to the old, to make the Scriptures complete, has
the Church of God the like need of Prophets. Mart.

6. Quest. v. 6. Of the place where Saul called his servants together.
1. Some read thus, Saul remained in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah: making both
of them proper names, Gibeah and Ramah: so read the most: but Gibeah and Ramah
were far a sunder: for Saul dwelt in Gibeah of Benjamin, called also Gibeah
of Saul: and Samuel dwelt at Ramah, 1. Sam. 15.34. therefore Iunius reads
better, in the high place at Gibeah: and so Vatablus retaining the proper name
in his translation, yet in his annotations takes it for an high place in
Gibeah. 2. Some do take Gibeah not for a proper name, but translate, in the
hill, Sept. but it is evident that Gibeah was the place where Saul's house was.
3. Therefore the best reading is, to take the first for a proper name, Gibeah,
the other appellatiuely for the high place in Gibeah. 4. And the word
translated a tree, properly signifies a wood or grove, eeshel: as Genesis 21.33.
Abraham planted a grove rather then a tree: so reads also the Latin
translatour, sub nemore, under a grove or wood. Iun.

7. Quest. v. 7. Of Saul's oration to his servants.
1. Saul's speech unto his servants is full of dissimulation and hypocrisy: for
therein he shows first his cruelty, that charge his servants with
negligence and unfaithfulness toward him, because they were no more eager in
pursuing of David: who were indeed too much estranged from David, and addicted
to Saul: but thus the wicked mislike all those, that run not together with
them step by step: as S. Peter says, They think it strange, that ye
run not with them to the same excess of riot, therefore speak they evil of
you, 1. Pet. 4.3. Secondly, his flattery appears: he tells them of the
fields and vineyards and offices which David had not to bestow upon them, but
he had: as Samuel had foretold before, that their King should take from the
people their vineyards and olive grounds, and give them to his servants. So
Tyrants counterfeiting the liberality and bounty of good Princes, use by
liberal rewards and gifts, to tie men unto the^: as Caesar, when he had
overcome Pompey, gave so much to the soldiers, as that he was feign to empty
the common Treasury. Mar. Thirdly, he tells many untruths, as that David did
lay wait for him: whereas he did seek David's life: that Jonathan his son
conspired with David, whereas he was only his faithful friend in lawful
things. Mar. 2. Here in Saul we have an image of the Antichrist of Rome: who
calls his counsels and Synods, Contr. The Antichrist of Rome wherein like
unto Saul.
as Saul did to suppress David's, that is, the faithful servants of God, and
says in a manner, as Saul did: that he has Cardinalships, Abbeies,
Prouincialships, and other such dignities to bestow upon his, whereas among the
Protestants they expect no such thing. Mart.

8. Quest. v. 9. Of Doegs malicious accusation.
1. It is better read, Doeg, who stood among the servants of Saul, I.V.L. then
appointed by the servants of Saul: B. or set over the servants of Saul.
G.A.P.C. or set over the asses of Saul. S. for the word natzab is taken in this
sense, and with the same co^struction, v. 7. Saul said to his servants that
stood about him: yet it appears, c. 21.7. that Doeg was set over Saul's
sheepheards or heardmen. 2. This Doeg being an Edomite, is an enemy to David
a true Israelite, as Esau before was to Israel: wherein he does show himself
to be a right Edomite or Esauite. 3. Doeg in this his tale, shows his malice:
in that he takes all that David did in the worst part: concealing that which
might make for David and Ahimelech, and urging that which was against him: he
makes mention how Ahimelech consulted with God for David: but shows not
wherein, as how by Gods direction he gave him the shewbread, and the sword:
Iun. beside, he is a manifest liar, and false accuser, as David charge him:
thou do love evil more then good, and lies more then to speak the truth,
Psalm. 52.3. And herein he was a liar, accusing Ahimelech and David as
conspirers against the king, as Saul upon his information charge the Priest,
v. 11. Mar. Further, he shows himself a flatterer: calling David the son
of Ishai in disdain, as Saul used to call him: therein conforming himself
unto Saul's humor. 4. So this Doeg intended nothing, but to make himself
great, and grow in honor and wealth and credit with Saul, though it were with
the overthrow of others: as David charge him, that he trusted in the
multitude of his riches: Psalm. 52. but David prophesies of his end, God shall
destroy thee for ever, he shall take and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and
root thee out of the land of the living. Psalm. 52.6. Let all such Doegs, that
incense Princes against the Ministers and servants of God, and falsely accuse
them under the show and pretext of obedience, take heed by this example: least
the Lord cut them off, as he did Doeg. Mar.

9. Quest. v. 13. Of Saul's speech to Ahimelech.
1. Saul against all right is both the accuser of the Priest, and his Judge:
Mar. yet he sends for him under color of justice, not intending to spare
him, what just defense so ever he made. Osiand. 2. Saul obiecteth two things
unto Ahimelech, conde^ning him for that, wherein he did well, both showing his
love and charity in releeuing David in time of necessity and distress, and
his piety in consulting with God for him: for Saul, that cared more for the
answers of Soothsayers and witches, then for the oracles of God, misliked that
the Priest should have recourse unto God. Bor. 3. Though Saul herein was a
mean to execute the sentence of God against the house of Eli, yet his sin
and cruelty was no way thereby excused, seeing in him it proceeded only from
malice. Borr. 4. Though the Priest in this thing was innocent, yet there might
be other causes why the Lord suffered this judgment to fall upon him: as often
it falls out, that he which is innocent in that, for the which he is
condemned, is judged in the secret justice of God, for other some precedent
sin. Mar. 5. Who it is, that now is incensed against the Ministers of God,
for consulting with the Lords oracles in his word, it is evident: even that
Antichrist of Rome, which obiecteth heresy and rebellion unto those, which
depend upon the answeares and oracles of Jesus Christ the high Priest, and
chief shepherd of our souls. Borr.

10. Quest. v. 14. Of Ahimelechs defense against the accusation of Saul.
1. Ahimelech confesses these things to be done, which were objected, but he
denies that they were done to any such end, to conspire against the king, as
he was charged: and of his fact he alleges three reasons: first, from the
faithful service which David had performed to the king, and therefore he
knowing nothing to the contrary, had no reason but to help him: secondly,
because he was the kings son in law: thirdly, because according to his duty,
he had oftentimes asked counsel for him, saying, have I this day first begun
to ask counsel of God for him? for the words are to be read with an
interrogation, as appears by the article ha, prefixed: not without an
interrogatio^, as D. Kimhi thinks, as though he never had asked counsel for
him before, but that time was the first. 2. But it may seem strange that
Ahimelech made no mention of the excuse that David made, that he came about the
kings business, which had been a material point to clear the Priest: Josephus
thinks that Ahimelech did express so much: some think, that all which
Ahimelech spoke, is not set down: some, that Ahimelech suppressed it of
purpose, least afterward, if David should have been reconciled to Saul, he
might have fared the worse at David's hand. Mar. But it is more likely that
Ahimelech made some covert mention of it: in saying, he goes at thy
commandment: which words might be so taken, that even then he knew none other,
but that David was employed by the king. 3. Ahimelech in this his Apology,
partly shows his weakness, excusing himself by his ignorance, that he knew
not that Saul held David his enemy, and confessing in a manner, that if he had
known him to be in the kings displeasure, he would not have relieved him:
wherein Ahimelech should have offended, in refusing to help an innocent man,
being unjustly persecuted by Saul: partly he bewraieth his simplicity, that
falls into such great commendation of David, giving him the titles of
faithful, and honorable: whereas Saul being so much incensed against David,
a prudent man would have forborne so to have extolled him. Mart.

11. Quest. Of Saul's cruel sentence pronounced against Ahimelech.
1. Though Saul had lawful authority to convent the Priests before him, as
also where he saw cause to censure them: as all Princes ever had that power
even over Ecclesiastical persons and causes: Contr. The authority of Princes
over persons Ecclesiastical.
as the Christian Bishops did accuse one an other before Constantine the
Emperor: and Justinian the Emperor deposed Sylverius and Vigilius Bishops of
Rome: contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Romanists, who will have
their Clergy exempt from the Civil authority: yet Saul abuses this power
in this unjust and cruel sentence. Mar. 2. And he further offends in the
rash execution thereof: taking no pause or deliberation, but presently
commanding them to be put to death: when Theodosius the Emperor in his rage
had put diverse thousands in Thessalonica to the sword, after being touched
with grief and sorrow for that bloody fact, at the instance of Ambrose made a
law, that there should be the space of thirty days, between sentence giving,
and the execution thereof: which constitution is inserted into the Code, among
other Imperial ordinances: but Saul as he was hasty in his sentence, so he
does precipitate the execution thereof. Mar. 3. His rage was such, that he
commands the innocent Priests to be slain, being unarmed, and consecrate to
the ministry and service of God, who use to be spared even in battle amiddes
their enemies: yea, he spares neither women nor children, and as Josephus
adds further, he rased the city, and burned it, and left the Tabernacle of
God, as much as lay in him, without Priests to minister. Thus this hypocrite,
which before against the Amalekites offended in too much clemency, having the
word of God to the contrary: now having no word of God, sins in cruelty
and tyranny: Mar. wherein his fault was so much the greater, that then he
seemed to be touched with some remorse, but here his heart is hardened. Mart.
4. Josephus makes this moral application, that in Saul we see the condition
of such, who while they are in low and mean estate, seem to be good and
upright men, because then they have no opportunity to show their nature: who,
when they are advanced to honor, and attain unto wealth and power, then
having changed their apparel, as players their habit on a stage, they make no
conscience either of divine, or humane laws. sic fere Joseph. lib. 6. cap. 14.

12. Quest. v. 17. Whether Saul's servants did well in disobeying the Kings
commandment.
1. R. Selamo thinks, that these ministers and sergeants of Saul, whom the
Rabbis held to have been Abner and Amasa, refused to obey so bloody an
edict, remembering that answer of the people to Ioshuah: that they would obey
Ioshuah, as they had obeyed Moses. Josh. 1.17. But whether it were this, or any
other place out of the law of God, that moved them, they did well to choose
rather to obey God then man, which was the Apostles resolution. Act. 5. Osiand.
2. Some think they refused, because Saul's proceeding was against the law,
which will have none condemned without two or three witnesses. Borr. But it
seems, that the horror of such a detestable and cruel fact, rather kept
them from doing it, then the failing in the circumstance and manner. 3. Here
further a question arises, whether the Judge is bound against his conscience
to condemn or put any to death, whom he knows innocent: for the deciding of
which doubt, Whether a Judge be always in giving of sentence, bound to follow
the evidence.
it must be considered whether he be a superior or inferior Judge, before
whom such innocent person is condemned: if the superior, the law is in his
hand, and so he can not be forced to do against his conscience: if the
inferior, he is to refer the matter to the superior judge, and there to
plead for the innocent, or else, if he be not heard, to give over his place of
judgment, rather then to consent to the condemnation of the righteous. So by
no means is he to commit any act against his conscience. Mar. If by oath he be
bound to give sentence according to the evidence brought in, whether it be true
or false, in this case, such an oath being not in truth, righteousness, nor
judgment, does not bind him.

13. Quest. v. 18. In what sense the Priests, that were slain, are said to
wear a linen Ephod.
1. Osiander thinks, that at that time they had their linen Ephods upon
their backs, when they were slain: but that is not like: for the Ephod was a
sacred vesture used only in the time of their service in the Tabernacle: they
are said to wear a linen Ephod, because they were of that age, to be admitted
to the service of the Tabernacle: Vatab. they were actual ministers and
seruitours in the priestly function. Mar. Iun. 2. It is called a linen Ephod,
to make a distinction between the Ephod with the brestplate and pectoral,
which was peculiar to the high Priest, and the common linen Ephod, which all
the Priests used: Mart. which is called a linen coat or tunicle, Exodus 28.40.
3. The principal Priests, which were slain, were 85. there were more beside
slain in the city: Josephus, according to his use in altering the numbers
expressed in the Scripture, says that there were 385. slain, beside those
which were put to the sword in the city: some think that all the inhabitants
of Nob were not put to the sword, but only the Priests. Mart. But it seems
by the text, that the whole city of Nob, being a city of Priests were
smitten, and that only Abiathar one of the sons of Ahimelech escaped.

14. Quest. v. 19. How it stood with the justice of God, that the innocent
Priests with the infants were slain.
1. The sentence which God had pronounced against the house of Eli, the Lord
had suspended unto this time: and now as that sentence was just, so is the
execution thereof: the children are punished, not so much for their fathers
sins, as for their own: being found to continue in their fathers stepps: so
that although in this thing, whereof they are accused, they did nothing worthy
of death, yet otherwise they were not innocent. 2. And concerning infants, they
are not void of original sin, which though it be not imputed unto them in
Christ unto eternal death, yet it makes them subject to temporal death:
seeing then, that infants are once to die: then their death may be disposed of
God in the providence of God, when it makes for Gods glory, and the just
condemnation of the wicked. Mart. 3. Herein David was a type and figure of
Christ, at whose fleeing into Egypt the infants were slain by Herod: as here
these infants are put to the sword for David's cause. Osiand.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. Quest. v. 2. Of David's asking counsel of God, and by whom he did it.
1. David will not here enterprise battle, unless first he had consulted with
God, following therein the godly examples before his time: as the Israelites
asked of God who should go up against the Cananites, and the Lord assigned the
tribe of Judah, Iud. 1. so when the Israelites waged battle against their
brethren the Benjaminites, they went to ask counsel of God: So war is not
to be taken in hand rashly, but with counsel first from God, and then to be
taken with men. Mar. 2. Now some think, that David did ask counsel of God by
the Priest, namely Abiathar, who should now be fled unto David: Mart. Borr.
Osiand. But it is evident by the text, that Abiathar was not yet come unto
David: for v. 5. it is said, that he fled to David to Keilah: but this
consultation was had before David came to Keilah: for now he was aduising,
whether he should go to Keilah or no. 3. Therefore it is rather to be
supposed, that David consulted here with some Prophet, as Josephus well notes:
and it was likely to be the Prophet Gad, who was in David's company, c. 22.5.
Iun.

2. Quest. v. 4. Whether David offended not in asking counsel of God the
second time about the same thing.
1. David did not again ask counsel of God, as doubting himself of the
truth of his word: but because of the weakness and infirmity of those, who
were with him: Borr. Pelican. for they were very timorous: and reasoned thus;
seeing we are not without danger here in the mids of Judah, how much more in
Keilah, being in the utmost border of Judah: Vatab. if we are afraid of Saul,
how much more of our professed and strong adversaries: Osiand. therefore for
their strengthening, David asks counsel again, that all might hear it: as
Christ prayed aloud at Lazarus grave, being without doubt, that the Lord
otherwise would have heard him, for the edifying and comfort of those which were
by* Mar. 2. God was indeed angry with Balaam, because not contented with the
Lords answer, he asked again: for he did it of a covetous mind, being
desirous to go, for the rewards sake which was promised him. But in these
cases God has been well pleased, twice in the same thing to be consulted with:
1. when a man desires to be further strengthened and confirmed in his own
faith, as Gedeon asked two signs one after an other, Iud. 6. 2. when upon Gods
answer, the event falls out not answerable, then for their further
resolution, they may again go unto God, as the Israelites did, being once
overcome of the Benjaminites, Iud. 20. 3. it is lawful for the edifying of
others, as David here does: 4. or for a more full answer, if they receive not
sufficient satisfaction at the first: as v. 11. David propounding two questions
unto the Lord, whether Saul would come down to Keilah, if he stayed there, and
whether the lords of Keilah would deliver him into his hands: receiving but
answer concerning the one, that Sa^u^l would come down, he asks of God the
second time, to be resolved likewise of the other. 3. This shows, that when
men receive not full satisfaction by once hearing of the word of God, they
should resort unto it often: Osiand. as S. Paul says, it was a sure thing for
them to write the same things again. Philip. 3.1.

3. Quest. v. 7. Of Saul's purpose to besiege Keilah where David was.
1. Saul does promise himself Gods assistance, saying, God has delivered him
into mine hand: so the wicked and hypocrites many times do use the name of the
Lord, when God is furthest off from them: so railing Rabshakeh said in the
name of the king of Asshur, Am I now come up without the Lord unto this place,
to destroy it? the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it,
2. king. 18.25. In like manner the Romanists when they enterprise war against
the servants of God, use this posie, Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini, Our
help is in the name of the Lord. And they used to begin their bloody sentence
of condemnation against the Martyrs, In nomine Dei, In the name of God. Mar. 2.
Whereas Saul leaves the Philistims, and bends his force against David who
had overcome the Philistims, and deserved to be honored of Saul: herein like
minded are the Papists, which leaving the common enemy the Turk do turn
their force against the professors of the Gospel: yea, they hold it more
necessary for them to be suppressed, then the common enemies of Christianity:
Mar. who in the same place yet goes further, and complains: Nec ita pridem
erant, qui omitterent communem causam contra Papistas, vt fratres suos, quos
tamen habent hostium loco, condemnarent: And not long since there were, which
did leave the common cause against the Papists, that they might suppress their
brethren, whom they held as enemies. And it were to be wished, that both the
power of the sword and the word, were turned against the common adversary the
Papists, amongst us, who grow insolent and bold, by our domestical dissension.

4. Quest. v. 12. Of David's twice consulting with God, and of the Lords answer
concerning the men of Keilah.
1. The Rabbis suppose, that they were wont to ask the Lord but one question
at once, and therefore David propou^ding two questions, receives but one
answer at the first time: but this is their vain supposall without any ground,
or warrant in Scripture: Mart. for as it is lawful now for the faithful to
ask, not one thing at once in their prayers, but whatsoever they stand in
need of: so we doubt not, but that then they might crave the Lords direction
in all their doubts. 2. But whereas the Lord answeareth, that Saul would come
down to Keilah, and that the men of Keilah would deliver him into Saul's hands,
and yet neither of these came to pass, for upon David's departure Saul also
ceased his pursuit: hence it can not be inferred, that the predictions of God
are uncertain: Reconcil.
for the Lords answer is here to be understood conditionally: that those
things should certainly come to pass, if David stayed there: so the Lord
speaks of that purpose, which he saw already to be in Saul, not of the act
it self. So Jonas threatened the destruction of Nineveh, after 40. days, but
with a secret condition, if they repented not. Mar. A difference also is here
to be made between the prescience of God, and predestination: for the Lord as
well foreseeth what shall be done, as what is likely to be done, in respect of
the second causes: but his decree of predestination is only of those things,
which shall most certainly be effected. 3. Here also may be observed a manifest
difference between the answears, which God used to give, which were certain
without any doubtfulnes and ambiguitie, and the oracles of Apollo, which were
ambiguous and doubtful. Mart.

5. Quest. v. 13. Of David's departing with six hundred men.
1. The Lord could if it had pleased him, have so assisted David, that as he
had victory against the Philistims, so he might have prevailed by force
against Saul: but the Lord thought not good in his wisdom so to do: for this
would have been the cause of intestine and deadly war, and the destruction
of the Lords people: and David might have bin thought to have aspired unto the
kingdom, and to stand against the Lords anointed: God knew how by other
means, without the destruction of his people, or slander unto David, in good
time to perform and accomplish his purpose toward him. Mart. 2. David's number
is increased: he departs to Keilah with six hundred (not four hundred, as
Josephus reckons) whereas he had but four hundred before, c. 22.2. where we
see that affliction and persecution does not diminish the Lords people, but
rather increases them: Mart. according to that ancient saying, sanguis
Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

6. Quest. How Jonathan was deceived, in thinking he should be next unto David,
when he was king.
1. In that Jonathan said, David should be king, he spoke certainly, because he
had the word of God for it by Samuel, who had already anointed him for king:
but the other was not certain, that he should be next unto David, because
Jonathan had no such promise. 2. Some think therefore, to make this saying of
Jonathan good, that he only entreated this of David by their great friendship,
that he might be next him in the kingdom. Pelican. But Jonathan affirms
that it shall be, he prays not, that it may be: and to have asked such a
thing, would have showed some doubt in Jonathan of David's friendship and amity
toward him: some say further, which is most true, that though Jonathan was not
next to David in that terrene kingdom, being prevented by death, yet the Lord
gave him a place in his celestial kingdom. Osiand. Here we see, The children
of God have no certain assurance of temporal things.
that the children of God are sometime deceived in temporal things, whereof
they have no certain promise and assurance, but so far forth, as the Lord
sees it to be good for them: as S. Paul persuaded himself that the Lord would
still deliver him from the danger of death, 2. Cor. 1.10. and that he should
still continue with the Philippians, Phil. 1.25. whereas being a prisoner at
Rome, he was not from thence delivered, till he finished his life by glorious
martyrdom. Mar.

7. Quest. v. 18. Of the mutual covenant, which David and Jonathan made before
the Lord.
1. It is lawful for Christians to join in league together, so it be for a
good end, as for the maintenance of religion: for as God makes a league and
covenant with man, so may one man with an other: this is the third time, that
this league was made between them: once before, when he had killed Goliath, c.
18.3. and again, when he fled out of the kingdom, c. 20.42. for the nature
of man being variable and inconstant, had need often to be stirred up, and
put in mind by the reviving of godly love and friendship. Mart. 2. This
covenant is said to be made before the Lord, that is, in the presence, sight,
and fear of God: Mart. it is like also it was done in the presence of the
Priest with his Vrim and Thummim. Iun. 3. As it is lawful for the servants of
God to make mutual leagues, so it must be limited with certain conditions. 1.
They must not enter into any league or covenant with the wicked: as Iehoshaphat
is reproved for joining with Ahab, 2. Chron. 19.2. and afterward with Ahaziah
his son. 2. Chron. 20.37. 2. Their league must be grounded in the fear of
God, not for any worldly respect or advantage: as Abimelech only desires to
make a covenant with Abraham, that he should not hurt him nor his posterity.
Genesis 21.23. How leagues and covenants ought to be made.
3. They that make such league must not go from it, but surely keep it: not
as Saul brake his oath made to David, that he should not die. c. 19.6. 4. Such
leagues and covenants must be made to good end, not to combine themselves to
persecute Christ, as Herod and Pilate were made friends for the same end: nor
his members, as the Antichrist of Rome, has incited diverse Princes in
Christendom to associate themselves against the people and Church of God the
professors of the Gospel.

8. Quest. v. 17. How Saul knew that David should be King.
1. Some understand this of the amity and friendship, which was between
Jonathan and David, that it was known to Saul: Osiand. but beside that the
coherence of the words here shows, that it must be referred to that which
immediately went before, that David should be king over Israel: Saul else where
signified so much himself, that the kingdom could not be established in
Jonathan as long as David lived, and that he had chosen him to his confusion.
chap. 20.31. 2. Saul knew that David should be king, both by Samuels words,
that the Lord had cast off Saul, and chosen his neighbor better then he: c.
15. by the continual good success that David had, and by the report of
others, as he himself confesses, c. 22.8. Iun. as also by the favor of his
son, and of all the people toward David: Mart. he might also have heard of
the anointing of David by Samuel, and his conscience did testify against him,
that he was unworthy to hold the kingdom: Borr. so that Saul knowing this,
did persecute David against his own conscience. Mar.

9. Quest. v. 19. Of the Ziphims betraying Of David.
1. These Ziphims were of the tribe of Judah, and came of Caleb, 1. Chron.
2.42. of whose treachery David complains unto God, Psalm. 54. which Psalm he
made, when he was in this distress: he calls them there strangers, saying,
v. 3. Strangers are risen up against me, because they were strangers and
aliens in affection. Mar. 2. Herein the Ziphims were a type of Judas, who
being one of the Apostles of Christ betrayed his Lord. Osiand. 3. The reason
which moved them to this treachery, was their fear, remembering what Saul had
done before to the city of Nob, lest he might also deal so with them. Mar. 4.
They describe the place, where David did hide himself, in the hill Hachilah on
the right hand, that is, the south side of the desert, called in Hebrew
Ieshimon: which most do take for a proper name: but it is better here
interpreted the desert: Lat. Iun. for the name of that desert, was the
wilderness of Maon, v. 25. And Number. 21.20. mention is made of Ieshimon, which
was beyond Jorden, where Moses with Israel had pitched, and in diverse other
places: so that it appears to be no proper name.

10. Quest. v. 21. Of Saul's accepting of the Ziphims treacherous service.
1. Saul was led by an other spirit then David, for he slew the Amalekite
that told him, he had killed Saul: and he likewise caused to be put to death
those two captains, that had murdered Ishboseth, 2. Sam. 4. But Saul refuses
no treacherous course to make an hand of David: herein the very heathen and
Gentiles showed more equity: the Romans, when Pyrrhus physician offered his
service to poison the King, delivered him to Pyrrhus: and when the
schoolmaster of the Phaliscians would have betrayed the chief men's children
of the city, they sent him home bound thither again. Mar. The present
Romanists, who usurp the name of Catholic Christians, are herein unlike their
heathen progenitors: for they have given grace and countenance to traitors and
rebels, to practice against their country. 2. Saul blesses them for this
their treachery: which his blessing was a mere cursing: thus hypocrites do
speak good of evil, and evil of good: they take upon them to bless where
God curses, and to curse, where he blesses. Borr. Thus does that Antichrist
of Rome give them his Popes blessing, that yield their service in betraying the
servants of God, and calls them his sons. Mar.

11. Quest. v. 22. Of the meaning of Saul's words, He said to me, that he is
subtle.
1. Some read thus, he thinks of me, that I craftily lie in wait for him.
Lat. but in the original the word subtle, is of the third person, not of the
second. 2. The Sept. read thus, for Saul said, lest he use craft: but here
Saul, is inserted, which is not in the text. 3. The Chalde thus, they said to
him: but the word amar, is in the singular number: and eelai, is to me, not to
them. 4. Others read thus, it is told me, B. G. but the word is in the active,
not in the passive voice. 5. Therefore the truest reading is: he said unto me:
which some refer unto Saul, that his own mind and imagination so gave him.
Vatab. But the better sense is, that David in former times, when he used to go
forth to battle for Saul, being asked by what means he had such prosperous
success, would answer, that he used subtlety and policy. Iun.

12. Quest. v. 26. Of the great straight that David was in, being compassed in
by Saul, and whether he despaired.
1. David being pursued hard by Saul, left the places where he lay hid, and
went down to a rock: Iunius reads, from the rock, called before v. 19.
Hachilah: but the other reading seems better, and more agreeable, as all the
interpreters beside consent therein: for both the article ha being prefixed,
as in this word haselagh, signifies usually, to a place: and the next v.
shows that Saul was on the one side of the mountain or rock, and David on
the other. 2. The Latin translator here reads: desperavit se posse evadere:
he despaired that he could not escape: but that David despaired not in this his
trouble, it appears by the 116. Psalm. which he made upon this occasion. Some
would free David here from all doubting of Gods promises: and think he feared
either because of the people, which were with him, or in regard of Saul, whom
he was afraid, being the Lords anointed, to deal against: and whereas the
Prophet says, Psalm. 116.11. I said in my have, that all men are liers, they
refer it to the treachery of the Ziphims: and will not have it so
understood, as though David began to think of Samuel, that he was as other
men, and might have deceived him. Mar. But the mean between both is best:
that David neither despaired of Gods promise: for thus he says, I believed,
therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116.10. neither yet was he free from some perplexity,
and doubtfulnes of mind: for he was in fear to be swallowed up of death, The
snares of death compassed me, v. 3. and the same word which is here used,
chaphaz, he made have to escape, David expresses there: I said in my have, all
men are liers. As in his body he made have to escape, so in the heat of his
affection he was hasty, as doubting somewhat of Samuel: Iun. but being thus
plunged between hope and fear, he soon recouereth himself again. It
pleases the Lord, that his dear servants should be thus sometime perplexed
and troubled, that they may have in the end more comfortable experience of
Gods mercy.

13. Quest. v. 27. What moved Saul to leave David, and to go against the
Philistims.
1. Some ascribe this unto Saul's valiant mind, and the love of his country,
preferring the common safety before his private grudge and hatred. Pelican.
Josephus also affirms the same, that it proceeded from an inward resolution
that Saul had, that it was better to go against the common adversary, then in
pursuing his domestical enemy, to leave the country to the spoil of the
Philistims. But it appears that Saul did it not of any good mind, or care
which he had: for before this, when David had rescued Keilah from the
Philistims, and had given them a great overthrow, Saul took occasion presently
after that victory to pursue David: whereas if he had preferred the public
business, he should have followed after the common adversary, and let David
alone. 2. Therefore this was rather the Lords work, that pulled away Saul
against his own inclination, as Senacherib was called by the like occasion
from besieging Jerusalem, when he heard that Tirhakah king of Ethiopia was come
out against him. 2. King. 19.9. Thus we see that in the greatest and deepest
dangers, the Lord wants not means to deliver his. Mart.

CHAP. XXIIII.
1. Quest. v. 4. Of Saul's coming into the cave, where David with his men lay
hid.
1. SAul had promised himself before, that the Lord had delivered David into
his hands, c. 23.7. but now the Lord delivers him into David's hands: thus
they which lay a trap for others, do often fall into the same themselves. Mar.
2. It may seem strange that David and six hundred men could be contained in
the cave, and Saul not know thereof: but hereof three reasons may be yielded:
1. caves have this property, that they which are within may see what is done
in the mouth of the cave: but they which are in the entrance, perceive not what
is within. Mart. 2. The largenes of the cave was such, as it might receive a
great number; as in Germany there are caves of such capacity, that a band of
soldiers may lie within them. Osian. 3. Josephus adds a third reason, that
it was a long cave, and David went into the inward parts thereof, which were
very large.

2. Quest. v. 5. Of the speech of David's men: The day is come, whereof the Lord
has said unto thee, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand.
1. Some think that they understand the promise which God had made concerning
the kingdom unto David: and so consequently, that he should have victory over
his enemies, which should seek to hinder that promise. But that promise was
evil applied by them: David had indeed received a promise for the kingdom,
but that he should kill Saul, he had no commandment. Osiand. 2. Some think
that David had beside a particular promise given him for the overthrow and
destruction of his enemies, which was like to have been when David was with
Samuel among the rest of the Prophets: as many things are cited in Scripture
which are not else where to be found, as the book of the battles of the Lord,
Numb. 21. the book of Iasher, or the righteous, Josh. 10. the prophecy of
Henoch, Epist. Jude: S. Paul makes mention of Iannes and Iambres, which
resisted Moses: which things being once inserted in Scripture, are of
sufficient and authentike authority, though not else where to be found. sic
Mart. 3. But they rather mean that present occasion, and commoditatem oblatam
interficiendi, and opportunity offered of killing Saul: and therefore it is
better expressed by the present tense: This is the day wherein the Lord says
unto thee. Iun. Thus we see how ready we are to hasten the Lords promise, if
the occasion serve never so little. Genevens.

3. Quest. v. 5. Of David's cutting of the lap of Saul's garment.
1. The Rabbis think, that David being persuaded by this speech of his men,
went with a purpose to have killed him, but that as he went he bethought
himself otherwise: but it is not like that David had any such cogitation
against Saul, both by his answer which he makes presently unto them, and by
his resolution afterward in the like case, c. 26.10. this business required
have, and therefore it is not like, that there was such a sudden alteration in
David's mind. 2. Now David might easily cut off the lap of his garment,
either for that he had laid it aside, or the tumult of the soldiers without,
might drown the noise within: Mar. or rather, seeing the phrase is, that Saul
covered his feet (for it was their use, when they did their easement, to cover
both their head and feet, and all the body for comelines sake, Pelican. that
it was Saul's upper garment or robe, which he had cast about him, so that David
might cut off the outward lap thereof, without being felt or perceived. 3.
Now concerning this fact, because David's heart smote him: the Jews think,
that David offended therein, and therefore it was laid as a punishment upon him
afterward, that in his old age David's clothes could not keep him warm,
because he had cut off a piece of Saul's garment: but this is a cold conceit of
theirs. Some think, that it is the property and condition of a good and
tender heart, even to be afraid, where there is no cause: but that is not so
neither: for a Christian ought to be assured of all his actions, that they are
pleasing unto God: therefore David's heart smote him at the first in these two
respects, both for that it was his own private cause, and in regard of Saul's
person, because he was the Lords anointed. Genevens. But afterward David
considering, that by this means he did both show his innocence, and that Saul
was thereby reclaimed from pursuing of David, he then understood, that he had
not done herein any thing displeasing unto God. Mart.

4. Quest. v. 7. How David appeased and satisfied his servants.
1. David uses two reasons to content them, because they looked he should have
killed Saul, both that an end might be made of their travail and warfare, and
that David might the sooner come unto his kingdom: the first is, because Saul
was his lord and master, and therefore nothing ought to be attempted against
him: but the other reason was more forceable, and therefore he twice repeateth
it, he was the Lords anointed. God had advanced him to that place of
government, and he would not remove him. Thus did the Apostles behave
themselves under the cruel Emperor Nero, and the Christians in the primitive
Church under the heathen persecutors: they would not attempt any thing against
the life and state of the Magistrates, though they were persecutors, but leave
them to the judgment of the Lord. Of an other spirit are the Romanists now,
who have encouraged subjects to take arms against their Prince, yea to
conspire their death. 2. But whereas David so much urges, that Saul was the
Lords anointed: the sign is taken for the thing signified: the anointing was a
sign of those inward graces, wherewith they which were anointed, were made fit
for their government: and it was a sign of their high and sacred authority:
But the inward anointing did not depend upon the outward: God did confer his
spiritual graces, without that ceremony: as Christ is called the Messiah, the
Anointed of God: therefore that external ceremony of Anointing is not always
necessary. As then the inward anointing is sufficient without the outward,
Contr. Against the anointing of Popish priests.
so the outward is nothing without the inward. Therefore the Papal shauelings,
that so much stand upon their greasing, shauing, and anointing, and thereby
plead immunitie, do but deceive themselves and others, seeing they are not the
anointed of the Lord: but enemies unto Christ the true Anointed, and his
Gospel. Mart.

5. Quest. v. 7. Whether it had been lawful for David to have killed Saul.
1. Some do think, that it had been lawful for David, (though they confess
it was not expedient) to have taken away Saul's life: because David was now the
Anointed king, and Saul was unworthy to reign, having executed such cruelty
upon the Priests: and because he sought David's life, therefore it was lawful
to repel violence by violence. But these reasons show it not: for though David
were Anointed, he was not yet possessed of the kingdom: he was to expect till
God saw his time to accomplish his promise. Saul had committed many outrages,
yet David was not to see him corrected, but to leave him to the Lords
judgment: and violence is not always to be put of with violence, but when
there is no other way to escape. God found out other ways whereby David
escaped, therefore he was not driven unto any such straight. 2. It was not
therefore lawful for David to lay violent hands upon Saul, because he should
have taken revenge into his own hands, which belongs unto God: he should
have brought the Commonwealth into danger by civil dissension: by this
means he would have raised a skandall against himself, that he attained unto
the kingdom by blood: and it would have been dangerous to his own state and
person: others would have thought they might have attempted the like against
him, when he should be King. Mar.

6. Quest. v. 9. Of David's defense in general.
1. As there be many things, which make a man bold, as riches, honor, favor;
so there is nothing which works such boldness and confidence, as the
testimony of ones innocence, and the witness of a good conscience: as here
David being thus inwardly armed, steppeth boldly out of the cave, and calls
after Saul. Borr. 2. By David's example we see, that it is lawful for a
Christian to purge himself of such crimes, as are laid falsely to his charge:
as our blessed Savior did before Pilate, and Paul before Festus and Agrippa.
Mar. 3. David uses these arguments to qualify the rage of Saul toward him:
first, his humility, which appeared in bowing himself to the earth, v. 9. and
in his speech, in calling him his lord and king: his innocence, which against
the vain words of false accusers, he proves by his present fact, in sparing
Saul's life, when he might have killed him: which he does demonstrate by the lap
of his garment, v. 11, 12. then by his confidence, he appealeth to the Lords
judgment, v. 13. by his continual fruits, which would have bin wicked and
evil, if he had been lewdly given; which he proves by that usual proverb,
v. 14. Lastly, he urges his tenuitie and meanenes, that it was not for the
Kings honor to persecute such a poor worm, who in respect of the King, might
be compared to a dead dog, or a fly. v. 15. Mar.

7. Quest. v. 11. In what sense David says, The Lord had delivered Saul into
his hand, seeing he killed him not.
1. This David spoke not either in respect of the opinion of his servants,
which so said, the day was come, wherein the Lord would deliver his enemy into
his hand. v. 5. 2. Neither does David thus say, as though he himself had
thought at the first, that the Lord had offered Saul into his hands to kill
him: Pelican. for David had no such thought at all, as is before showed. qu.
3. 3. But David's meaning is, that Saul was delivered into his hand, in respect
of the opportunity and occasion which was offered, which David in all
likelihood might have taken, if God had not stayed him. God then delivered
Saul, not to that end, that he should lay hands upon him: but to make trial
of David's patience and charity, and to make manifest his innocence. 4. God
sometime is said to offer one into a man's hands, in regard of the present
action, as when one is slain, his life being not before sought: Exodus 22.13.
sometime in respect of the occasion and opportunity only: which opportunity
sometime not to take, is sin, as in Ahab, who let Benhadad go, whom the Lord
had delivered into his hand, and appointed to destruction: 1. king. 20.
sometime to take it, is imputed for sin; because such occasion is only
offered for trial and probation: as here David should have done evil, if he
had apprehended this present occasion.

8. Quest. v. 14. Of the meaning of that proverb, Wickedness proceeds from the
wicked.
1. Some do understand it to be spoken of Saul, as if he should say; though I
know, such is the wickedness of thy heart, that thou will not leave persecuting
of me, yet wickedness shall not proceed from me, my hand shall not be upon
thee: ex Borr. but seeing David did not directly charge Saul with any crime,
but laid it upon those, whom he listened, and give ear unto, it is not like
that David would in that sense use this proverb of Saul. 2. Therefore it is
thus rather to be applied: wicked and evil works do proceed from them which
are wicked, and void of the fear of God, but I am none of those, therefore
mine hand shall not be upon thee, which were a wicked and ungodly work.
Pellic. 3. But it may be objected, that this proverb does not always hold,
that wickedness should always proceed from the wicked, and pious and good
works from the righteous: for hypocrites many times do dissemble their
impiety, until occasion be offered to show it, and then their impiety
breaks forth: to this it may be answered, that such fained and dissembled
piety can not last long, but it will break out at the last. Mart. But Saul
had continual experience from time to time of his faithfulness, and therefore
it was like to be unfeigned. 4. Some do make this application of the proverb:
that the wicked shall perish through their own wickedness: and therefore his
hand need not be upon Saul: for his own wickedness should bring him to
destruction. Vatab. But David by this proverb does rather clear himself,
then accuse Saul.

9. Quest. v. 17. Of Saul's confession, and his tears.
1. Some think that these tears of Saul, and this kind of confession of his
fault, was but in hypocrisy, which Saul dissembled both in respect of others,
who would have thought Saul to be too hard hearted, if he could not be mollified
by David's submission: as also that by this means David might be induced to
come to the Court, that so Saul might have his will of him. But it seems both
by Saul's accusing of himself, his acknowledgement that David should be king,
his instance in making David to swear unto him, that Saul was touched in
deed. 2. For the wicked though they have no true feeling of their sins, yet
may sometime be moved in conscience, though it continue not long: as Pharaoh
confessed to Moses, that he had sinned, and Judas also knew that he had sinned
in betraying the innocent blood: for by the instinct of nature, the conscience
does in some degree both excuse and accuse, as the Apostle shows, Romans 2.14,
15. As David's music had before diverse times allaied Saul's malady, so now his
divine voice does work some remorse in Saul. Pelican.

10. Quest. v. 23. Of David's oath, whereby he binds himself not to cut off
the posterity of Saul.
1. David refuses not to swear unto Saul for these causes: both because Saul
did yield unto David the right of the kingdom, one good turn as it were
required an other, that David again should give him security for his
posterity: beside, David had already in effect sworn as much unto Jonathan,
the son of Saul, not to cut off his seed, c. 20.15. and further, if David
had refused to take this oath, Saul should have had more just cause to
persecute him, whereas now he had no pretext. 2. But here this question will be
moved, how David kept his oath, when as he caused the two sons of Rizpah
Saul's concubine, and the five sons of his daughter to be hanged, because of
the Gibeonites, 2. Sam. 21. To this the answer is ready, that David for his
part was so minded, as much as in him lay, to keep this oath: Reconc^l.
as may appear by the punishment which he took of them, that killed
Ishbosheth Saul's son: but in this oath was to be excepted, unless God gave
any special commandment to the contrary, as he did in the cause of the
Gibeonites: for David asked counsel of God, and followed the Lords direction
in that action: Mar. neither did David voluntarily put the^ to death, but
seven of Saul's sons were required by the Gibeonites, for oppression of whom
the land was punished by famine: neither was Saul's posterity utterly
destroyed, for David had compassion on Mephibosheth Ionathans son.

CHAP. XXV.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the death of Samuel, the time, and place.
1. THough Saul hated Samuel, because he had told him, that the Lord had cast
him off, yet he had no power to hurt him: for Samuel was of great authority,
both because he was the Lords Prophet, and for that he had been the Judge and
governor of Israel, and had governed them justly: as also Samuel had given up
the politic administration, and betaken him to a private life in the school
of the Prophets: and therefore Saul the less regarded him: but most of all the
Lord kept Saul from doing any violence to Samuel. Mar. 2. Seasonable mention is
now made of Samuels death, because Saul at the length had confessed that David
should be king: Pelican. the authority and testimony of the Prophet was not
now so needful, David's enemy acknowledging his right. 3. Concerning the time
of Samuels death, Josephus thinks, that it was in the eighteen year of
Saul's reign: and that Samuel had judged Israel 12. years alone, lib. 6. c. 14.
But this can not stand: for Samuel was at the least 20. years Judge alone, as
it may appear, c. 6.2. and Saul and Samuel had but 40. years between them:
Act. 13.21. then if Samuel judged Israel 20. years, and died in the 18. year
of Saul, there should remain yet two years of the 40. years under Saul and
Samuel: therefore the opinion of some Hebrews is false, that Saul reigned but
seven months after Samuels death: for after this David soiourned a year
among the Philistims, c. 27.7. ex Pelican. see more hereof, qu. 2. c. 12. 4.
The place where Samuel died and was buried, was in his house, that is, among
his family and kindred in Ramah. Osiand.

2. Quest. Of the mourning for Samuel, and his burial, and generally of
funerals.
1. The people had great cause to mourn for Samuel, the Lords Prophet, and an
upright man: and at this time two calamities happened together: the death of
Samuel so great a Prophet, and the exile of David: Mar. and not long after
Samuels death, the Philistims prevailed against Saul, when he and his three
sons died in battle, who were kept under while Samuel lived: it is not like
that Saul was either present, or mourned for Samuel, as he had done for Saul:
yet he did forbear, in this public lamentation to pursue David: and therefore
he takes this opportunity to escape to the utmost parts of the land, while
they were busied about the burial of Samuel. Iun. 2. There was a very great
assembly of all Israel to honor Samuels funeral: for the bodies of the Saints
are to be interred after a comely sort, and according to their deserts while
they lived, to be brought unto the ground with honorable solemnity. But here
therefore two extremes are to be shunned: that neither the bodies of
Christians should be neglected, and cast away as unclean, as among some
heathen, which had no opinion of the immortality of the soul, they made small
account of the dead: and under the Pagane Emperors of Rome, they suffered the
bodies of Christians to lie unburied: and the like disgrace under the
idolatrous Popes of Rome, therein following the steps of their predecessors,
has been offered unto Gods Saints, both keeping them from burial, and raking
their bones out of their graves: whereas the bodies of Christians, in hope of
the resurrection, as the temples of the holy Ghost, should with reverence be
commended and committed unto Christian sepulture. 3. The other extreme, is in
the superfluous and unnecessary cost, which is bestowed upon the sepulchers of
the dead: as the kings of Egypt had their costly Pyramides, and Queen
Artemisia made for her husband, that famous tomb mausoleum, famous over the
world. In time of Popery they shrined them in silver, and cloth of gold:
Contr. Against the adoration of the dead.
and grew to further superstition to adore the relics of the dead: to
invoke them, as their patrons: whereas no such service was done under the law
unto Samuel, or any of the Prophets: neither did Christ, or his Apostles ever
command any such thing to be done. This superstition even Cicero misliked,
following only the instinct and light of natural reason: for thus he writes,
1. Philippic. An me censetis P. C. decreturum fuisse, vt parentalia cum
supplicationibus iungerentur, vt inexpiabiles religiones in rempublicam
inducerentur, vt decernerentur supplicationes mortuorum: adduci non possum vt
quenqua^ mortuorum adiungerem, cum deorum immortalium religione: Do ye think,
honorable fathers, that I would have decreed that funerals should be joined
with supplications, that inexpiable religions should be brought into the
Commonwealth: that the prayer to the dead should be decreed: I can not be
induced to join any of the dead with the religion of the immortal gods. Thus
much Cicero one of the heathen Romanists: our Christened Romanists may be
ashamed then of their gross superstition, and wilful blindness herein. 4.
Beside, as they prayed not here to Samuel, so neither prayed they for Samuel:
for the dead are neither to be prayed unto, nor yet prayed for. We read that
the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaak, Iaakob, were mourned for when they died: so
were the Prophets Moses, Samuel, with others: yet prayers and supplications
were made for none of them: whereby an other superstition of Popery is
discovered concerning Purgatory: if they answer, that there was no Purgatory
before Christ; Contr. Against Purgatory.
surely there is less reason to imagine it after the coming of Christ, seeing
he by his death is as available to purge our sins now, as before. And as in
the sepulture of the Saints of the old Testament, no mention is made of any
prayer for the dead: so neither is there in the new Testament: as in the death
of John Baptist, Stephen, James. Act. 12. Mart.

3. Quest. v. 2, 3. Of Nabal and Abigail his wife.
1. Nabal is described by his place of dwelling in Maon; who kept his cattle
in Carmel, where his business lay: for Maon, Ziph, and Carmel, were not far
asunder, Josh. 15.53. Carmel signifies generally any place tilled or planted:
it was the proper name of two places, one in Isachar, where Baals priests were
slain, an other in Judah, which was this. Mar. Further, he is set forth by his
name, which signifies, a fool; by his riches, by his qualities, he was
churlish, and evil conditioned: riches, where Gods grace is not bestowed
withal, make men proud and insolent: by his kindred, he was of the posterity
of Caleb: good men have not always good issue: parents may leave unto their
children, riches, and possessions, but they can not bequeath them wisdom,
understanding, piety: for these gifts have an other beginning, they proceed
from God: and if there might be a certain descent of these spiritual graces,
as of temporal, they would be thought to be natural. Mar. 2. Concerning
Abigail, whose name is interpreted the joy of the father, she being a
virtuous woman, was unequally matched with a wicked husband: Ambrose hereof
makes this allegory: that this Abigail does signify the Church, which first
served under a foolish and unwise husband, the Philosophers, and other vain
men among the heathen, but after was joined in marriage unto Christ, as Abigail
became David's wife. But this figure holds not in every point: for Abigail was
a beautiful and wise woman, before she was married unto David: the Church of
God was deformed, without any spiritual comelines or beauty, till she was
espoused unto Christ. Mar.

4. Quest. v. 5. Of David's salutation, which he sends unto Nabal.
First, the word is lechai, which is diversely interpreted. 1. Some read, to my
brethren. L. but then it should be leachi, as Numb. 6.7. not lechai. 2. Others
thus, thus say unto him, being living, that is, in good health: Iun. that if
they found him well, they should then wish continuance of health and
prosperity to himself, and all he had: but it is like that David knew before
he sent, that Nabal was in health, because he heard, that he kept a
sheepshearing feast, which being a time of mirth would not have been
solemnized, if Nabal the master of the house had not been well. 3. Therefore
the better reading is, per vitam. C. or ad vitam. A.P. that is, during thy
life, I wish thee this prosperity: so also Joseph. and Vatab. so may thou
live.

Secondly, David in this his salutation omitteth nothing, whereby he might
insinuate himself unto Nabal. 1. It should be a work of mercy, to have
compassion on them in their want. 2. It was honest, because they had deserved
it in in guarding and keeping his cattle. 3. It was an easy matter for him to
do at this time, seeing he made a feast: and he prescribed not what he should
send, but as he thought good himself. 4. It would be profitable for Nabal: for
they might be a safeguard to him and his still. Mar.

Thirdly, here we may see the fickle and uncertain state of the world: how
fools are many times rich, and wise men poor: I have seen, says the
Preacher, servants on horses, and Princes walking on foot, c. 10.7. that is,
men of small virtue and understanding advanced, and men of great desert in low
and mean estate: as it was strange here, that David should become a suitor
unto Nabal for his relief: thus we see that Gods favor is not to be measured
or esteemed by riches or poverty. Mar.

5. Quest. Of Nabals churlish answer.
1. Nabal is not content only not to give any thing to David, but he also
raileth and reuileth him, as worldly wretches many times do not only not
relieve the necessities of the Saints, but revile their persons, and condemn
their cause. Genevens. 2. So Nabal does every way disgrace David: first, he
sets light by his person: saying, who is David: he despises him, that was
the Lords anointed, that killed Goliath, and had defended the people of God
many times against the Philistims, whom Saul himself immediately before had
confessed should be king: he was also of Nabals own tribe: and yet he
despises and contemns him: and prefers his sheepheards and sheepeshearers
before him. Then he also slaundereth his cause, making both himself and all
those which were with him, no better then runnagates from their masters: and
secretly taxes David himself for leaving the king his master. Osiand.
Further, he makes as though his request were unjust and unreasonable, because
he would have that which was provided for others. Mart.

6. Quest. v. 13. Of David's hasty and sudden rage.
1. It may seem strange, that David, who with patience did bear the wrongs
which Saul offered him: and afterward the railing of Shemei: yet could not
forbear at this time, but armeth himself to take revenge: the reason that
moved him was both the ingratitude of Nabal, rendering unto him evil for good,
as David himself says, v. 21. and the indignity and contumely, which Nabal
evil requited David with in words: hereof it is, that men can with greater
patience endure violence offered to their bodies, then contumelies and
reproaches to their good name: because as Chrysostom says, the one concerns
but the outward man, the other touches the inward part, the very soul and
mind. 2. Yet although such cause were given to David, he diversely offends:
1. in his have, that without any further consultation he purposes to take
revenge: 2. in his rash oath, that unadvisedly in his rage binds himself to
finish that, which he had inconsiderately purposed: 3. in that he purposes to
destroy all, even that pissed against the wall, that is, to the very dog: for
the offense of one he would bring this calamity upon the whole house: for
though Nabal had committed this villainy, yet what had the women, and the
servants offended? 3. Some do excuse David, that he did this by the motion and
stirring of the spirit: but we need not use any such defense, seeing that
David himself confesses therein his oversight, v. 33. And these infirmities
of the Saints do serve for instruction, as well as their virtues: for by this
we may see, what we are by nature: that if any good grace be wrought in us, we
should give the praise thereof unto God. Mar.

7. Quest. v. 18. Of Abigails wise behavior, in preparing to meet David.
1. Her wisdom appears, in that laying aside all delay, she makes all
possible have: for it was time in this case to make speed, David being now
upon the way coming toward Nabals house. 2. She will not go empty handed,
she carries a rich and plentiful present: for it was not a little that would
suffice so great a company: so then as Nabal had two ways given offense, both
in giving nothing, and in reuiling beside; Abigail applies the remedy
according to the disease: against Nabals illiberal and churlish refusal to
send any thing at all, she sets her liberality, and in stead of his
unkind reuiling, she meditateth to appease David's wrath with gentle speech.
3. She goes her self, and would not trust her servants: she would be more
faithful in her own business: and she knew she could behave her self more
prudently. 4. She did choose to go an hid and secret way, that she might not
be interrupted in this business, nor hindered by any occurrents in the high way:
Mar. wherein Gods providence was seen, that brought her right upon David,
whereas if she had missed of him, David might have gone on still. Osiand.

8. Quest. v. 18. Of these words: She told not her husband Nabal: whether it
be lawful for the wife to give without the consent of her husband.
1. Some think that the wife has no power to give of her husbands goods
without his consent, but only of such things which are her own, unless where
the case is extraordinary, as this was: Mar. but then a woman shall give
nothing at all, where the law gives unto the husband the whole right of all
such goods which are called moueables, that belong unto the wife: therefore
this were too much to abridge the wife many times in necessary and charitable
duties. 2. Neither yet is power to be given unto the wife, to give when and
what, and to whom she thinks good: for this were likewise to give her
superiority over her husband in commanding his goods at her pleasure: we read
that the Shunamite being a devout woman, conferred with her husband, and
moved him to make a chamber for the Prophet, that came to her house, and other
necessary things: she would not do it without his consent. 2. king. 4. 3.
Wherefore a mean way between both is best, that neither the woman should
dispose of her husbands goods at her pleasure, nor yet have no power upon what
occasion soever, to have the disposition of part: for a difference is to be
made of the things which appertain unto those which are married: the wife must
keep her soul for God, her body for her husband: the goods are in some sort
common between them, by the right of marriage. Again, the wife has more
interest, then either servant or child in the goods of the house: she is not
after a servile, but civil manner subjected to her husbands power. Borr. 4. In
these cases then, and these circumstances considered, the wife is not barred,
to dispose of the substance of the house: first, where the glory of God is
sought, and it tends to the preservation of her husband, and of the whole
house, as in this case: Borr. secondly, where the husband is foolish and weak,
and not able to see what is good for himself and his family, as this was
Abigails case also: or where he is an enemy, and will suffer nothing to be
done, to relieve the necessity of the Saints: as Ioanna the wife of Chuza
Herod's steward, who may be thought to be like minded to Herod, was one of those
which ministered of their substance to our blessed Savior. luke 8.3. But where
a woman has a good husband, and one that fears God, the case is otherwise,
as is before showed in the Shunamite: and as the law was, Numb. 30. that the
husband had power to dispose even with the vow of his wife: which is understood
of the husband of the same religion and profession, that is, an Israelite.

9. Quest. Of Abigails speech to David in general.
Abigail in this her wise oration, uses many pithie arguments to persuade
David. 1. From the simplicity of her husband, who was foolish and a very sot,
and therefore not to be regarded. 2. From her ignorance, that knew not of the
messengers, that David had sent. 3. From Gods providence, who had sent her to
be a means to stay David from this enterprise, v. 26. 4. By showing her duty
in bringing that present, which she modestly, as not thinking it worthy of
David's acceptance, desires might be given unto the young men that followed
him, v. 27. 5. From David's office, which was to fight the Lords battles, and
not to revenge his own quarrel, v. 28. 6. From the effects, which are two,
outward prosperity, and deliverance from all his enemies: from whom God shall
preserve him, doing that which is equal and right, v. 29. and the inward peace
of his conscience, which shall not vpbraid him in time to come, in that he had
not shed innocent blood. ex Martyr. Iun.

10. Quest. v. 25. Whether it became Abigail, to call her husband fool.
First, herein Abigail, all things considered, did no more then became her, and
then was fit to be done. 1. Her husbands foolishnes was known, in so much that
thereof he had his name, so that she did not reveal his secret infirmity,
but only speaks of that, which was in every ones mouth. 2. She was forced
so to do, to deliver Nabal from this destruction present: as Chirurgians to
save the whole body, think it best to cut off a part: so she therein showed
her love unto Nabal, that makes this excuse, in blemishing of his name to save
his life. Osiand. Martyr. Secondly, where Nabal signifies a fool, and indeed
a fool he was: this must be understood with a distinction: for there is a
foolishnes, which proceeds from a natural defect in the wit: such fools are
to be pitied: but such a fool was not Nabal: there is an other kind, when men
are given over unto all leudnes and wickedness, and are blinded with their own
impiety: as the Apostle speaks of the heathen, that their foolish heart
became darkness: and when they professed themselves to be wise, they became
fools. Romans 1.22. Such a fool was this Nabal: who is therefore called, a man
of Belial, that is, a wicked and lewd man. Mar.

11. Quest. v. 24. Of Abigails words, Thine enemies shall be as Nabal.
1. Some think that Abigail prophesies and foretells of Nabals end, which
should follow not long after, and wishes that all David's enemies might in that
respect be like unto him: Osiand. but then Abigail had spoken, as one that
wished and expected her husbands ruin. 2. Others expound it thus: she wishes
that all David's enemies had no more valor in them, then Nabal, or power to
hurt him: Borr. that as Nabal intended evil to David, in railing upon him, but
was not able to hurt him: that all David's enemies therein should be like unto
him. Mar. But Nabal did mischief enough unto David, in depriving him of all
necessary helps, who by that might have been famished with his men. 3.
Therefore it is better understood of Nabals condition, wherein he was like to
have been, if David had gone forward with his purpose. Iun.

12. Quest. v. 29. What it is to be bound in the bundle of life.
1. Some thus understand it, that all the righteous are bound together as in a
bundle: being of the same faith, religion, affection: whereas the wicked do
fall off one from an other, are never soundly conjoined and coupled together.
2. Some refer it unto the next life, that David should be bound up with the
Lord among the Saints, as in a bundle. Borr. 3. Some, that he should have a
sure house to him and to his posterity, who should be as fast bound to
continue, as a bundle surely tied together. Vatab. 4. But it is rather
understood of David's preservation, even in this life: as the words show both
going before, and following: for before she spoke of Saul's rising against
David, and after she says, that God shall cast out his enemies as out of a
sling, that is, their life shall be violently taken from them, as it was from
Saul: but David's life shall be surely bound unto him, that no man shall be able
to take it from him: Iun. yet these words have also a fit relation unto
eternal life, where the Saints are bound up together in the book of life. Mar.

13. Quest. v. 31. Of the grief of conscience: and of the difference between
a troubled and quiet conscience.
1. The word here used, phukah, signifies a stumbling: a metaphore taken from
those, which do dash their foot at any thing, and so are ouerturned, and
fall: so the conscience is offended at the remembrance of the sins past, and
committed. Borr. 2. Some read, it shall be no grief unto thee, that thou have
not shed blood causeless: B.G. but in the original, it is read affirmatively,
that thou have shed: for the grief of conscience arises upon the guiltines of
the things which are past and done: therefore it is better read with an
affirmation. 3. Hence it appears, what the proper property of conscience is,
that although it do not presently smite a man when the sin is committed, yet
it will sting in the end: the Latin interpreter translateth it singultum, that
as the heart throbbeth and sobbeth after some grief and heaviness, and as the
stomach rises after the eating of unwholesome meats: so the conscience in a
man boileth within him, after that sin is committed. 4. Hereby appears the
power of the conscience: that it even smites Kings, they are not free from the
stroke thereof: for before God, in whose sight they are as other men, their
conscience accuses them, as it does others. God is no accepter of persons. 5.
Further, a difference may be made of consciences: there is a troubled
conscience, and a quiet conscience: and both these are seen and found, as well
in the wicked, as the righteous: but not after the same manner. There is in the
wicked sometime a perplexed conscience full of horror, and terror, without
any comfort, as in Judas, when he had betrayed Christ: and sometime their
conscience is quiet, and troubles them not, no not after they have committed
most horrible and heinous sins: as we do not read, that Saul did any thing
at all repent him, after he had caused the Priests to be most cruelly slain:
and these are the worst of all. So there is in the righteous sometime a
troubled conscience, but not without hope, and it is a degree unto the peace
and quietness of the conscience, as David after the sins of adultery and
murder, was greatly plunged, as the fifty Psalm shows. The peaceable
conscience in the righteous is, when having wrestled with their sins, and
judged themselves, they find peace with God by faith in Christ: whereof the
Apostle speaks* Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God thorough
Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. which peace of conscience Saint Paul enjoyed, saying, I
know nothing by my self, 1. Cor. 4.3. 5. Wise Abigail reserving this argument,
taken from the testimony of a good conscience, unto the last place, shows
that there is no greater reward in this world, then the inward assurance of the
conscience: which if it do clear us, we need not fear what the world can
object against us: as David in an other Psalm says, This I had, because I
kept thy precepts, Psalm. 119.56. This was Jobs comfort in his affliction: and
nothing is more available to refresh us in the day of our temptation, yea in
the hour of death, then to say with S. Paul, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, 2. Tim. 4.7. God grant us all
to labor for this peace of conscience.

14. Quest. v. 31. In what sense Abigail desires to be remembered.
1. Some think that she prophesied, that she should become David's wife: but
it was not fit that Abigail should have any such cogitation: to desire to be an
other man's wife, her husband, though vnl^uely, yet being living. 2. Others
therefore conceive that she foreseeing Nabal was like to die, and that she
being a widow, should have need of help, desired that against such time
David should remember her. But it can not be gathered, that Abigail had any
such cogitation or forecast of Nabals death: for as yet he was not sick, she
at her return found him very merry, and drunk with wine. 3. Therefore she in
effect does desire no more but this, that David would remember afterward that
by her means, he was delivered from such a great sin, and that he would
think of her accordingly: as Joseph desired Pharaohs butler to remember him.
Mart.

15. Quest. v. 33. Of David's answer to Abigail.
1. David's modesty appears, that at the admonition of a woman, is not
abashed to acknowledge his oversight: so when Nathan reproved him, he
immediately confessed his sin: so Peter being rebuked of Paul, refused not
to join with him, the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2. which teaches us, not
to think much to be advertised and advised by others when we do amiss. 2. He
acknowledges Gods providence herein, in sending this woman, as an instrument
of this work, in keeping him from this sin: so are we taught, when we are
preserved from any dangerous temptation, to return the praise unto God: yet
so as David does first of all bless God as the author, so he blesses Abigail
as the instrument: for we are in some measure bound even to the instruments,
whereby the Lord conueigheth any blessing unto us: as the instrument also of
any wicked work is accursed: as the serpent was, whose subtlety Satan used
to insinuate himself into Eve. 3. This is a special favor of God, when he
does prevent the cause of sin in his children, which is done three ways: 1.
when as God keeps a man, that he does not so much as intend or purpose any
wicked thing: as David was free even in his purpose and desire from wishing the
death of Saul: 2. when a man is tempted in his thoughts, but yet is preserved
from doing the fact, as David here from killing Nabal: 3. when a man has
committed sin, if then he have grace to repent, that he continue not in
sin: so David being reproved by Nathan, was yet recovered and restored by
repentance. Mart.

16. Quest. v. 35. Whether David offended in breaking his oath which he had
made for the destruction of Nabal and his house.
1. A rash vow and oath, (for the same reason is both) are better broken then
observed: the reasons are these: the end of an oath is to bind us more
straightly unto Gods service, to perform some duty unto his glory: therefore
it is a part of Gods worship and honor, to be sworn by: then by an oath we
can not bind our selves to do any thing, whereby God is dishonored. Again,
the breach of an oath is therefore unlawful, because it is done with contempt
of God, whose name is called upon: but when an unlawful oath is broken, it
proceeds from the fear and reverence of God. Beside, two sins are worse
then one: and therefore we are bidden not to join two sins together, for one
sin shall not go unpunished: but when an unlawful and unjust oath is kept,
there is a double sin committed: first, in the rash making of such an oath,
and then in the ungodly performing of it. 2. But yet this must be acknowledged,
that though it be better to reuerse an unjust oath, then to perform it, as
both Iipthah had done better, if he had changed his vow concerning his
daughter, and Herod his oath touching John Baptist: yet it is an offense also,
to make a rash oath, as David here committed that oversight; but it is better,
the oath being once made by repentance to heal that soar in reuersing it,
then to make the wound greater in effecting it. sic fere Martyr.

17. Quest. v. 36. Of Nabals drunkenness, and senseless end.
1. We see in this example what the fruit of drunkenness is, it overthrows the
better part of man: besotteth a man's understanding, and hardens his heart,
and makes it past feeling. So Balthazar being in the mids of his cups,
had no consideration of the present danger wherein he was: but he was slain,
and the city taken that night. 2. Abigail watching her time, as wise women
will spy their opportunity, when they may speak unto their husbands, did so
frame her speech, that by the very narration of that which was done, Nabal was
suddenly smitten: for repentance and sudden news, either of joy are grief,
are very violent, and oppress the heart. 3. Wonderful was the power of this
woman's speech, that as it before allaied David's rage, so now it pierces Nabal
to the heart: this force was not in her humane eloquence, but proceeded from
the spirit of God. 4. As Nabal was sensles in his life, so was he in his death:
his heart was lumpish and cold within him, like a stone, without any feeling
or repentance: so for the most part is the state of carnal men, that as they
live without sense of any good thing, so they die without comfort. Mar.

18. Quest. v. 39. Whether David did well in rejoicing when he heard Nabal was
dead.
1. True it is, that we are not to rejoice in the death and overthrow of our
enemy, in respect of our own cause: as the wise man says, Be not thou glad
when thine enemy falls, etc. least the Lord see it, and it displease him,
and he turn his wrath from him, Prove. 24.18. from this kind of carnal
rejoicing, David was very far: as may appear, in his mourning for the death
of Saul. 2. But David rejoices, because Gods justice now appeared in the
judging of Nabal: and the righteous in that regard may rejoice and give thanks
to God, when the enemies of God are taken out of the way, which were
impediments to his glory. 3. David also had an other cause to give God thanks,
because the Lord had stayed him from judging his own cause, but had taken the
matter into his own hand. 4. Further, David learned by this example, and so
do we all, not to seek our own revenge, but to commend our cause unto God,
who judges uprightly. Martyr.

19. Quest. v. 39. Of David's sending for Abigail to be his wife.
1. It is not like that David sent to Abigail immediately after Nabals death:
but therein had respect both unto her credit and his own, and expected some
time: for by the ancient Roman laws, a woman marrying within a year of her
husbands death, was counted infamous. 2. David thinks it best to send his
servants, and not to go himself, that her love should not seem to be forced:
and if he had a repulse, the matter would not be so grievous. 3. David makes
choice of a wife every way meet for him: for her wisdom, comeliness, riches,
and which was the chiefest of all, her piety: so it was both an honest,
pleasant, profitable, and comfortable marriage. 4. Further, in that David
takes him a wife, in the mids of his troubles, when men are many times
sequestered, and violently pulled away from them: this showed his trust in God,
and reprooueth their infirmity, which do forbear marriage in respect of the
great troubles and cares that do accompany it. 5. In Abigail there is a
notable example of modesty, who does think her self not worthy to be David's
wife, but does humble her self to be a servant, even to his servants to wash
their feet: the more she does humble her self, the more worthy she was to
be exalted to be David's wife.

20. Quest. v. 43. Whether David offended in taking many wives.
Whereas this law is given, Deuteronomy. 17.17. that the King shall not multiply many
wives, least his heart turn away: there is great doubt, whether David did not
offend against that law, who in this place is mentioned to have three wives,
and beside these diverse more. 1. Some answer, that as in the same place the
King is forbidden to prepare many horses, and yet Solomon before his fall,
while yet his wisdom remained with him, had forty thousand stalles of
horses, 1. king. 4.26. the meaning is, that as it was lawful for the king to
have a number of horses, according to his state, so that they exceeded not,
growing to an importable and unnecessary sum to be kept rather for
ostentation, and pleasure, then for necessity: so the King was permitted to
have two, three, or more wives, so that they were not multiplied out of
measure: which was Salomons fault, and not David's. ex Martyr. But this answer
does not satisfy: for although Solomon having three hundred wives did
multiply more then David: yet he also multiplieth, that increases his wives
above one: as David did that had six: neither does the comparison hold
between the number of horse and wives: for one wife may suffice, where many
thousand horse are not sufficient for the state and service of a King. 2. Some
therefore think that not simply the king is forbidden to have many wives, but
not to multiply such, as should turn away his heart from God, as Salomons
wives did, yet David's did not. But this answer is not sufficient neither: for
the reason is general for all kings of Israel, as well for them, whose hearts
are not turned by this means, as for others: for they are all in danger,
though some by Gods grace are kept from that danger: therefore the occasion of
the danger is to be shunned of all: no man knows his own strength. The like
law is prescribed, that they should not take the daughters of the strange
nations to their sons, least they should make them to go a whoring after
their gods, Exodus 34.16. yet was it simply forbidden to marry any such, though
such danger ensued not: as the people confess that they had trespassed against
God, in taking strange wives of the people of the land, Ezra 10. 2. yet there
is no mention made that by them they fell to idolatry. 3. Some think, that
the King is forbidden by violence to take away other men's wives, as they did
before the flood: which was David's great offense in taking Vriahs wife. Pellic.
in Deuteronomy. 17. If this were the meaning, then Solomon in the great multiplicitie
of his wives, had not transgressed against this law: for we find not that among
so many of his Queens and concubines, any of them was an others wife. 4.
Neither yet can it be thought of David so holy a man, that he would apparently
transgress such a manifest law, which he could not be ignorant of, being
continually exercised therein: and therefore howsoever it were a general
infirmity in those days, not only in kings, but in their people to have
diverse wives, which it pleased the Lord to use connivence toward them in: yet
it shows not to be the meaning of this law, simply to forbid more wives then
one unto kings: seeing that the Lord gave power and liberty unto David to take
his masters wives, I gave thee thy lords house, and thy lords wives into thy
bosom, 2. Sam. 12.8. The Lord would not have gone against his own law. 5.
Therefore in this place, not the thing, but the manner thereof is forbidden:
that he should not take many wives, to give himself to lust and pleasure, and
so to neglect the office and duty of the kingdom: Borr. for as the King is
forbidden to multiply horse, and gold, and silver, so he is restrained from
multiplying of wives: but it was lawful simply for the King to have many
horse, and to have much silver and gold, as Solomon had, but not to trust in
them: So was it permitted unto them, in respect of those times, to have diverse
wives: so they used them not for lust and concupiscence, but for procreation:
neither were addicted unto them.

21. Quest. v. 44. Of the great wrong, which Saul offered David, in taking away
his wife Michal.
1. Saul offended first in taking away David's wife, which was due unto David in
a trebble right: by Saul's promise for killing of Goliath, by David's compact
with Saul, for he bought her with two hundredth foreskinnes of the Philistims,
and by the law of matrimony: Saul sinned again in giving her to another man.
2. Michal also offended in giving consent to be married unto an other: for it
can not be alleged, that David had given her a bill of divorce or separation,
because he afterward did require and receive her again, which by Moses law he
could not have done, if he had given unto her such bill: neither had Michal
renounced David, for it was not the use for the women to give the bill of
divorce unto the man. 3. Phalti also sinned in taking an other man's wife: the
Rabbis here excuse Phalti, holding him to have been a good man, and affirm,
that he came not near Michal: but the contrary appears, in that he was so
loath to part with her following her a great way weeping behind her, when she
returned to David. 2. Sam. 3.16. Saul's tyranny may be alleged for defense,
that they were compelled thus to do: though that does somewhat extenuate the
offense, yet does it not justify it. ex Martyr.

22. Quest. v. 44. Of David's many wives: and first of Polygamie in general,
whether it be simply unlawful.
There are two sorts of bigamie, that is, the marrying of two, and likewise of
polygamie, the marriage of many wives: for either these terms are used to
signify the marriage of two or more successively, one after an other, or when
two or more wives are had together: but the first acception and use of these
terms is improper: for he properly by the law is said to have two wives, that
has them together: binas vxores habere dicitur, qui eas habet simul: he is
said to have two wives, that has them at once or together. Cod. lib. 5. tit.
5. leg. 1. Diocletian. In veritate digami non existunt: they which marry
second wives in truth are not to be said to have two wives. decret. Gregor.
lib. 1. tit. 1. c. 5. the question is here of the second kind of digamie, or
polygamie, not of the first.

Now first those reasons shall be brought forth and answered, which would seem
to prove that polygamie, that is, the the having of many wives at once, is not
simply unlawful.

1. Holy men, as Abraham, Iaakob, Elkanah, David, had many wives at once. Ans.
Holy men might have their infirmities: God might tolerate it in them, in
respect of those times: which makes it not simply lawful.

2. The Prophets never reproved them for having diverse wives, as when Nathan
came to tell David of his sin, he spoke nothing of that. Ans. The Prophets
were silent therein, because it was either permitted or tolerated in those
times for the procreation of the people of God: and therefore it was no
marvel, if the Prophets spoke nothing thereof: the people being beside
inclined to many gross sins.

3. But if it were a fault or oversight in those holy men, they would have
repented them thereof, which we read they did not. Ans. In particular they
could not repent of a fault, which they were ignorant of: in general they did
repent the^ of whatsoever they did amiss, as David oftentimes asks
forgiveness of sins in the Psalms.

4. Nathan coming to David, says that God had given his lords wives into his
bosom: therefore it was not unlawful. Ans. This was but Gods indulgence or
permission to David, to use this liberty, if he would: this only shows a
toleration or relaxation of the general law for a time, it proves not simply
the lawfulnes of it.

5. There is no positive law made to restrain polygamie. Ans. Some think that
God gave them no direct law concerning that matter, for the propagation and
increase of that nation, among whom only the visible Church of God was. Mar.
But the proposition is untrue: for beside the general law given in the
creation, They two shall be one flesh, there is an other particular law, which
restrains marriage of more then one, Leuit. 18.18. Thou shall not take a wife
with her sister, during her life, to vex her: which is understood not of the
natural sister, but of any other woman: for the natural sister could not be
married, no not after her sisters death.

6. But the law, which gives the brother power to marry his brothers wife,
which is deceased, makes no exception, if he be married: but absolutely
enioyneth him to marie his brothers wife. Ans. The Rabbis answer, that she
was not properly counted the second brother, but the first brothers wife;
because the seed was also counted his: some answer that this was a special
prerogative, and therefore can not make a general rule: Mar. an other answer
is, that these particular laws, where there is not some special and
particular exception, must be understood according to the general law, Leu.
18.18. that the next brother, which has no wife of his own should take his
brothers wife: Iun. but it should seem rather to be a special prerogative,
which is the second answer: because in the Gospel mention is made of seven
brethren that one after another took their brothers wife, Matthew. 22. it is not
like but some of them had beside wives of their own.

7. If many wives were allowed, there would be fewer adulteries. Ans. That is
no cause: for David having many wives, committed adultery: it would rather
give further occasion, for vagrant lust, which has many objects, will more
hardly be governed, then matrimonial love tied to one: as a river swelling
over the brooks is not so easily kept in, as a shallow river.

8. Fecunditie is the end of marriage, which is more plentiful in Polygamie,
then in monogamie, the marriage of one. Ans. 1. Fecunditie simply makes not
marriage lawful: for then it might justify unlawful copulations, by which
there is procreation: many have children by whores, that have none by their
wives: it must be fecunditie then according to Gods institution. 2. Many times
there is more fecunditie in the marriage of one wife: as Saul had four sons
by his wife Ahinoam, when as Solomon had by so many hundred wives and
concubines, but one son. 3. Fecunditie made polygamie tolerable for those
times, but it is not so necessary now: then the Church of God was tied to one
nation, now it is dispersed into all the nations of the world.

9. If polygamie were not lawful, what should become of those honouroble
Fathers and Patriarks, which came of such marriages, as all the 12. Patriarks;
excepting Joseph and Benjamin, which were of Rachel the principal and proper
wife of Iaakob: were they begotten in adultery? Ans. 1. It had bin no
disparagement to that nation to come of parents of adulterous seed, no more
then it was for our Savior to descend of Pharez, the son of Judah by his
daughter in law Thamar. 2. Their honor and nobility depended not so much upon
their external birth, as upon the blessing of God. 3. Neither yet do we say,
that they were adulterous marriages, seeing the Lord either permitted, or
tolerated them for the necessary procreation of that people.

10. Valentinian the elder beside his wife Severa, took also her maid Iustina
to be his wife, by whom he had Galla, married afterward to Theodosius the
Emperor, and thereupon he made a law, giving the same liberty also unto
others to marie two wives. Answ. So Claudius the Emperor made a law, that a
man might marie his brothers daughter: but neither of these laws of Claudius
or Valentinian, were thought worthy to be inserted into the Code. God did not
bless that marriage of Valentinian: for Iustina became an Arrian: and
Valentinian the younger the son of Galla, did afflict and persecute the
orthodoxal Churches.

11. S. Paul prescribes, that he that was chosen to be a Bishop, should be the
husband of one wife: whereby it seems, that even in the Apostles time,
polygamie in others was tolerated: as if a Turk having two or more wives,
being converted to the faith, is rather to be borne with, then by abridging
his liberty, to be driven to Turcisme again. Ans. The law of monogamie being
revived by Christ and his Apostles, and brought to the first institution, was
to take place, not for the time past, but for the time to come, as all other
positive laws of nations do: Polygamie was then tolerated as an infirmity
for a time in those which were newly converted: as it might be in Turks and
Jews now till such time as they are confirmed in the faith: but this
toleration makes it not lawful.

12. One may depart from their right if they will: if then the wife will
consent, that her husband may marie an other, why is it not lawful? as Sarah
gave Abraham leave to take Hagar. Answ. The wife in so doing departs not from
her right, but the divine right, which she can not relinquish: for marriage is
grounded upon the will and law of the instituter. Sarah her example can not
serve for these times: yet they which took a wife or concubine, as Abraham
did, that is, for procreation only, and with consent, not forced, but offered
on the wives behalf; do sin less, then they which observe neither of these
circumstances. Other reasons are alleged to this purpose: but these may
suffice. consul. Martyr.

Reasons and arguments showing that polygamie was never simply lawful.
1. God gave unto Adam but one helper: He had abundance of spirit, as the
Prophet says, Malach. 2.15. he might have made more then one: but yet he made
but one, because he sought a godly seed: and that was not peculiar unto Adam,
but established as a general law of marriage for ever, They two shall be one
flesh: which word two, although it be not found in Moses, Genesis 2. yet it is
sufficient, that our Savior, the most perfect interpreter of the Scripture,
has so expounded it. Now that which is made one flesh with the body, can not
be made a member of an other body rightly and truly: therefore a man, which is
one flesh with his wife, can not be made one flesh with an other. It will be
objected, that he which is joined with an harlot, is also made one flesh with
her, as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 6.17. Some answer, that they are one flesh
but for a time: but the better answer is, that it is no lawful conjunction,
because it is not after Gods institution.

2. Christ allows not a man to put away his wife, and to marry an other,
unless it be for fornication: much less is it lawful for one to have two
wives together at the same time.

3. The first that brought in two wives was Lamech, who, as Hierome says, was
the first, qui vnam costam distraxit in duas, who divided one ribbe into two.
Chrysostom seems to commend Lamech, as a good man: but that he does in
respect of his repentance, which in his opinion he showed, not because of his
wives.

4. S. Paul wills that every woman have (...), her proper husband: but how
can he be said to be a proper husband, who is common to more then one.

5. Again, the Apostle would not have them to defraud one an other, but for a
time: but the man, that has more then one wife, must needs defraud the one,
while he attends the other. As Iaakob being more addicted to Rachel,
defrauded Lea, when she was feign to purchase of her sister to lodge with her
husband for her mandrakes.

6. There is a spiritual resemblance between Christ and his Church, and the
marriage between the man and wife: but Christ has but one Church: therefore
the man should have but one wife.

7. The greatest union and conjunction in the world should be between the man
and wife: but there can be no union, where there is a division: and love is not
so sincere and entire, where it is divided.

8. Solomon says, Rejoice with the wife of thy youth: let her be as the loving
hind, and pleasant roe, Prove. 5.18, 19. this counsel, as Solomon himself
followed not, so neither can they obey, that have more then one wife of their
youth.

9. Laban required of Iaakob that he should not take other wives to his
daughters to vex them, Genesis 30. foreseeing the inconvenience of having many
wives: how there is continually emulation and strife between them: as there
was between Adah and Zillah, Genesis 4. Hannah and Peninnah, 1. Sam. 1.

10. Lastly, the Imperial laws do condemn polygamie. Lib. 9. titul. 9. leg.
18. Eum qui habet duas vxores comitatur infamia: he is counted infamous, that
has two wives. Dioclesian made a law likewise against the having of two wives:
Cod. lib. 5. tit. 5. leg. 2. yea the Christian Emperors, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Honorius, would not suffer the Jews which lived in the Roman Empire, to have
many wives, as may appear by their laws. Cod. de Iudaei. leg. Nemo.

23. Quest. Whether polygamie were an infirmity in the fathers.
1. Some think, that the fathers offended not in the marriage of many wives:
but that God remitted unto the^ the severity and strictnes of that law, given
in the creation unto Adam: both for the procreation of the people of God, who
then consisted but of one nation: as also that the spiritual mystery of the
Church of Christ, and the old Synagogue might be represented thereby: as in
Sara and Hagar, Rachel and Leah. Of this opinion is P. Mart. consenting herein
to the judgment of some of the ancient Fathers.

Contra. 1. If there were any dispensation or relaxation of the law of
monogamie, being it a written law, it would have been expressed in Scripture:
for a relaxation or dispensation of a law, must be of the same authority and
perspicuitie, which the law is of. Now no such relaxation is in any part of the
law to be found. 2. Nay the contrary is extant, that in Moses law there is a
prohibition, that a man should marie a woman and her sister, Leuit. 18.18.
which is showed before to be understood not of the natural sister, but of any
other woman. 3. If for procreation this had been allowed, then it had been
most necessary to be granted unto Adam in the beginning of the world, and to
Noah in reviving and restoring of the world: it is here answered, that in their
time, there was no idolatry, and so no separation from the Church of God: and
therefore for procreation of the people of God it was then so needful as
afterward. Contra. But in Cains time there began to be a generation of evil
seed, and then began men to call upon the name of God, that is, publicly in
their assemblies and exercises, to separate themselves from the profane and
wicked, Genesis 4. and yet no polygamie was brought into the Church of God, it was
first found before the flood in the progeny of Came: which might have moved
the godly fathers then, the rather to have used polygamie, that they might have
increased as fast, as the unrighteous seed. 4. Neither was polygamie made
lawful for mystery: for if that mystery held in the marriage of two: yet
there was none in the marriage of six, for so many wives David had, 2. Sam. 3.
much less in Salomons thousand wives and concubines: what mystery lay hid in
that? 5. And if they will justify polygamie in the fathers, how can they
condemn it in Solomon? in whom it is apparent it was a great slip, and
against the law, to multiply many wives only for lust, against the law, Deuteronomy.
17. for he did not take so many for procreation: nay, he made himself thereby
unfit for procreation, as is evident in his small posterity.

Wherefore I prefer their answer, that think the fathers offended in their
polygamie and multiplicitie of wives: but that it was no great offense,
proceeding from ignorance: there being no manifest law to the contrary, and
the general custom of that age bearing them out: and beside the Lord used
this infirmity unto their good, thereby increasing his people: yet this
offense was pardoned and forgiven them, with all other their sins, by faith
in Christ. Sic Melancthon. And so the Lord so disposed in his providence, that
the reformation hereof should be reserved for the coming of his Son: that
the second Adam should reduce marriage to the first institution thereof given
unto the first Adam: and that the spouse and husband of the Church should give
the rule of carnal marriage, by the pattern of the spiritual marriage between
him and his Church.

And least it might seem strange, that the fathers should so long continue in
an error of life unreformed: the like instance is given, Nehem. 8.17. where
the people of Israel are said not to have kept the feast of Tabernacles from
Ioshuahs time till then, by the space almost of a thousand years.

CHAP. XXVI.
1. Quest. v. 7. Whether David sinned not in tempting God, by presuming to go
with one alone into Saul's camp.
1. SOme think, that David did this by an ordinary warrant: because every man
ought to adventure his bodily life, for the saving and winning of his brothers
soul from error: now David had experience, that Saul, as hard hearted as he
was, would rather be won by clemency, as he had experience before, when he
spared him in the cave: and therefore to deliver Saul's soul from this
spiritual danger, he resolves to go unto him in this manner. But there are
two things that make against this answer: first, David did not know, before he
came in the camp, what to do, nor how he should have occasion to make known
his kindness and faithfulness unto Saul: secondly, he had tried already, th^^
Saul though he showed some remorse before in words, yet David's sparing of him
did work no good upon him: and therefore unless David had certainly known,
that Saul by this service might be brought to repentance to save his soul, he
could have no ordinary warrant to do, as he did. 2. Therefore the better
answer is, that David did take this enterprise in hand by the motion of the
spirit: as Gedeon went down to the host of the Midianites, and as Jonathan
and his armor bearer, climed up the hill, where the garrison of the Philistims
was, c. 14. and that it was an extraordinary motion, appears, because the
Lord concurred, and sent a dead sleep upon them. ex Martyr.

2. Quest. v. 10. Whether it be not lawful to kill a tyrant, seeing David
spared Saul.
1. It is out of doubt, that it is not lawful for any private man to lay
hands, no not upon a Tyrant: for if it be not lawful for a private man to kill
a thief or murderer, that is but a private person, much less is it to be
permitted, that he should rise against the Magistrate, though never so wicked.
As David would not here lay hands upon Saul: but leaves him to God, till he
should smite him with some extraordinary sickness, as he did Nabal: or his
natural time come to die, or some violent death in battle: for these three
kinds of death David here touches. 2. But such private men are here to be
excepted, which are stirred by some extraordinary motion of the spirit, as
Ehud was against Eglon king of Moab, Iud. 3. In which kind of extraordinary
vocation, two things are to be considered: both the end, that they did it not
for their own revenge, but to deliver the people of God, as Ehud here did: and
their persons, that though they lived as private men before, yet in these
extraordinary acts, they were declared to be public governors and
deliuerers: as Ehud was one of their Judges. 3. But yet Tyrants and wicked
governors may be removed by the whole state, as Athens and Rome were
delivered from their cruel governors: but this must be understood of such
kingdoms where the kingdom goes by election; as in Polonia, and Venice: for
from whom kings receive their authority, by them they may be constrained to
keep within their bounds: but where kingdoms go by succession, the reason is
otherwise: unless the Prince by oath be tied unto certain conditions, and so
his authority be not absolute but conditional, so long as he observe and
keep the ancient rites and privileges of the country: which seems to be
the question at this day, between the Archduke and the States of the united
Provinces.

3. Quest. v. 18. Of David's Apology unto Saul, consisting of six several
reasons and persuasions.
1. He shows that Saul did persecute him unjustly: what have I done, or what
evil is in my hands? v. 18. 2. He reasons from the nature of his offense,
that it is not such, but there may be a reconciliation, and God may be appeased
by sacrifice. 3. From the person of his enemies, they were wicked men and
accursed before God, who have provoked and stirred up Saul against him. 4. From
the inconvenience that was like to follow, that they would drive him from among
Gods people, and out of his Church, and as much as in them lay, cause him to
consent to the Idolaters. 5. If his blood did fall to the ground in the sight
of Jehovah, he would revenge it, v. 20. 6. Lastly, from the indignity of the
fact: Saul was like to get no honor by pursuing David, who was but as a flea
or a partrich, in respect of Saul, who was king over a mighty people. Martyr.

4. Quest. v. 19. Of the meaning of these words: If the Lord have stirred thee
up, let him smell the savor of a sacrifice.
1. Some do refer this, as spoken of Saul: that seeing the wrath of God was
kindled against him, and had sent an evil spirit upon him, which vexed him:
that Saul should offer sacrifice unto God, to be reconciled unto him, that he
being directed by his spirit, might cease pursuing of David: Osiand. Pelican.
but that the offering of the sacrifice is understood of David, this dilemma, or
forked argument, which David urges two ways, shows, if it be of God, let
him smell a sacrifice, if of men, cursed be they: and the whole sentence still
runs upon David, because they did cast him out from the inheritance of the
Lord. 2. Others do understand it of David: and here there are diverse
expositions. Some expound it thus: if God have done it, let him be appeased
with sacrifice: if he will not be appeased, his will be done: but, if this were
the sense, the^ the other part of the dilemma were superfluous, the argument
being both ways enforced already: and in this sense David should speak
doubtfully, as though God would not be appeased toward him by sacrifice. Others
think that David means, that God would by some extraordinary sign to be
given by his sacrifice, testify his innocence, as he did in Abels sacrifice
justify him against Cain, and Elias against Baals priests: but the phrase of
smelling the savor of a sacrifice, signifies nothing else, but the acceptance
thereof, and of him that sacrificed: as it is said of Noah's sacrifice, that
the Lord smelled a savor of rest. Genesis 8.21. Iunius refers it to David's
person, that if there were any sin found in him, he was willing to yield
himself to the magistrate to be put to death, and so to be offered up, as it
were in sacrifice: but the phrase, let him smell the savor of a sacrifice,
shows, that it can not be understood so: for no sacrifice of any man was of a
sweet smelling savor, but only the sacrifice of Christ, Ephesians. 5.2. it is
therefore understood of the external sacrifices, which had also a sweet
savor before the Lord, not of themselves, but as they were figures and types
of Christ. David's meaning is, that he would offer a sacrifice unto the Lord,
that his wrath might be appeased toward him. Mart. Borr.

5. Quest. How the sacrifices of the law had a sweet savor.
1. The sacrifices of themselves could not give remission of sins: for, as
the Apostle says, Heb. 9.9. The sacrifices could not make holy concerning the
conscience him that did the service: they therefore did no otherwise sanctify
and reconcile unto God, then as they had their force and efficacy from faith
in Christ. 2. But yet both the name and the thing is communicated unto the
sign and sacrament, which is wrought only by the thing signified and
exhibited therein: as the lamb is called the Passover, Exodus 12.11. and
circumcision the covenant, Genesis 17.3. But this conjunction between the sign
and thing signified, depends not upon any natural coherence, as the Sea
follows the influence of the Moon, but it stands by a divine constitution:
so the sacrifices being sacraments of the passion of Christ, are said to purge
and cleanse, and to be of a sweet smell. Mart.

6. Quest. v. 19. How the Lord is said to have stirred up Saul against David.
God stirs none nor tempts them to evil, as he himself is not tempted of
any: yet the Lord may be said here to stir Saul up unto this action, in
pursuing of David three kind of ways. 1. Instrumentally, because God used
herein justly the ministry of the evil spirits, that were the instruments
and ministers of God in stirring up Saul: they were sent of God in justice upon
Saul, to work his will. Osiand. 2. God may be said to stir up the
Magistrate to do justice properly and as the efficient cause: but here Saul
did injustice. 3. The Lord stirs up occosionally, when the wicked take
occasion by Gods mercies upon others, to fret and show their malice, as Pharaoh
did hate the people of God, because he saw that they so mightily increased: and
so Saul was enemy to David, because the Lord had caused him to be Anointed
King. Mart.

7. Quest. v. 19. In what sense they bid David go serve other gods.
1. David as yet was no exile, but he grieved, if Saul persisted in his purpose
still, that he should be driven out of the land, as indeed it came shortly
after to pass. Pelican. 2. He grieueth not so much to leave his parents,
friends, and country, as that he should be sequestered from the service of God,
and be compelled to live among idolaters, and so be occasioned and provoked, as
much as lay in them, to forsake his God: it was not then the land it self,
that David so much affected, as because it was the land of promise, in which
regard Abraham preferred it before his own country of Mesopotamia, and Joseph
before the riches of Egypt. 3. If then David complains hereof, as of the
greatest calamity, that he should be absent from the service of God, and be
conversant among Idolaters: then they are worthy of reproof, which neglect
the assemblies of religion, which they may lawfully frequent: as the Recusants
of both sorts among us, and carnal worldlings: as also they which do without
any necessity run unto the countries of Idolaters, yea, make no conscience
of assembling with them before their Idols. 4. And if this be so heavy a thing
to be sent out from among the people of God: Peter Martyr further thus notes,
Gravissime peccant Principes, qui homines pios e ditionibus suis extrudunt,
quod enim aliud faciunt, quam vt cogantur illi miseri sub Turca vivere: then
such Princes do greatly offend, which thrust out godly men out of their
dominions: for what do they else, then that the poor men be forced to live
under the Turk. sic Martyr.

8. Quest. v. 20. What David means, when he says, Let not my blood fall to
the earth before the face of Jehovah.
1. Iunius reads thus, let not my blood fall, procul a conspectu, far off
out of the sight of Jehovah: that is, before I come to be tried in the presence
of the judge, who is in Gods place. But neither did David intend to yield
himself to an ordinary trial before the Judge, for he knew that there was no
justice to be had at Saul's hand: and the word mineger, signifies ex adverso,
S. or a regione, over against, or directly: as Genesis 21.16. and is better
translated, directly in the sight. 2. Some think, that David utters these
words by way of supplication unto God, that the Lord would not suffer his blood
to be spilt, but defend and protect him. But it seems by Saul's answer, that
presently followed, v. 21. I will do thee no more harm, that he spoke these
words to Saul. 3. Others take these words to be spoken by David positiuely
and affirmatively: that his blood should not be spilt upon the ground, do what
he could: he labored in vain, and troubled himself to no end. sic Borr.
Mar. 4. But the best interpretation is, that his blood should not fall to the
ground, and be spilt as water in the sight of the Lord, the Lord seeing and
beholding it, but that the Lord would revenge and judge it: Vatab. and
therefore David advises Saul to take heed how he shed his innocent blood:
for the Lord would see it, and not suffer it to go unpunished.

9. Quest. v. 21. How Saul is said to have erred.
There are three sorts of error. 1. There is a voluntary or wilful error, and
an inuoluntarie, which proceeds of mere ignorance: the first is of two
sores, either when there is an error in the judgment and understanding: as
those of whom our Savior speaks: they shall think they do good service,
when they put you to death, Ioh. 16.1. and the Jews, as the Apostle says,
Romans 10.2. had zeal, but not according to knowledge. 2. The other voluntary
error is in the will and affection, when the judgment is not corrupted, but
the will consents not, being carried along as a violent stream, to subscribe
unto that, which the mind sees to be evil. And this error is of two sorts,
when the judgment is obscured and cast over for a time with the clouds of
carnal desire and affection, as David yielded unto the temptation of lust,
which in his judgment cleared, though for that time obscured, he condemned: as
when one wittingly and willingly against his judgment and conscience, does
evil; as Saul persecuted David, knowing him to be innocent, only of malice
and hatred, because he was appointed to the kingdom. This kind of error
excuses not at all. 3. The inuoluntarie kind of error is, when there is a
total ignorance and (...) first in the judgment, and then in the will
following the judgment: as Iaakob took Lea for Rachel: this kind of error
excuses wholly. sic fere Martyr.

10. Quest. v. 23. Of the rewarding or rendering unto a man his righteousness,
where also of merits.
1. Some read, The Lord reward every man according to his righteousness:
L.B.G.V. but it is better read: The Lord render unto every one his
righteousness: A.P.C. Iun. for the preposition eeth, here is an article of the
accusative case. 2. The meaning is, that as every one has behaved himself
justly or unjustly, so he shall receive at Gods hand. There are two kind of
righteousness, one is the righteousness of faith, which is imputed unto us,
whereby the righteousness of Christ is made ours; there is a righteousness of
works proceeding of faith, which is imperfect, of which kind David speaks
here: which is rewarded and crowned in the mercy of God. 3. This righteousness
is called both the justice and righteousness of God, as it proceeds from him,
the fountain and author of good things: it is also called ours, because it is
wrought in us as the subject, and by us as the instruments: otherwise we have
no righteousness of our selves, for our Savior says, Without me, ye can do
nothing.

4. Our works are not the cause of the reward, which proceeds from the favor
of God: for eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23.
but they are the means and the way appointed for us to walk in: as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2.10. nay, they are not generally causa sine qua non, the cause
without the which a thing can not be: for infants are saved without them: but
as Bernard says, via sunt regni, non causa regnandi, they are the way to the
kingdom, not the cause of the kingdom: like as a man can not go unto the
city but by the way, nor clime up into an high place, but by steps and
degrees: yet the way is not the cause of our going, nor the steps of our
ascending: So by good works we must walk unto the kingdom of heaven: but good
works do not procure unto us the kingdom.

5. Then we refuse upon these grounds, the Popish doctrine of merits: which is
overthrown by these three reasons. 1. Where merit is, a man must do some
service of his own ability, which he has not received of him, of whom he
looks for a reward: for between him that meriteth, and him which rewards,
there must be a giving and receiving: but man can give nothing unto God,
neither can he do any good thing of himself: our good works, are his works:
then can they not properly merit. 2. Between the merit and the reward, Contr.
Against the doctrine of merits.
there must be an equality, for a man to receive so much, as he deserves: but
between our imperfect obedience, and the infinite reward of eternal life,
there is no equality: as the Apostle shows, Romans 8.15. That the afflictions
of this present life, are not worthy of the glory, etc. 3. He that rewards,
is endebted unto him that meriteth and works, and is bound in justice to
recompense him: but God is no way endebted or bound to us: for we do but our
duty, and when we have done all, we are found but unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10.

6. But it will be objected: 1. why then does the Scripture use this term of
reward, and recompense, if it be not merited. Ans. 1. Because there is some
similitude, though no equality, between our service, and Gods reward. 2. In
Christ Jesus the reward is indeed merited in respect of his obedience, but in
favor it is given to us. Object. 2. S. Paul says, that the righteous Judge
shall give him a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8. the reward then is of
justice. Ans. Of justice indeed, but not with relation to our works, but in
respect of Gods promise, who is just to perform and keep all his gracious
promises. Object. 3. Evil works are meritorious of hell, and therefore good
works are also meritorious of heaven. Ans. The argument always follows not
from contraries, where the reason is unlike: for good works herein have a
diverse reason from evil works, because the evil are from our selves, so are
not the good: the evil are perfectly evil, but the good are imperfectly good:
S. Paul also shows the weakness of this consequent: for having said, the
stipend of sin is death: he adds, changing his form of speech, life
eternal is the gift of God through Christ.

7. Lastly, that Popish distinction of the Schoolmen: of merit of congruitie,
and condignitie, falls to the ground: good works, they say, as they proceed
from our freewill, do merit of congruitie, it is fit they should be rewarded,
as they proceed from the grace of God, they deserve of condignitie, they are
worthy to be rewarded. Contr. 1. From our freewill without grace proceeds
nothing that is good, for being without faith* it is sin: as the Apostle
says, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. and that which is
sinful, has no merit in it at all. 2. Merit of condignitie the Apostle
absolutely denies: Romans 8.15. non sunt condignae passiones: The sufferings of
this life are not worthy of the glory, etc. Grace makes not our works
meritorious, but it makes them good works, and acceptable unto God; which he
crowns of grace and mercy. sic fere Martyr.

CHAP. XXVII.
1. Quest. v. 1. Whether David did well in flying to the Philistims.
1. LYranus defends David herein, that he fled not, as fearing he should be
killed, being assured of the kingdom, but least he should be forced to fight
with Saul: but this is contrary to the text: for he feared least one day he
should perish by the hand of Saul. 2. Others think that David might so
conceive as though promise of the kingdom were conditional, if David did not
fall into some grievous sin: and therefore he fled: but if this had been so,
David offended more in going for succor unto the uncircumcised, then if he had
stayed. 3. Some think, that David did it not, as doubting of the promise of
God, but as a wise and provident man, using the means of his safety: Borr.
but his own words do show his infirmity, that he doubted, least he might
perish: he was in deed to use the means, but such as were lawful and without
offense. 4. Wherefore the truer opinion is, that David herein showed his
infirmity: Mar. Iun. Osiand. as shall be showed afterward.

First, the reasons shall be examined, which are brought in defense of this
fact of David. 1. David fled before to the Moabites, and was not reprehended:
why might he not as well flee to the Philistims? Ans. 1. The Moabites were not
such opposite enemies, as the Philistims. 2. He fled not then to the same end:
then he went only to succor his father and mother: here to serve as a
captain with his soldiers under Achish. 3. His going then was not very
pleasing unto God, for he was admonished by the Prophet to depart. 4. And then
he knew not the Lords pleasure, till the Prophet had spoken to him, as he now
did.

2. But whence should David have provided for all his company, unless he
should have lived upon the spoil of his own country: and by staying he
should have brought himself, and all his friends into danger: and he should
have tempted God, if he had refused the occasion offered.

Ans. 1. David needed not have spoiled his country: he might have prayed upon
the Philistims, and other enemies adjoining. 2. He was not to do any unlawful
thing to provide for himself and his friends, but to depend upon God. 3. A
good occasion and opportunity is not to be refused: but to let pass occasion
and means not lawful, is not to tempt God, but rather to cleave unto God:
which David should have done, rather then by unlawful ways and means to
seem to doubt of Gods deliverance.

3. Christ fled unto the Sidonians, Tyrians, and Samaritans. Ans. He fled not
unto them to take part with them against the Jews, but to instruct and teach
them: but David went to serve Achish. ex Martyr.

Now the reasons which show the unlawfulness of David's flying, are these.

1. He fled unto those which were enemies of religion: as if now a captain
with his soldiers should flee unto the Turk: herein he did contrary to the
law, which did forbid the Israelites to make any covenant with the heathen,
which were about them.

2. He in a manner runs from his calling: who being appointed king of the
Lords people to defend them, goes to join with their enemies. Mar.

3. This his flight seemed to proceed from the weakness of his faith, Iun. as
doubting of Gods promises.

4. And many inconveniences followed upon this his flight. 1. David is driven
to dissemble, v. 11. when Achish asked him, where he had roued to day. 2. By
this occasion the Amalekites burned Ziglag, c. 30. and carried away his wife and
children. 3. He was like to have served the Philistims against his country. 4.
By his absence the power of Israel was weakened and overcome in battle. 5. He
made himself by this means, being entertained among the Philistims,
beholding and bound unto them: with whom he knew, when he should be king, he
was to have war.

Therefore it must be confessed and yielded unto, that David in coming unto
the Philistims for succor, therein committed a great oversight: for herein it
is not expressed that he consulted with God, as at other times: but he herein
took counsel of himself, and of the rest of his company, as Josephus
writes. But this oversight of David is excused by his necessity, as a thief
stealing to satisfy his hunger, is more to be pitied, then he that steals of
wantonness: such was David's extremity at this time. Martyr.

2. Quest. v. 2. Why David flees again to Achish, of whom he was afraid
before, c. 21. when he fained himself mad.
1. Some think, because Achish is here called the son of Maoch, that he was
an other king of the same name: and that this was a general name to all the
kings of Gath. Osian. 2. The Rabbis think, that David sent messengers before
unto Achish: and so he was received fide publica, faith being made before for
his safety, Iun. which is not unlike. 3. Add hereunto also, that whereas
before he went privily and by stealth, now he goes with a band of men, able to
do the king service, and for that cause he is entertained: as Xerxes received
Themistocles; the Lacedaemonians, Alcibiades; and the Volscians, Coriolanus. Mar.

3. Quest. v. 5. Why David desired to be removed from Gath.
1. Some think that David desired to go from the kings Court and city, least
he might have been envied of the Philistims: and because he could not away
with the vices, superfluity, and excess of the Court: or most of all, because
of the Idolatry of the city. Borr. 2. Some, least he might have bin
chargeable to the king. Pelican. 3. But it is most likely, least he might have
been urged to fight against his own people, Mar. and to be employed against
them. Mar. And David did see, that he could not maintain that great company,
without living upon the spoil: and therefore he desires to be further off,
that he might pray upon the bordering nations, without any controlment: Osiand.
which his counsel David wisely colors with a show of modesty: that it was
not for him being a stranger, to dwell with the king. Iun. Also this fell out
well in this respect: that David should have a city assigned him, whether came
unto him a great number of Israel, till they made a great army like the host
of God. 1. Chron. 12.22. By this occasion Ziklag, which was allotted to Judah,
Josh. 15.31. and unjustly detained by the Philistims, was restored to the right
owners. Iun.

4. Quest. v. 7. Of the time of David's abode among the Philistims.
1. Some read, the time that David dwelt, etc. was four months: L.S. but here
somewhat is omitted: it is in the original, days, and four months. R.
Selamo thinks, that he was there but four months: then days beside
months, should be superfluous in the text. 2. Some read, four months and
certain days: B. G. V. but here the words are transposed: which stand in this
order, days, and four months: so Josephus thinks, that he was there four
months, and twenty days. 3. Chimhi thinks he was there seven months, for
so many months were between Samuel and Saul's death. 4. But the sounder
opinion is, that David was there a year and four months: as it may appear
by these reasons. 1. Because chap. 29.3. Achish says, he has been with me,
these days, or these years: that is, one full year, and going upon the
second: for in the space of a few months the king could have no great
experience of his service. 2. In so short a time all those things could not
well be done, which are set down from this chapter to the 31. 3. iammim,
days, is taken in this sense: as c. 1.21. a sacrifice, iammim, of days, that
is, a yearly sacrifice: and the order of the words show as much: the greater
number is used to be placed first: we say not days and months, but months
and days: but to say a year and months agrees well.

5. Quest. v. 8. Of the Geshurites, and Girzites, whom David put to the sword.
1. These were a remnant of the Cananites, the Geshurites were those that dwelt
in Geshur, Josh. 12.5. in Gilead: and the Gizrites in Gezer, which belonged
unto Ephraim, Josh. 16. v. 3. who at the coming of the Israelites, left those
places, and went and dwelt among the Amalekites: but at the beginning they
dwelt in that land, that is, the Geshurites and Girzites in Canaan. Iun. 2.
These Cananites were ordained of God to destruction, and therefore David might
safely invade them. Osiand. 3. But it is like that David, as he did this
exploit of a zeal, to root out the enemies of Gods people, so also he had at
this time a respect unto his present state, and took the spoils of them for
the maintenance of him and his: for God many times uses men's infirmities, to
accomplish his will. Martyr.

6. Quest. v. 10. Whteher David offended in making such an excuse to Achish, as
though he had invaded the Israelites.
1. Some think, that it was lawful for David to destroy those nations without
sin, so he might without sin color it with a show of inuading his own
people: Osiand. but that is not so: for not only the lawfulnes of the thing
which is done must be considered, but the manner also, that it may be done
without offense: now howsoever for the present David contented Achish, yet was
it an offense unto good men, which might take David to have done as he spoke.
Mar. 2. Some think that David dissembled not, but spoke the truth: not that he
put the Ierahmeelites, which were a family of the Judah, to the sword, 1.
Chron. 2.9. or the Kenites, but only smote the south coasts, which of right
belonged unto the Israelites, but were possessed by other nations. But it
appears, in that Achish was contended with David's answer, that he understood
him to speak of the Israelites, whom he had invaded. 3. Others say, that
David here plainly mentitur, tells an untruth: Mar. but I rather think with
Iunius, that David speaks here doubtfully and ambiguously, not using that
plainnes which became such a good man: that he might either be taken to speak
of the Israelites inhabiting Judah, or of the nations which bordered upon the
South coasts. 4. Achish was very credulous and ready to believe David:
Josephus gives this reason, because it was easy to persuade him to believe
that, which he greatly affected and desired.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1. Quest. v. 2. Whether David promised his aid unto Achish, and whether
therein he did well.
1. SOme think that David had no purpose at all to fight against Israel, but
only he would have defended the Kings person: who says, he would make him
keeper of his head for ever: but this agrees not to David's own words, that
seems to be discontented, because he was sent back, and might not go to
fight against the enemies of the king, c. 29.8. it seems therefore that he
bare the king in hand, that he would go and fight against Israel. Mar. 2.
Others think, that this war was just, which the Philistims at this time
took in hand against Saul, because that therein the Lord purposed to punish
Saul's wickedness, and beside the kingdom belonged unto David, and therefore he
might seek his own. But neither of these makes this war just: for
howsoever God intented herein to judge Saul, yet the Philistims did it of a
hateful mind against the people of God: and though David were the anointed
king, as it were the apparent heir of the kingdom, yet he had no such
commandment to invade the kingdom, but to wait his time. 3. Some are of
opinion, that David would in the battle have turned his force against Achish:
but herein David beside his deep dissimulation, should have showed great
unthankfulness unto Achish with whom he had found such kind entertainment. 4.
Therefore the best solution of this doubt is, that David gave this wise answer
unto Achish, neither directly promising his help, as Josephus says, he did
prompte polliceri operam, readily promise his help: neither yet denying the
same: but he waited upon God for his direction, praying fervently in his heart
unto God, that some impediment might fall out, that he should not be forced to
fight against the Israelites, and specially against his loving and dear friend
Jonathan. sic Osiand. Mar. Pelican.

2. Quest. v. 3. Of what mind Saul put away the sorcerers in Israel.
1. Some do gather that whereas mention is made here together of Samuels
death, and that Saul had put away the sorcerers, that hereby it is signified,
that Saul while Samuel lived used to consult with him: and that by his advice
he did according to the law of God expel the sorcerers. Pelican. But after
that the Lord had rejected Saul, and David was anointed king, Samuel went no
more to visit Saul, c. 15.35. neither does it seem that Saul much regarded
Samuel. And it is not like that Saul did this of any good mind, by Samuels
direction: for it seems, that at the same time the Gibeonites were slain, 2.
Sam. 21. which thing did displease God. 2. Saul therefore did it of a blind
zeal, that he might seem to make show of religion: not with any true heart or
affection: for then he would not have run unto sorcerers himself. Mar. Bor.
3. This then is here inserted both of Samuels death, and Saul's expelling of
sorcerers: both to show, that it was not true Samuel, which afterward appeared
unto him, Osiand. and to manifest Saul's inconstancy, in returning to his vomit
again, to build again what he had destroyed: and his impiety in forsaking of
God, and craving help of the devil. Iun.

3. Quest. Whether it belonged unto Saul, to expel witches and sorcerers.
1. The Romanists opinion is, that Princes are not to meddle with religion, but
that it belongs unto the Pope to manage the affairs of the Church, and such
things as concern the soul: leaving unto the Prince only the care and charge
of the body, and such things as concern the civil and politic state. And
here they do urge the example of Vzziah, who was stricken with leprosy,
Contr. Of the Princes authority in Ecclesiastical matters.
when he attempted to have sacrificed. But this example is unfitly alleged:
for Princes are not indeed to meddle with the execution of Ecclesiastical
offices, as themselves to preach, to baptize, to excommunicate: as Vzziah would
have taken upon him the office of the Priest: but it belongs unto them, to
see that as well Ecclesiastical persons, and others do their duties: and by
good laws to command the true religion to be received of all. The reasons are
these.

1. Because Princes are in Gods place here in earth, and every soul is
commanded to be subject unto them, Romans 13.1. then is no soul excepted,
whether of Bishop, or of whomsoever. 2. Their office is to bear the sword, and
to see all ungodliness punished, as well the transgressions of the first, as of
the second table: as Augustine says, been se res haberet si magistratus
adulteria punire posset, animorum scortationes non posset: It were well, if the
magistrate may punish adultery, and not meet with the spiritual fornication
of the soul. 3. As Princes have the oversight of other professions, which yet
they themselves practice not: as to see that Physicians, and Apothecaries,
which attend upon the health of the body, should deal faithfully in their
several vocations, so also, seeing there is great necessity of providing
physic for the soul, much more ought magistrates to take care thereof. 4.
This appears by the example and practice of all godly Magistrates, David,
Solomon, Hezekiah, Josias, and all the good kings of Judah, did purge and
reform the Church of God, put down Idolatry, and set up the true worship: so
did the good Christian Emperors, Constantinus, Theodosius, Carolus. 5. For
unless this power according to the word of God be yielded unto Christian
Magistrates, what remedy should there be to redress the enormities of the
Church, when the spiritual governors thereof, become dissolute, disordered,
and corrupt. sic fere Mar.

4. Quest. v. 6. How Saul asked counsel of the Lord, and why the Lord
vouchsafed no answer.
1. Saul is here said to have asked counsel of the Lord, and yet 1. Chron.
11.14. it is said, Reconcil.
he did not ask counsel of Jehovah: because he did not seek unto God in
truth, but in hypocrisy: and therefore the Lord seeing his heart, would not
vouchsafe him an answer: and he which had before destroyed the innocent
Priests, was not worthy to receive any comfort by them. 2. Here are three
ways expressed, whereby the Lord used to make known his will to his servants:
by dreams, by Vrim, that is, by the Priests, and by Prophets: there were other
ways, as God spoke sometime by his Angels, they also sometime used lots, but
the other three were more usual in those times. Mar. 3. There were two sorts
of dreams: some good dreams, which were sent upon the servants of God, some
were but the illusions of Satan: and these two kind of dreams differed in
three things: in the author, God sent good dreams, the other proceeded from
Satan: the servants of God, as Joseph and Daniel, saw good dreams and visions,
the false prophets were deluded by the other: the first sort were to good end,
to set forth the glory of God, the other were to an evil end, to seduce and
deceive the people, Deuteronomy. 13.2. Now God did not reveal his will unto any by
dreams, to have Saul advertised of his will. Borr. 4. But whereas Saul is said
to have asked counsel of God, and he answered him not by Vrim: some think
that after Abiathar was gone with the Ephod, Reconcil.
he caused an other to be made; some, that he had sent to Abiathar, to consult
for him; some, that he consulted by some of the inferior Priests which were
left: Osiand. but the high Priest only consulted by the Vrim. But the meaning
is this, that the Vrim was not now with Saul, but with David, and therefore
Saul could receive no answer by Vrim, although he had desired it. sic Mar. Iun.

5. Quest. v. 6. What the Vrim and Thummim were whereby the Lord made answer.
1. Some think, that Vrim and Thummim, which signify light and perfection,
were no peculiar thing belonging to the priestly ornaments: but only signified
the light of doctrine, and holiness of life, which the Priest should be endued
with: so expounds the Latin and Septuag. which interpret these words,
doctrinam and veritatem, doctrine and verity: but it seems by the
description, of putting the Vrim and Thummim to the brestplate, Exodus 28.30.
that it was some real thing, that was put thereunto. 2. Some did take them
only for the illuminations and visions which the Priest had: but as is showed
before, it is evident that it was some real thing. 3. Some take it that these
names, Vrim and Thummim, were written in the brestplate: but then they should
rather be said to be written, then put to. 4. Other think, they were two
precious stones shining beyond the rest, that were put into the pectorall: but
the brestplate or pectorall being made four square, and set with twelve
precious stones in order, could not conveniently receive them. 5. The opinion
of some is, that this Vrim and Thummim, was nothing else but the name Jehovah,
which was written, and put in the duplicature or folding of the brestplate,
which was made double: but, the name of Jehovah was written in the golden plate
of the Priests forehead, Exodus 28.36. therefore it seems it was of no great
use to put it secretly within the brestplate. 6. Some further think, that the
Vrim and Thummim, was not any of the priestly ornaments, which were made by the
workman, but it was given unto Moses by the Lord, to be put within the
brestplate, which may seem to be the reason, why it was described to be made
double, Exodus 28.16. Iun. But the preposition el, signifies properly, to, not
in, that we need not understand, the Vrim and Thummim, to be put into the
brestplate, but only unto it: and it may be thought to be made double as with
a lining, for the strengthening of it, because it was beset with the precious
stones. 7. Wherefore leaving other conjectures, I think it most probable that
this Vrim and Thummim, were nothing else but the precious stones themselves,
which were set into the pectorall: so called of their exceeding brightness and
perfection: Osiand. Mar. which may be thought to have been more then ordinary
precious stones, prepared of the Lord for this use. And this may further
appear thus: because the same title is given to the brestplate and to the Vrim
and Thummim: the pectorall is called the brestplate of judgment, Exodus 28.29.
and so is the other called the Vrim of judgment, or judgment of Vrim, Numb.
27.21. which was so called, because the high Priest consulting with God by
Vrim, gave direction what was to be don, or not done. Again, to apply the
Ephod, is all one as to ask counsel of God by Vrim, as 1. Sam. c. 23.9. and
c. 30.7. David bids Abiathar apply or bring the Ephod.

6. Quest. How the Lord used to answer by Vrim.
There are 3. opinions. 1. Some think, that by inward illumination of the
mind, the Lord revealed his will to the Priest: ex Vat. but I take it, that this
was the difference between the Priests and the Prophets, that these by some
secret instinct and inspiration had the will of God revealed, the other by some
outward and sensible means. 2. Josephus thinks, that when the answer was
affirmative, the precious stones did shine extraordinarily: but he adds
further, that these stones had ceased to shine in that manner 200. years before
his time, because of the sins of the people: but it may be doubted, whether, as
they were with^^ the Ark after the return from Babylon, though that seems to
be a fabulous report of Ieremies hiding it, 2. Macch. 2. so they also wanted
the priestly Ephod. And again, this shining of the stones served only for
affirmative and good answers: it still remains uncertain how they received
negative and heavy answers. 3. Therefore I rather think, that the Lord
answered the Priest by some voice and oracle: as the Lord used to answer Moses
by voice, from the Mercy seat, Numb. 7.89. as it also appears, c. 23.7. how
the Lord answered David's demands by voice: The Lord said, etc.

7. Quest. What manner of woman Saul would have sought out for him, and why?
1. The word here used is bahalath obh, the dame of a familiar: as such spirits
use to call the witches, dames: the word signifies a bottle, because such used
to speak out of their bellies, as out of a bottle* with an hallow voice: in
Latin they are called Pythones, Pythonists: so called of Apollo Pythius,
because the oracles of Apollo, who was called Pythius, were delivered by them.
Apollos Pythonisse was by her obscene parts filled with wind, and gave answer
unto their demands. Apollo was so called of the serpent Pitho which he killed.
ex Martyr. This obh was a spirit as it seems, whom they imagined to have
power to raise up the dead: as a woman of Thessalie raised up a soldier lately
dead, which declared unto Pompey the evil success of the Pharsalian battle.
Lucan. l. 6. Julian the Apostata, being fallen from the Christian faith, did
betake himself unto sorcerers and Conjurers, as Saul does here.

8. Quest. v. 8. Whether Saul in deed thought, that Samuel might be raised up.
1. Some think, that Saul was not so blind or ignorant, as to imagine, that
Samuel could himself be raised up: but that by Gods permission, there might be
apparitions of spirits in their likeness: Pelican. but this was a greater
blindness in Saul, to go directly and ask counsel of the devil: and further
by Saul's reverent behavior, he imagined, that it was more then a bare
apparition, which was represented unto him. 2. I rather therefore think, that
it was Saul's foolish imagination, that Samuel might be called up unto him: for
the spirit of God being departed from him, as his body was distempered, so
also was his mind and judgment. Mart. Osiand. And Augustine says well, neque
reprobus factus potuit bonum intellectum habere, being rejected he could have
no good understanding. 3. Now how this woman remained yet in Endor, the rest of
the Soothsayers being destroyed, the cause was not, as some of the Rabbis
imagined, that she was Abners mother, and so spared: for then Saul need not
have inquired after her, she had been known well enough: but Saul might
think, as there is oftentimes negligence, and remissenes in the officers and
ministers of the kingdom, that some among the rest, might escape and find
favor. Mart.

9. Quest. v. 12. Of the apparition of Samuel, and the manner thereof.
1. It seems by that Saul asked the woman what she saw, that Saul saw him
not at the first: the Rabbis think, that Saul heard only the voice, and that
the woman both saw, and heard, but Saul's servants neither heard nor saw: some
think, that the woman only saw, and Saul only heard, Vatab. but, though Saul
saw not the apparition at the first, the woman being apart in an other place,
as witches use not to be seen, when they work their feats: yet it is like,
that afterward Saul was admitted to his sight, both by the reverence which he
yeildeth, in bowing himself, and by the communication between the fantastical
Samuel and Saul: it may be gathered also by the text, that the woman heard not
the communication: for v. 21. it is said she entered or came in to Saul: it
seems that she was gone forth, having raised the spirit, and left Saul alone
within in the bed chamber, as is expressed v. 23. but the servants were left
without, and neither heard nor saw: as the like is showed, Act. 10. how Saul
only heard the voice, they that were with him heard nothing. Mar. 2. Now where
the woman says, that she saw gods ascending: some understand it, that she
means an excellent person, that was ascending: but it is like that these
elohim, gods, were certain goodly apparitions (as Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light) which Satan sent, as his apparitors and
messengers before. Iun. 3. Thus Samuel appears, wrapped about with a mantle,
which was the habit of Magistrates and Prophets, to distinguish them from the
common sort: Josephus thinks it was a priestly garment: but Samuel was no
Priest, though he were of the tribe of Leui. Mar. 4. The witch knew him to be
Saul, rather having so learned of the devil, who told her, Mar. then, as the
Rabbis suppose, she coniectured it by some reverence that this counterfeit
Samuel yeildeth unto Saul.

10. Quest. v. 17. Whom he means when he says, The Lord has done to him.
1. Some read, the Lord will do to thee: Lat. but that is not agreeable to the
original, which has li, to him. 2. Some read, the Lord has done to himself,
that is, has disposed of his counsel, as he purposed and determined. Iun. 3.
Some refer it unto Saul, that the Lord has done to him: Borr. but
thoroughout he speaks unto Saul in the second person. 4. Therefore it is
better referred unto David, that the Lord has done to him, as he promised: so
the Chald. B. Genevens. Joseph. and so the next words do help to expound
these: he has rent the kingdom from thee, and given it unto David: the
kingdom is said to be rent, because the whole was not taken at once from Saul's
posterity, a part was a while held by Ishbosheth: Mar. but this seems to be
somewhat curious: for the Lord had given the whole kingdom to David, and so
rent, that is, taken the whole from Saul.

11. Quest. Of the meaning of these words: To morrow thou, and thy sons shall
be with me.
1. Some take it, as though the devil, counterfeiting Samuels person, should
say, that Saul should be with him, that is, in the state of grace, and the
favor of God, but that Satan herein lied unto him. Osiand. But as the rest of
this heavy declaration fell out to be true, that Saul should be delivered into
the hands of the Philistims, so it is like, that the rest also should be true,
and the event indeed was answerable: both Saul and his sons were slain the
next day. 2. D. Kimhi with other Rabbis think, that this is to be understood
of the happy estate, wherein Saul should be: and that herein nothing was
uttered but truth: for they hold, that Saul dying for his country, and not
giving over the defense of Israel, though he looked for present death, died in
the favor of God: Josephus also commends Saul as a worthy man, that died
for his country. But, this resolution in Saul to die for his country, was
only a civil virtue: it was far from piety: like unto the fortitude of the
heathen, as of the Decij, Curtij, among the Romans, that died for their
country: and it was Gods justice rather that forced him to this battle, then
his own will and resolution to defend his country. Borr. Beside, seeing Saul
killing himself, died without repentance, ending his days in despair, how
could he die in the favor and grace of God, Mar. But we will not precipitate
our sentence concerning his everlasting reprobation, though he were rejected
from the kingdom, leaving him to the judgment of the Lord. Borr.

12. Quest. Whether it were Samuel in deed that appeared unto Saul.
1. This could not be Samuel in his own person, both body and soul: for to
raise again the dead, is the work only of God: diverse have been raised from
the dead: we read of three raised in the old Testament: the widows son by
Elias, and two by Elizeus, one when he was alive, the other by touching his
body, when he was dead: five were raised in the Gospel, three by our Savior,
the rulers daughter, the widows son, and Lazarus: and two by the Apostles,
Dorcas by Peter, and Eutyches by Paul. But these miracles were wrought for the
confirmation of the truth: this miracle if Samuel had been raised, had been
for the countenancing of sorcerie and lies: the devil could not raise Samuel
himself: and God for the reason aforesaid, would not permit Satan to do it.

2. Some therefore think, that it was the body of Samuel, as Burgens. says.
But the body being dead, has no actiuitie, and is unapt to be used as an
instrument of action: neither does it suffice to say, that Satan might give
action and motion to the body: for Satan can make illusions, and counterfeit
any shape of himself, so that he needed not to have assumed a body.

3. Some do think it was the very soul of Samuel, as Justinius Martyr, but
unto him I oppose Tertullian, who thinks, lib. de anima. that the Devil
deluded both the woman, and Saul, abusing his eyes, and her ears. Augustine,
though sometime he seems to doubt, whether it were Samuel, or only
phantasma, a fantastical image or apparition of Samuel: ad Simplic. lib. 2.
yet, lib. 2. de doctr. Christian. he defends and proves, that it was imago
sacrilegio excitata, an image raised by sacrilege. That it was the soul of
Samuel, these two reasons are produced to prove: 1. because thoroughout this
story, he is called Samuel: 2. because that which is here foretold, fell out
accordingly. Ans. 1. The Scripture calls things as they appear, and as they
are taken: as Pharaoh is said in his dream to have seen seven kine, and
seven ears of corn, Genesis 41. because they so appeared: so in this place this
apparition is called Samuel, because it seemed so to be, and Saul took it to
be Samuel. 2. God suffers the Devil sometime to speak the truth, and may
reveal some things unto him, as he did to Balaam, for such end, as the Lord
sees best, for the setting forth of his glory. Borr.

4. Wherefore the sounder opinion is, that this was not Samuels soul, but a
counterfeit representation of him: as may appear by these reasons. 1. Satan
has no power over the spirits of the righteous, neither can their spirits be
fetched by enchantments: for then he would abuse the souls of the dead at his
pleasure, to deceive the living. Whereas it will be answered, that Samuel
prevented the witches enchantment, and came before at Gods appointment: this is
contrary to the whole narration: for this Samuel appeared not, till Saul came
to the witches house, and Saul had set the witch a work. 2. It is said
before, that God answered not Saul by Prophets: therefore he by whom Saul now
receives answer was no Prophet. 3. If God had sent up Samuel, the dead, to
instruct the living, why is this reason given of the denial of the rich man's
request, to have one sent from the dead: because if they would not hear Moses
and the Prophets, neither would they believe, if one were raised from the dead,
Luke 16. in so doing the Lord should seem to go against his own order. 4.
True Samuel would not have suffered himself to be adored: sic Mart. Borr.
Osiand. Pelican. Vatab. and this is the sentence of Augustine in this place:
Indignum esse facinus, si secundum verba historiae commodetur assensus, it is
an unworthy act, if one press the meaning of the story according to the
words: and this is cited in the decrees, Cause. 26. qu. 5. c. 14. Wherefore this
place is friuolously alleged by the Romanists, Contr. Against Limbus patrum.
to prove Limbus patrum, or Purgatory: that the souls of the Fathers before
Christ were in a dungeon of darkness in the earth, expecting the coming of
Christ: or that the souls of the faithful now go to a certain place of
Purgatory under the earth: for this counterfeit Samuel, that seemed to ascend
out of the earth, which was not the soul of Samuel, but the devil in his
likeness, proves no such thing. This question is handled more at large in
Hexapla upon the 7. chap. of Exodus, whether I refer the Reader.

13. Quest. Of the nature of spirits.
Now upon this occasion, that mention is here made of the witches obh, or
familiar spirit, certain necessary questions do here offer themselves briefly
to be touched: first, of the nature of spirits, secondly of their knowledge,
thirdly of their power, fourthly whether it be lawful at any time for
Christians to use the ministry and help of such spirits.

First, concerning the nature of spirits, called devils, there are diverse
opinions. 1. This opinion is ascribed to the Peripatetikes, that there are no
devils, or spirits, and that these strange things, which seem to be
miraculous in the world, are done by the secret and strange operation of
nature, as the loadstone draws the iron, as also by the fantasy of man,
which is very strong: and by the temperature, and constitution of the body: as
it is written of Vespasian, that he healed a blind man with his spittle, and
cured a lame man by touching his foot.

Contra. 1. It will be confessed, that many things unwonted are caused by such
means: but there are miraculous and extraordinary works, which are above the
course or strength of nature: as for images to speak, to go invisible, for
unlearned men to speak Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and languages which they never
learned, to stir things which are a great way off, and such like: of these no
natural reason can be given. 2. Sorcerers and Magicians do use words, and
spells, and charms, wherein there is no force or power to work naturally. 3.
This opinion the Sadduces held, that there were no Angels or spirits: and it is
contrary to the Scriptures, which witnesses both of the good spirits and
elect Angels, and of the reprobate and evil spirits, which we call devils. As
a lying spirit was in the mouths of Baals false prophets, 1. king. 22. Satan
stirred up David to number the people, 1. Chron. 21.1. Satan afflicted Job, and
tempted our Savior Christ.

2. The opinion of some was, that men's souls are turned into spirits, the
souls of good men into good spirits, and of evil men into evil spirits.

Contr. But seeing the souls of men and spirits are of a diverse kind and
nature, it is no more possible for them to be changed one into an other, then
for any other kind of living creature to be changed and altered into an other
kind: and if this should be so, then the souls of men should never be reunited
to their bodies: which were an impious thing once to think or conceive.

3. The Platonists do imagine, that there are some fiery, some aerie, some
watrie spirits, some of a terrene nature: and do ascribe certain material
bodies unto the spirits. Contra. 1. If spirits had bodies, they must be either
of a celestial, or of an elementarie constitution: if any of these, then they
should have either a circular motion as the heavens have, or an elementarie
motion, to ascend, or descend, as the elements do: but none of these are
naturally incident to the spirits. 2. But we need no further reason to
convince this error, seeing the Scriptures give testimony hereunto that the
Devils are spirits, without flesh and bone, as our Savior says, Luke 24.39.
and in the Gospel, the Devil is called an unclean spirit, Math. 12.43. and
how could a legion, that is, diverse thousands of devils be thrust together
into one bad man, Mark. 5.9. if they had material bodies, and corporal
substances. Thus it appears, that there are evil spirits, which wander up
and down in the world: and that they are immateriall, and altogether of a
spiritual nature. 3. Lastly, of spirits there are four kinds: 1. God is an
infinite spirit: 2. the Angels good and bad are spirits: 3. there are the
souls and spirits of men: 4. there are also the spirits of bruit beasts. These
kinds may be thus distinguished: spirits are either of an infinite and
incomprehensible nature, as God only: or of a finite: which are either
immortal spirits, and the same either made to cohabite with bodies, as the
souls and spirits of men: or are spirits separate from bodies, either good,
which are the elect Angels, or evil, which are the devils: or they are
mortal, as the spirits of bruit beasts.

14. Quest. Of the knowledge of Devils.
1. That spirits have a very acute and subtle knowledge, and great insight in
things to come, it is evident, seeing that wise and prudent men skillful in
natural observations, can foretell of many things, as of Eclipses, of rain,
and such like: yea, the unreasonable creatures both birds and beasts, by a
natural instinct, have a sense of the external accidents in the air, before
they come: much more have the spirits more certain conjectures of many things
to come: which knowledge of theirs, is diversely helped: 1. by their subtle and
spiritual nature: 2. their long experience, and continuance: 3. their agilitie
of nature, which can in a moment pass from place to place: as August. lib. de
Genes. ad liter. reports of a man that was strangely taken, who refusing to
take any sustenance, but at a certain priests hand, who dwelt five miles of,
could tell being absent, when he came forth of his doors, where he was, how
near the house: this was done by the agilitie of spirits: like as if a
watchman should a far off discover a band of soldiers coming, and give
notice thereof. 4. The devil may foretell such things, which the Lord by his
ministry entendeth to do: as he punished the Egyptians by his evil angels:
and Satan was here the minister of this judgment decreed against Saul. 5. The
spirits being placed in the air (as the devil is called the prince that
rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2.) from thence, as from a watch tower, can more
easily see and discern, the causes of such events, which happen in the earth.
6. By the writings of the Prophets he understands many things: as Augustine
thinks, that Trismegistus foretelling unto Asclepius the ruin and overthrow
of Idols, might take that light from the predictions of the Prophets. 7. Satan
does foresee many things by the effects: as when he sees a man full of good
works, and given to devotion and prayer, he can think none other, but that
such an one is in Gods favor: Martyr. likewise by the contrary, when he sees
one given over to all wickedness, he knows that Gods judgments hang over his
head, as here they did over Saul. And therefore it need not seem strange,
that the devil did foretell of his end. Augustine here says, quasi magnum
sit diabolo ante occasum mortem corporis praevidere, cum signa quaedam soleant
apparere morituris, cited by Great. c. 26. qu. 5. c. 14.
quibus Dei protectio amota videatur: As though it were a great matter, for the
devil to foresee ones death before it fall, seeing that they which so die, do
themselves perceive some signs, that the protection of God is removed: As
Saul gathered by evident arguments, that the Lord had forsaken him: how then
could it be hid from Satan?

15. Quest. What things the Devil is ignorant of.
There are four kind of things, which Satan has no knowledge of. 1. He
knows not things to come, but by conjectures, and the same uncertain: God
only sees things to come, as present: for seeing God does whatsoever pleases
him in heaven and in earth, he can not be ignorant of any of his works: spirits
know things to come only by signs and conjectures. And Satan is deceived
often in his predictions: 1. either because the signs, which he coniectureth
by, are uncertain by themselves, as are the signs and prognostications of
weather, and such like: 2. or for that God interposeth himself, How the devil
knows things to come.
and works beyond the natural and ordinary course, as when the fire in the
furnace had no power to burn the three children: 3. sometime the condition is
secret of such things, as are prophesied to come to pass: as when Jonas
preached, that within forty days Nineveh should be destroyed, unless they
repented: 4. the Lord many times either blinds Satan, that he can not use the
subtlety of his own nature, or binds his power, that he can not do what he
would. Then it appears, that there is great difference between the certentie
of Angelical, and diabolical predictions: 1. good Angels are more acquainted
with Gods will, then Satan is: 2. they are holy spirits, not lead with
ambition, envy, malice, as Satan is, and therefore their knowledge is not
obscured or ouercast, with such turbulent affections, as Satan's is: 3. they
refer all to Gods will, and therefore are not let, or hindered by the Lord,
as Satan is, who aims always at a wicked end.

2. Secondly, Satan is ignorant of the mysteries and secrets of Gods counsel:
as he was doubtful concerning Christ, whether he were very God in the flesh:
and therefore he speaks unto Christ in an ambiguous term, when he tempted
him: If thou be the son of God: he saw many evident arguments of the divine
power of Christ, and confessed him to be the son of God: but he was not
certain thereof, for then he would not have stirred up Judas to betray Christ,
Satan did not know certainly, that Christ was God in the flesh.
and the Scribes and Pharisees to have put him to death, if he had known that
by his death, Christ should have overcome him, that had power of death, that is
the devil, Hebr. 2.14. for as the Apostle says, had they known, they never
would have crucified the Lord of glory, 1. Cor. 2.8. which may as well be
understood of Satan himself, as of those which were his ministers and
instruments. The good Angels themselves did not fully comprehe^d the mystery
of the incarnation of the Son of God, and of our redemption by him, until
they saw the same accomplished: as S. Paul says, To the intent, that unto
principalities and powers in heavenly places might be made known by the Church
the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. much more therefore was this mystery
kept hid and secret from Satan.

3. Satan knows not what is in the heart of man, but only by conjectures and
signs: directly he neither knows the will, nor the understanding or
judgment of man: two ways he sounds man's heart: either by the precedent
causes, the objects offered outwardly, as when David espied Bersabe, or by the
inward imagination or fantasy: yet he is not certain whether the will shall
apprehende such objects or not: or else he gesseth by the outward signs and
impressions of the affections in the body: as love, anger, rage, care, and
such like, do discover themselves in the countenance, and other parts of the
body: but where such impressions are not, as wise men can bridle and conceal
their affections, there Satan fails in his conjecture. Further, the Scripture
speaks evidently, that God only is the knower of the heart: Thou only
know the hearts of all the children of men, 1. king. 8.39. And the Apostle
says, Who knows the things of a man, saving the spirit of man which is in
him, 1. Cor. 2.11. Man's heart is known to none, but unto God, and himself:
but more unto God, then unto man himself: for both God sees aforehand, what
thoughts are like to rise in man's heart, which man knows not himself, as
Psalm. 139.2. Thou understand my thoughts a far off* and God is greater
then a man's heart, that a man can not think what he would in good things, but
as the Lord inspireth him. Further, if Satan did know man's heart, then would he
be more busy in his temptations, and mote dangerous. This also is the
pre-eminence which the spirit of God has beyond the evil spirit: He that
searches the heart knows what is the meaning of the spirit. Romans 8.27.

4. The fourth thing, which Satan is ignorant of, is of the graces of
regeneration, the consolation of the spirit, the operation of a true and lively
faith: the Devil has a kind of superficial belief, as Saint James says,
That the Devils believe and tremble, Iam. 2. he has an historical faith to
believe the Scriptures to be true, and that the incarnation, passion,
resurrection of Christ, were so done and fulfilled, as they are in Scripture
declared: but none of these he believes to his comfort: neither can he
comprehend them, as the faithful do: so that herein every faithful man has
more knowledge by the sense and experience of faith, then Satan has.

16. Quest. Of the power of spirits, what they are able to do by their
spiritual nature, and what not.
1. Here the power of spirits is to be distinguished: for there is in them a
threefold power to be considered; a natural power, which they have by their
creation, as they are spirits; a limited power, restrained by God; and their
power augmented and enlarged from God, for some special service, wherein it
pleases the Lord to use their ministry. The Devil, by whom the sorcerers
of Egypt wrought, could by his natural power, produce the similitude and
likeness of serpents: but that power was restrained, when they assaied
likewise to counterfeit lice: his power was augmented, when he was suffered to
execute his malice upon Job: for Augustines distinction is here to be held,
that the Devil otherwise afflicts the godly, and otherwise punishes the
wicked: In filijs diffidentiae, tanquam in proprijs mancipijs operatur: he
works in the children of disobedience, as in his own vessels: but he has
no power upon the righteous, unless it be given him: sicut homo de pecore suo
facit, quod vult, de alieno pecore vt faciat, expectat sibi dari potestatem, ab
eo cuius est: ibi potestas, quae fuerat, prohibetur, hic, quae non fuerat,
tribuitur: as a man may do with his own beast what he will, but with an other
man's he can do nothing without leave of the owner: there the power which was
is restrained, here the power, which was not is attributed. Aug. in Psalm. 77.
Here now the question is only of the natural power of Satan, as he is a
spirit.

2. Now concerning this power, some do extenuate it too much, thinking that
neither the spirits, nor those which work by spirits can do any thing: but
that men are only by them deluded and deceived: for Nero, and Julian, which
were Emperors, and sought to suppress the Christian faith, did confederate
themselves with sorcerers and Magicians, and yet they could effect nothing by
them: yet it had been much for the advantage of Satan's kingdom, to have aided
such special instruments, what he could.

Contra. 1. That the spirits are able to work strange things it appears
diversely, both by the divine laws, made against them, that they should not
suffer a witch to live, Exodus 22. Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 18. and by the humane laws
of the Imperial and other states: which laws should not have been made, if
such were thought to be able to do nothing: further, in the story of Job it
is evident, that the devil brought down fire from heaven, and raised the
winds: in the Gospel, the spirits that possessed the bodies of men, did torment
the^, and cast them sometime into the water, sometime into the fire. Beside, in
the Ethnike stories it is recorded, that Tuccia a vestal virgin did carry
water in a sieve, and Claudia drew a ship that stuck in the sand, that could
not be removed by any humane force: Pliny writes how the olive grove of
Vectius Marcellus was removed: to deny that these things were done, it would
be thought too great boldness. Mart.

2. But touching the examples of Nero and Julian, who effected little by art
Magic, the cause was not in their want of power, but for that God restrained
their power, that Satan did not what he would. Martyr.

3. Some do ascribe too much unto the power of spirits: as that they can
excitare tempestates, raise tempests: as we read, how the devil brought down
lightening, and raised the winds, Job 1. and in Norway, there are certain
called Lapones, that have three knots in their beards, who if they loose one of
them, then there follows a great tempest in the Sea, if the second, then the
tempest is increased, if the third, then the storm rages, and rises as
though heaven and earth would go together: this is the opinion of Peter
Martyr, therein consenting with Augustine: the reason of his opinion is,
because, as he thinks, the devil can bring and put together the causes, and
beginnings, and seed as it were of things: and so his opinion is, that those
serpents which the Egyptian sorcerers made to appear, were true serpents,
which the devil brought forth, being not ignorant of what seed and
beginnings serpents were made. Contra. 1. The Scripture ascribes the power of
rain, lightening, and winds, only unto God, Ierem. 10.13. He causes the
clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth: he turns lightening to rain,
and brings forth the wind out of his treasures: by these works of power,
the Prophet concludes, that the Lord was God, and that the gods of the heathen
(which were the Devils, whom they worshipped in their idols) could do no
such thing. 2. Augustine is of that opinion, that Satan brought down fire from
heaven, Job 1. but both the text it self is against him, which calls it the
fire of God: it was done then by the power of God: and against Augustines
private opinion, I can oppose the determination of an whole Synod: Br^^arens.
1. c. 8.
Si quis credit diabolum sua potestate posse excitare tempestates, fulgurae,
etc. anathema sit: Let him be accursed, that thinks the Devil can raise
tempests, lightening, etc. of his own power. 3. If the Devil can make
serpents, or bring forth any true living creature, because he can put together
the seeds, and beginnings of things, then why may he not as well help the
generation of man, and procreate children by humane seed, which were absurd to
imagine: as for those serpents, that they were no true serpents, but in
appearance only, I have showed elsewhere, in the questions upon the 7. chap.
of Exodus. 4. But thus much further I conceive of the power of spirits in the
disposing of the weather: that although they cannot raise vapors or
exhalations, whereof the winds, and rain, and other meteors are engendered, at
their pleasure; yet when this preparation is made by nature, and such things
are already in being, that Satan can transport the raines, winds, lighetning,
from one corner to an other: and this is all he can do for that matter, as I
have showed in the place before cited.

4. Now then, keeping the mean way between both, though Satan be neither so
impotent and void of power, as some think, nor yet so potent, as some others
imagine, yet many strange things he is able to do. 1. The Devil can move or
transport from place to place, and that very speedily, and with great agilitie:
for if the spirit of man, has that power to move and stir the body, the
like power can not be denied unto spirits of a more powerful nature: the
Scripture also gives evidence for this, that Satan transported the body of
Christ: it pleased our Savior to give the tempter that advantage, and to yield
him so far to be carried of him, that he might confound him in his own
devise, and slay him with his own weapon, as David killed Goliath: so we heard
before how Claudia by a diabolical power removed a ship: so Satan uses to
transport Magicians and sorcerers, and to cause them to ride in the air: as
Simon Magus, as Ecclesiastical stories make mention, could glide in the air.

2. Satan can use creatures as his instruments, whether they be living, or
void of life, as he spoke out of the serpent unto Eve: The devil can not
assume dead men's bodies.
and he caused the image of fortune among the Romans to speak, or he rather
spoke out of that image. But it is a question, whether he can use the bodies of
dead men, as his instruments, and take and assume them out of their graves:
which is rather to be thought that he can not do: both because the carkesses
of dead men falling to corruption, are more unfit for any such motion, then
dead instruments that never had life: and for that this is set forth as a
peculiar work of Gods power, in raising the bodies of certain dead out of
their graves, to be a testimony of the resurrection of Christ. Matthew. 27.53.

3. The Devil notwithstanding may assume unto himself the likeness of any
body, either of the living or the dead: which yet is no true body, but only
in outward shape and appearance: for like as in the clouds, there are often
natural impressions showing the similitude of diverse shapes, as of men
fighting in the air, and such like, so we conceive that Satan by disposing and
gathering the air together, can make a representation of colors and of
shapes: as is evident he did, in the apparition of Samuel. But whereas Peter
Martyr equally attributes this power to spirits both good and bad, to assume
true bodies, which may be handled and felt, therein I can not subscribe unto
him: that the good Angels have appeared in true sensible bodies, it is evident
both by their eating, as the three Angels that came to Abraham, and by the
washing of their feet, Genesis 19.2. But these bodies they assumed not by their
own Angelical power, but the Lord the creator so disposing, that they might
take such bodies, during such service and ministry, and afterward lay them
down again. Evil spirits never appear with true bodies.
But we never found in Scripture, that evil spirits appeared with true real
bodies, but only in outward show: and therefore the Apostles, when they saw
our Savior Christ walking upon the waters, suspected that it was phantasma, a
phantasme, Mark. 6.50. that is, a spirit appearing with a fantastical body:
our Savior also confirms as much himself, saying to his disciples, who
supposed him to be a spirit: Handle me and see me, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.37. he means an evil spirit, such as
they were afraid of: this had been no good argument to satisfy the Apostles,
if evil and wicked spirits could assume true bodies, that might be felt and
handled.

4. The Devil can diversely delude and deceive the senses, either the outward
with imagined shows, or the inward, with fantastical imaginations: those by
day by visions, the other by night in dreams, casting them asleep, whom he
seeks to seduce and deceive. How the devil can delude the sense.
He can deceive the sense with false and vain illusions diverse ways: sometime
by agilitie and quicknes of motion, as by this trick iuglers seem to do
strange feats: sometime he uses natural helps, as there be certain
mettalls and perfumes, which being burned, will make all the chamber seem as
though it were full of serpents: as he can cast a mist in the air, and make a
thing invisible, by thickening and darkening of the medium, as it is called, as
Plato writes of Gyges, and Virgil of Aeneas, that they went invisible: and
sometime he can vitiate and corrupt the organe of sight the eye, by tempering
the humors in such sort, as things shall appear like as the humor is: as
when all appears outwardly like blood, when some bloody humor is mixed with
the sight: like as they which are sick of choler, the tongue being infected
with that bitter humor, imagine whatsoever it tastes, likewise to be bitter.
By these and other such sleights Satan can play the counterfeit, and so deceive
and beguile the sense. Such kind of cousenage was that, whereof Philostratus
writes in the life of Apollonius Tyaneus, that a certain young man was
enamoured with a fair rich woman, the marriage feast was prepared, which seemed
to be set forth with vessels of gold and silver: but Apollonius desired her to
be one of the spirits, called Lamiae, and presently all that show of silver
and gold was turned to coals. The like hereunto was that, which is mentioned
in the Arausicane council, of certain women that imagined they road upon
beasts in the night, with Diana the Pagane goddess, or Herodias, being
accompanied with great troops: of which vain apparitions, the Council gives
this sentence, Satanas, qui se transfigurat in angelum lucis, transformat se in
diversarum personarum species, and mentem quam captivam tenet, in somnis
deludit. Satan, which can transform himself into an Angel of light, does
transform himself into the likeness of diverse persons, and deceives the
mind, which he holds captive with dreams. The same opinion is to be held of
the spirits called Incubi, and succubi, some showing themselves like women,
some like men: for the devil deceives his clients in their dreams, with such
sights, as though they were set at bankets, and had real fruition of carnal
pleasure. Thus it is not impossible for the devil to transport men into woods,
and solitary places, and to show them strange sights, as of some frying in the
flames of Purgatory, and such like, to nusle people in ignorance and
superstition.

17. Quest. That all confederacy with spirits, is unlawful, and abominable.
1. Here a distinction is necessary: the ministry of spirits is used, either
by authority and commandment from God, as our Savior, and his Apostles by
the spirit of God did cast out devils: or else by compact and agreement made
with them, which is altogether unlawful, for that were to fall from God unto
the devil. 2. And whereas the spirits seem to be delighted with herbs, and
to be called by certain rites and ceremonies, that is done but to collude
with, and to deceive men: there is no power in such herbs, ceremonies, and
charms, but all depends upon the covenant and confederacy, which they have
made with their clients. Like as the Lord has appointed certain holy rites
and Sacraments, as signs of the covenant between him and his people: which
outward signs have no actiuitie or working power of themselves, but from the
covenant, whereof they are signs: So Satan, who would herein imitate God,
seems to be affected with those superstitious signs, but it is the deuillish
covenant, that binds him unto his ministers, and yet no longer then he will
himself.

3. Now concerning Exorcists, Of Exorcists.
which took upon them to adjure and cast out devils, this gift and function
was of three sorts: 1. one was lawful and instituted of Christ, having both
the name and the thing, which was in use in the Apostles time, and continued
some time after in the primitive Church, so long as the gift of miracles was in
use, and thought by the Lord to be needful for the planting of his Church. 2.
An other kind of Exorcists has the name, but not the thing, such as yet are
called in Popery: which is a vain title, that miraculous gift of adjuring and
expelling spirits being ceased. 3. There was a third sort of Exorcists, which
was among the Jews before the coming of Christ, and in his time, whereof our
Savior speaks, Matthew. 12.27. If I through Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your children cast them out? it seems that they used in the name of
God to cast out devils, as the sons of Sceva a Jew assaied to do, Act. 19.
which miraculous work it pleased God, should take place among his people, to
help their weakness and infirmity until the coming of the Messiah: as we
read of a greater miracle which continued till Christ's time, of the descending
of an Angel at certain times into the poole of Bethesda, Ioh. 5. And this sort
of Exorcists, remained still among the Jews, as Josephus makes mention of one
Eleazar, who in the presence of Vespasian and his sons, cast a devil out of
a man, and this he testifies, that he himself saw: lib. 8. antiquit. yet this
their exorcising was not lawful, they abused thereunto the name of God: though
the Lord thought good for the manifesting of his power among the Gentiles, that
in his name such things should be done.

4. But now to use any enchantment to prevent witcherie, as many things are
commonly received and prescribed, It is not lawful to use charms.
whereof there is no reason to be given, to help both men and cattle so
bewitched, it is altogether held to be unlawful: many do use spells, and
charms, and other observations, to cure diseases, and to find out witchcraft:
which Josephus thinks in the place before cited, to have been found out by
Solomon for the benefit of men: to the which it may be answered, that if such
things were found out by Solomon, which uncertain, either it was after his
fall, when his wisdom was corrupted and profaned, or the Lord suffered such
things to be for the hardness of the peoples hearts, and to succor their
weakness. But now we have a rule, This kind goes not out, but by fasting and
prayer, Matthew. 19.21. Spiritual enemies can not be expelled, but by spiritual
enemies. sic fere Martyr.

CHAP. XXIX.
1. Quest. v. 6. How Achish came to knowledge of Jehovah, by whom he swears.
1. IT is like that in the country of the Philistims where Abraham and Isaak
sometime had soiourned, and Melchisedek had dwelt not far off, that they had
learned somewhat from them concerning the knowledge of the true God, and of his
ways: Mart. Borr. as likewise most of all David having a good while conuersed
among them, and using much the name of Jehovah in their hearing, might bring
them to have some taste and savor of that name. Pelican. 2. But it will be
objected, that the name Jehovah was not known in Abraham's time, because the
Lord says, I appeared unto Abraham, to Izhak, and to Iaakob, by my name
Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them, Exodus 6.3. But
these words are so to be taken, not that the name it self was not then used,
for Abraham directly calls him the Lord Jehovah, Genesis 15.8. but it is so
said, in respect of the effects: that whereas Jehovah, and likewise Ehtah,
coming of the same root, and signify existence or being: God yet had not
showed himself, by causing his promises to be accomplished, and so to have a
being. Mar. 3. The Gentiles then had an obscure and dim knowledge of the
true God: but it proceeded from the light of nature, it was not of faith:
again, they were without any knowledge at all of the Messiah, who^ the
faithful Jews looked unto: and beside, though they knew God, they did not
worship him as God, but worshipped Idols beside, gods of their own making.
Mart. Borr.

2. Quest. v. 8. Whether David dissembled in seeming to be unwilling to be sent
back from the Kings service.
1. Some think, that as David's flying unto Achish was lawful, and done not
without the Lords direction: so that David herein, purposing to join with
Achish dissembled not at all, yet relying here upon the direction of Gods
spirit, not to proceed to join in battle against Israel, unless it should
so seem good unto the Lord. Borr. Contra. 1. What is to be thought of David's
rescuing himself with Achish from Saul, is showed before, c. 27. qu. 1. and to
think that David had any such cogitation to fight with Achish against his
people, is to make him an apparent transgressour of the laws of God, which did
forbid all kind of confederacy with the uncircumcised nations: for if
Iehoshaphat were reproved for joining with idolatrous Ahaziah, only to make
ships to go to Tarshish, 2. Chron. 20.37. much more unlawful was it to
join with such against the people of God. Neither would it have helped David,
to depend for this service upon Gods will: for seeing he was anointed king, to
this end, that by his hand the Lord would deliver Israel out of the hands of
their enemies, 2. Sam. 3.18. he could not make any question, but that this
service against his country and people, was displeasing unto God.

2. Some confess that David herein dissembled, and spoke otherwise then he
thought, but excuse this his dissimulation by his present necessity. Osiand.
Contra. Although necessity do help to extenuate a fault, yet it does not
justify it: it was a less oversight, that David being forced by necessity,
to retain the kings favor, thus spoke; yet it altogether excuses him not.

3. Therefore we need not be so scrupulous, to yield some infirmity to have
been in the Saints, where the Scripture has set it down so plainly: for
David in pretending that he desired to go and fight against the kings enemies,
therein apparently speaks against his own mind and affection, who was glad
of that opportunity given him to be rid of the kings service, and he evidently
flattereth, and gloseth with the king. Martyr.

4. And that David's flattery may further appear: Chrysostom observes two
things in flattery: when a man does or says any thing not comely, Of
flattery and the diverse kind; thereof.
for some temporal benefit: so the thing is unseemly which is committed, and
the end also not good: both these David here offends in, for he speaks
against his conscience, and he intends therein a temporal benefit, that he
might still retain the grace and favor of the king, whatsoever should happen.
Now in respect of the end and intention of flatterers, we may discern between
Christian comitie and gentleness, and carnal adulation and flattery: S. Paul
became all unto all men, he seeked to please in things, not uncomely but
indifferent, and he did it not for any temporal commodity or advantage to
himself, but only to win them unto Christ. Further, let it be considered,
that there are two sorts of flatterers: some are palpable and gross
flatterers, that say and unsay, to please them, whom they flatter: if they
say, nay, they likewise answer, Nay; if yea, then yea also: there is an other
sort of flatterers, that pretend a kind of liberty, as though they seemed not
to flatter: as here David seeks to please the king, by showing his desire to
the kings service, contrary to the kings determination. Mart.

5. Some also think, that David in deed desired to stay still in the camp,
that he might certify the Israelites of the counsels and intendements of the
Philistims, and so they might avoid them: L. Ben Gerson. But this is not like:
for neither could David have done this safely without danger: and beside, he
should have by this means cast himself into apparent danger: if the
Philistims should overcome, as they did, he was like to loose their favor: if
Saul and the Israelites, he and his also should have gone to wrack.

3. Quest. v. 9. Of Achish answer to David.
1. In that Achish likeneth David to an Angel of God, that is, as an excellent
man sent of God: for Angel signifies a messenger: we see that the heathen had
some knowledge both of God, and of his spirits and messengers the Angels. As in
this place Achish confesses these three things: 1. that there is a Jehovah,
that is, one almighty God, governor of the world: 2. that the same Jehovah is
just and upright, and therefore loves such, as are so: v. 6. 3. he
acknowledges also that the blessed Angels were ministering spirits unto this
Jehovah. Borr. 2. He reports the words of the Princes of the Philistims, in
better manner then they first spoke them; neither does he rehearse all their
words, because he would not altogether discourage David: teaching us, that when
we do report a tale from an others mouth, we should make not the worst but the
best of it. Osiand.

4. Quest. v. 10. Of David's return.
1. Josephus thinks that Achish sent back David to defend the borders of the
Philistims, least the enemies should invade the land, while they went against
Israel, adding further, that this should be as acceptable a service unto him,
as if he went with him to battle. 2. But the true cause Achish opens
himself, saying, that he should take his masters servants with him: suspecting
that they would not be faithful unto him, that had left their master Saul.
Pelican. 3. Thus we see what was the issue of David's fleeing to the
Philistims, they have no confidence in him, but send him away, as a man not to
be trusted. Mart. 4. But howsoever this return of David, was somewhat
contumelious unto him, yet Gods providence therein appears, that by this
means delivers David from so great a straight, that he should not be forced
to fight against his own people. Osiand.

CHAP. XXX.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the Amalekites sacking and taking of Ziklag.
1. BY this it appears what inconveniences followed upon Saul's sparing of
Amalek, contrary to the commandment of God: who were reserved for a plague
unto Israel. Bor. 2. Beside, by this accident God chastises and corrects
David, if he had entertained any such thought, as to fight against Israel.
Osiand. 3. Yet so as the Lord remembers his mercy in judgment, and so
ouerruleth the Amalekites, as that they put none to the sword, but only carried
David's wives away captive, that they might be recovered again alive. Mar. 4.
Gods providence also further shows it self toward David: in that Achish did
hasten him forward to go away in the morning very early: and by this means
making have, he came the sooner to Ziklag to pursue after the Amalekites:
Pelican. and so the Lord calls David from an unjust quarrel against the
people of God, to a just battle against the Amalekites. Mar.

2. Quest. v. 3, 4. Of the strait that David was in.
1. His own people would have stoned him: laying the cause upon him, that they
left their city without defense, to follow after him. So David has four
kind of enemies: Saul and his company, the Philistims, the Amalekites, whom
David now pursues, and which was most grievous of all unto him, his own
people and followers intended to stone him: wherein he was a figure of our
Savior Christ, who was hated of his own people: as was Moses that faithful
servant of God. Thus it pleased the Lord to try David's patience, and now
being as it were plunged in the depth of sorrow, it was a sign unto him that
his deliverance was near at hand. 2. David weepeth together with the rest, and
that excessiuely, but they for their present loss, that their wives and
children were carried away: but David further considered, that the Lord did
chastise him for his sin. 3. By this example of David thus grievously weeping
and lamenting, that opinion of the Stoikes is confuted, that would have a wise
man without all passion and affection, and not so much as to change his
countenance. Mart.

3. Quest. v. 6. Of these words, David did comfort himself in his God: how the
Lord is called his God.
1. The Lord was God not only of David, but of all Israel, and not only of
Israel, but of the Gentiles also. But David calls him his God, because he had
particular experience of the goodness of God toward him: as all the servants of
God have. Mar. So S. Paul says, I thank my God, Romans 1.8. and speaking of
Christ, he says, who has loved me, and given himself for me, Gal. 2.20. 2.
In the Canticles the Church says unto and of Christ, My well beloved, as
Christ calls the Church, My spouse, my love: whereupon Bernard notes well,
Vniversitatis Dominum, quadam sibi proprietate vendicat in dilectum: she
challenges the universal Lord, by a certain propriety to be her beloved.
And again, Mirum hoc videtur, sed verum, animam Deum videntem haud s^^us
videre, quam si sola videatur a Deo: this seems strange, and yet is true,
that the soul sees the all-seeing God, as though it alone were seen of God.
Sermon. 69. in Cantic. 3. This then makes strongly against the opinion of the
Romanists, Controv. Of particular assurance.
who think it to be presumption for one to have a particular confidence, and
assurance in God.

4. Quest. v. 15. Whether David did well to use the ministry of the Egyptian
servant to betray his master.
Herein David did no more then he might lawfully: David might use the service
of this Egyptian herein by a treble right: 1. he being an Egyptian, and no
Amalekite, was, as it seems being a poor stranger, constrained to serve an
hard service under an Amalekite: 2. being left of his master, he falls into
the hands of David, and so by the law of battle, he is exempted from the
service of his former master: Borr. 3. But David had a more just title to do
it: for seeing that the Amalekite his master had left this poor Egyptian
being sick, who might either have perished with hunger, or be devoured of the
wild beasts, and David succored him, and received him being ready to die, by
this means the Egyptian was more bound unto David who saved his life. And to
this purpose certain Imperial laws were made, Servus in gravi morbo dimissus
a Domino, liber esto, in ff. titul. qui sine manumission. etc. leg. 11.
tum enim deseritur, cum maxmie invandus esset: a servant being forsaken of
his master in his grievous sickness, shall be free, for he is then given over,
when he has most need of help. And again, si herus negaverit servo suo
alimenta, pro derelict. leg. 11.
and alius suppeditet, sit occupantis: if the master deny food to his servant,
and an other supply it, he shall belong to him that occupies him. 4. Gods
justice also herein is made manifest upon cruel and unmerciful masters: for
as the Amalekite regarded not the life of his servant, which he might easily
have preserved, by putting him upon some beast, especially seeing they were not
pursued of their enemies: so by the intelligence given to David by this
servant, his cruel master loses his life. Mart.

5. Quest. v. 17. Whether David did well in putting all the Amalekites to the
sword.
1. Seeing this war was just, both because by the oracle of God, David was
warranted to take it in hand: and his cause also was good, to rescue his wives
and children carried away, as Abraham in the like case recovered Lot, that was
taken captive, Genesis 14. David therefore with whom he might lawfully war, he
might also lawfully kill. 2. But it will be objected, that the Amalekites dealt
not so hardly with them: for they put not any to the sword in Ziklag. I answer,
1. that there was no resistance against the Amalekites, and therefore they had
no cause to put any to the sword: 2. and in that they spared their wives, they
did it rather of a covetous mind, to have them raunsomed, then of any merciful
inclination. 3. David knew, that the Amalekites were of God appointed to
destruction, as professed enemies to his people: and therefore he doubted not,
but that he might execute the sentence of God upon them. Mart.

6. Quest. v. 17. How long the slaughter of the Amalekites continued.
1. Some read, David smote them from the twilight unto the evening, (that is,
of the next day) and unto their morrow: that is, the morrow after the two
euenings. Vatablus he thinks, that the slaughter continued until the third
day, and began upon the evening, and so held out till the next evening, and
so on until the morrow after two euenings: but the pronoune affix, am, being
of the mascuuline gender plural, cannot be referred to ghereb, evening, being
of the singular. 2. Some therefore do read, that he smote them from the
evening, until the evening of the next day: L. or from the twilight unto the
evening of the next day: B. G. so also Pelican. But it seems that David came
not upon them in the night, because they were eating and drinking, and
dancing, but rather in the morning watch, as Saul came upon the Ammonites, c.
11.11. 3. A third interpretation there is, that David smote them from the
morning, until the evening, and so until the next day: so the Septuag. these
do begin the time right, but they extend it too far, until the next day:
it is like that the night did break off the pursuit, neither could David and
his men have endured a whole day and night, without any intermission. 4.
Wherefore the meaning rather is, that David smote them from the twilight in the
morning, until the evening of the same day: for nesheph, signifies the
twilight either in the morning, or evening: but here rather of the morning,
because an other word ghereb, is used to express the twilight of the evening.
And Josephus also so expounds, that the fight endured, a prandio vsque ad
vesperam, from dinner or eating time, until the evening. Now it is called, the
evening of their morrow, not because the evening begins the next day, as
Osiand. but in saying their morrow, he has relation unto the men, that it was
the morrow after they set forth to follow the Amalekits. Iun.

7. Quest. v. 20. Why it was lawful for David to carry away the catell of the
Amalekites, which was unlawful for Saul.
Saul was reproved for saving the best of the Amalekites cattle, and bringing
of them away, c. 15. but it was lawful for David to do so. 1. The reason is,
because Saul had a special commandment to put even the cattle to the sword,
and therefore he sinned, because he disobeied the Lords commandment: but David
having no such charge, therein offended not. Mar. 2. An other reason may be
yielded, because this pray which David took from the Amalekites was not of
their own cattle, but such as they had taken before from other cities of
Judah beside Ziklag, and therefore David might lawfully recover them. Vatab. 3.
Some think, that this difference between Saul and David herein, depends
upon the secret counsel of God, which can not be searched out: Borr. but I
rather insist upon the former reasons. 4. Now they divided the whole pray into
two parts, which consisted either of the cattle, which were taken from Ziklag,
which are called his, that is, David's cattle, or of such cattle as the
Amalekites had robbed and spoiled from other places: and this was driven before
the other, and they called it David's pray, not only for that the praise of the
victory redoundeth to the captain, Mart. but because David was the only
cause of this exploit, in consulting with God, by whose direction this
enterprise was taken in hand, and by this means they make amends for their
former oversight, when in their heat they would have risen against David.
Pelican. And further it is called David's pray, because the other part of the
spoil was to be restored to the inhabitants of Ziklag again.

8. Quest. v. 23. How David could call them brethren, which in the former verse
are said to be wicked men.
1. David calls them brethren, either in respect of their nation, and
country, being all of Israel, or because they were all of one profession and
religion: and though they were now evil disposed, yet he persuaded himself,
that they might come to be of a better mind: whereby we are taught not to be
out of hope of any, but that they may be otherwise minded. Mar. 2. And by this
friendly, and loving compellation, he insinuates himself, that he might more
easily win them, unto that which was honest and reasonable: Osiand. Borr. 3.
Thus Stephen in the Acts, c. 7.2. calls the obstinate Jews brethren.
Augustine also according to the same example, names the Madaurensians, which
yet were Idolaters, brethren. So Cyprian, cited by August. lib. 3. contr.
Parmenian. c. 2. calls certain, (which by usury and extortion, had
purchased them manners and farms,) colleagues, and brethren: they did not so
much consider; what they were in the present state, but what by Gods grace they
might be. Mart. 4. Now as in David's company, there were some bad minded men,
so in the Church of God there are hypocrites and false brethren. Osiand.

9. Quest. v. 24. Of the equity of David's law, that in battle the pray should
be equally divided between those that go down to battle, and those that
keep the stuff.
1. David to this equal division persuades by two special reasons: both
because the victory was not achieved by their power or strength, but given
them by God: and for that there was reason, seeing they did their service in
keeping the stuff, that they should take part of the spoil with the rest: for
they also did warrefare in an other sort. Iun. 2. Further, the equity of this
law appears, by these reasons: 1. they were weary, and could go no further,
their will was not wanting, but their ability: and therefore their willing
mind was to be accepted according to that they had, not according to that they
had not, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 8.12. that is, according to their power.
2. they all stayed with the stuff by a common consent of the rest, v. 22. They
made them to abide at the river. 3. they also did good service, in keeping the
stuff, which otherwise might have been spoiled by some enemies, if they had
not stayed by it. 4. if the rest had been overcome, that went down to
battle, their danger should have been as great. Mar. 3. Beside herein David
had the example of Abraham, Genesis 14. who reserved unto Aner, Escol and Mamre
their parts, though as may be gathered, they went not with Abraham to battle,
but were only confederates and assistants, Genesis 14. Mar. So likewise Moses
divided the spoil of the Madianites between the soldiers and the rest of the
Congregation. Numb. 31. This law was only revived by David, and after this it
continued in force; as it was practiced, 2. Macchab. 8.28. they divided the
spoil between the sick, the fatherless, and widows, and the rest among
themselves, their wives and children. Iun.

10. Quest. Whether David made an equal division between the one and the
other.
1. Some think, that an equal distribution was made after an Arithmetical
proportion, that is, to every one alike, not by a Geometrical, to every one
according to his service: because this victory was obtained, not by humane
strength and policy, but by the divine assistance. Contra. But this was made
as a law, not only for that time, but to continue afterward, and therefore that
was not the reason: and beside, it being enacted for a law, it was just and
reasonable: but to give unto all alike, were unjust: for in distributing of
rewards, it is agreeable unto justice, that respect should be had unto men's
deserts. 2. Wherefore it is rather like, that David made a just distribution to
every one according to the qualilitie of his service: which may be made plain
by these reasons. 1. There went down to battle four hundred, there stayed
with the stuff only two hundred: an equal division therefore between them
both had not been just. 2. In the president, which it seems David followed,
namely, that of Moses in dividing the spoils of the Midianites, the like
proportion was observed: for although they which went not to battle, had part
of the pray, yet the soldiers had the greatest part: for they being but 12.
thousand, had the half part of the pray: and the rest of the Congregation,
which amounted unto 600. thousand, had the other. And again, of the soldiers
part there was taken but one of five hundred both of the men and cattle to be
given unto the Priests, but out of the peoples part there was taken one out of
fifty: so it is evident, that the soldiers had a pre-eminence. Genevens.
Wherefore although David thought it meet, that they which stayed by the stuff
should have part of the pray: yet it is like that David made such a
distribution, as that every man was rewarded according to his service. Mar.

11. Quest. Why David sent part of the pray unto the cities of Judah.
1. David had found entertainment among them of his tribe, there hiding
himself, while Saul pursued him: and therefore David, to show his thankefulnes,
sends them presents: this reason is touched afterward, v. 31. Mar. 2. Beside,
they were his kindred and brethren, and therefore there was reason, why David
first should show his kindness toward them. Osiand. 3. These cities of Judah
also had been robbed and spoiled by the Amalekites, as the Egyptian told
David, v. 14. that they had roued upon the coast of Judah, and therefore David
thought it reasonable, that some restitution should be made unto them of their
losses. Pelican. 4. Beside, by this means David prepared their hearts, and
did insinuate himself into their affections: who afterward did faithfully take
part with David against the house of Saul, 2. Sam. 2. Borr. 5. Josephus says,
that David sent presents throughout all Judah: but seeing the cities are by
name expressed, whether David sent gifts, there is small probability of that
assertion: especially seeing the two principal reasons before alleged, of
David's thankefulnes to those places, where he had haunted, and of restitution
to those cities, which had been spoiled by the Amalekites, did not bind him
to all the places of Judah, but only to some.

12. Quest. 27. Whether David sent to Bethel, or to the house of God, as the
word signifies.
1. The most Interpreters, and all but Iunius, do take Bethel here for a
proper name, the Septuag. Chald. Lat. Vat. with the rest. 2. But Iunius reads,
the house of God, which seems to be the better reading for these reasons: 1.
because Bethel is so taken twice before, c. 7.16. and 10.3. not for the city
so called, but for the house of God, the place where the Ark of God was at
this time, which was Kiriathiearim, c. 7.1. 2. it is said in the former v. that
he sent of the pray to the Elders of Judah: and Josephus, only makes mention
of the cities of Judah, to whom David sent: now Bethel was not in the tribe of
Judah, but in Ephraim, Josh. 16.2. whereas Kiriathiearim, called also
Kiriath-baal, belonged unto Judah, Josh. 15.60. 3. most of the cities here
rehearsed, were in the territory of Judah: as Iathir, Josh. 15.47. Eshtemoah,
Josh. 15.49. the cities of the Ierahmeelites, c. 27.10. the Kenites also dwelt
with the children of Judah, Iud. 1.26. Hormah belonged to Judah, Iud. 1.17. and
Hebron and Char-ashan was in the tribe of Simeon, called Hashan, Josh. 14.4.
but the Simeonites had that inheritance among the tribe of Judah. 4. It is not
like that David would forget to send a present to the place where the Ark of God was, to show his thankfulness unto God.

CHAP. XXXI.
1. Quest. v. 1, 2. Of the overthrow of the Israelites in general.
1. Josephus writes, that the same day Saul was slain in mount Gilboa, when
David triumphed against the Amalekites: where we see the diverse success of
those that trust in God, as David did, and such as use unlawful means, as
Saul did, that consulted with a witch. Mar. 2. Whereas all the people fled, it
was a sign that the wrath of God was upon them: as this is reckoned among the
judgments, which God would lay upon his people for their sins, they should
flee before their enemies, Leuit. 26. Mart. and it is often seen, that the
people are punished under an evil magistrate, as being accessarie to his
sins: Osiand. for they conspired with Saul against David, neither did any of
them find fault with the cruel slaughter of the innocent Priests. Mar. 3.
Saul is reserved in the battle, until the last and greatest extremity, when
he saw all the people discomfited, and his sons slain before him: that his
sorrow thereby falling upon him by the just judgment of God, might be
increased. Mart.

2. Quest. v. 2. Of the death of Saul's sons, and specially of Jonathan.
1. Here are only three sons of Saul mentioned to have died in this battle,
Ishbosheth was not present, either because he was no warrior, or for that he
was left at home, to be ouerseer of the family. Mar. 2. All these three do
die together with their father, not bearing his punishment, or suffering for
their fathers sin: they had sins of their own, which Gods judgments might
work upon, which it pleased God should concur with the punishment of their
father, that evil parents might be warned, who by their wickedness do bring
Gods judgments upon themselves, and their posterity. 3. But concerning
Jonathan, his lamentable end, being a good man deserves more compassion:
which is thus far to be considered: 1. that Jonathan being a good man,
howsoever he ended his days, could not die evil: 2. God no doubt turned this
temporal death of Jonathan to his everlasting glory: 3. God might foresee,
that if Jonathan had remained, his heart might have changed toward David, and
therefore the Lord takes him away: wherein Gods judgments, though secret and
hid to us, are most just. Martyr.

3. Quest. v. 4. Whether Saul can be excused or justified for killing himself.
1. Some think, that Saul did this of a valiant mind, and therein did choose
rather thus to die, then that God should receive any dishonor by his death:
and Pellicane doubts not to say, that Saul taking a sword, and killing
himself, animam in manus Domini commendavit, did commend his soul into the
hands of God, and sacrificium se Domino obtulit, and offered up himself a
sacrifice unto God: here also the example of Sampson is alleged, that brought
destruction upon himself. Contra. 1. They which kill themselves, do it of a
cowardly, rather then valiant mind: for if they could with patience bear and
endure their troubles, they would not hasten their own death. 2. Saul herein
respected more his own dishonor, then Gods: for he gives this reason, least
the uncircumcised should come and thrust him through, and mock him. Bor. 3.
Neither could this be a sacrifice unto God, being not offered in faith, for
Saul immediately before had showed his infidelity in seeking unto a witch. 4.
The example of Sampson is far unlike: for the spirit of God came upon him,
but the evil spirit was upon Saul: Sampson in zeal intended the destruction
of Gods enemies, and not directly his own, but as willing to give up his life
for the glory of God, in the confusion of his enemies: but all things were
unlike in Saul, he principally intended his own death, was not therein
revenged upon Gods enemies, neither died in Gods quarrel, but to redeem his
own shame. 2. Therefore the sounder opinion is, that Saul died in despair,
and so killed himself: and this his desperate death may seem to be a
forerunner of everlasting destruction. Osiand. And that this act of Saul's was
unlawful, it is evident, 1. Cor. 11.14. where it is said, Because he asked
counsel of a familiar spirit, and asked not of the Lord, the Lord slew him:
that is, the Lord so disposed, that by the ministry of Satan working upon the
malice of Saul's heart, he was slain by his own hands. 3. Herein Gods justice
appears, that as Saul's sword was turned against the innocent Priests, in
putting them to death, and against David whom he unjustly persecuted, so now
he himself should fall upon the edge thereof: he first spoke to his harness
bearer to thrust him through: whom the Hebrews take to be Doeg, that fell
upon the Priests: but it is like if it had been that murderous wretch, he
would no more have stopped at it, then he had done in killing the Priests: the
like example is found in the Roman stories of M. Antonius, that would have had
his armor bearer called Eras to kill him, but he first fell upon his own
sword. ex Martyr.

4. Quest. Whether it be lawful for one upon any occasion to kill himself.
1. Many reasons may be alleged to show the unlawfulness of this fact, for any
to lay violent hands upon themselves. 1. The Scriptures do directly condemn
it: it is forbidden in that commandment, Thou shall not kill, for he that
kills himself, sheddeth his own blood, and therefore is a murderer: for if
it be unlawful for one man to kill an other, much more is it, to take away his
own life, seeing every man is nearest himself: and it is more unnatural for
one to shed his own blood then an others. 2. Our life is the gift of God,
therefore it cannot be cast away without great impiety. 3. None of the Saints
in their greatest misery, thought of any such way, to rid themselves out of
trouble, as Joseph, David, Job. 4. Our Savior bids his Apostles to escape
trouble, to flee from one city to an other, he never opened any gappe unto
such enterprises. 5. Plato used this reason, that as soldiers do commit a
capital offense leaving their station, without commandment from the general:
so neither should a man put himself out of Gods service in this life, to the
which he is called. Aristotle adds further, that it is not lawful to take
out of the way a citizen without the warrant of the law, and the consent of the
magistrate: so neither should a man displace himself, being a citizen and
inhabitant in this great commonwealth of the world, without the will of the
highest and supreme Judge. Therefore Hierome well says, speaking in the
person of God: Non recipio tales animas, Hieron. ad Marcell. de obit. Bleh^^.
quae me nolente exierunt e corpore: I will not receive those souls, which
against my will go out of their bodies. 6. The Athenians had a law, that they
which killed themselves, should confiscate all their goods, and not be buried
in the fields of Athens. But the Roman laws somewhat mitigated the penalties
of those which killed themselves: decreeing, that if he that killed himself,
were not guilty of any other crime, his fact should not hurt his successors,
and posterity: Diocles. l. 9. tit. 2. leg. 12. and such other laws there are
diverse to the same effect. And the reason why the Romans gave greater liberty
unto this sin, then the Athenians, may seem to be this: because they had so
many famous persons that had killed themselves, whom they were loath to count
infamous, or condemn, whose examples shall presently be brought forth. ex
Martyr.

2. Now diverse examples out of foreign stories are alleged, to justify this
unlawful act. As among the Philosophers, Cleanthes, Empedocles, Zeno, and some
write, Aristotle also, cut off their own lives: the like did Brutus, Cassius,
Cato, Demosthenes, Lucretia: so did Sampson and Razis, 2. Macchab. 14. Jonas
also bid the mariners cast him into the Sea, Ion. 1.12. diverse holy women to
save their chastity, as Pelagia the virgin, whom Ambrose commends, and a
chaste matrone whom Maxentius would have ravished, killed her self, making as
though she attired, and prepared her self to come forth. Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 15.

Contra. 1. Concerning the examples of the heathen, they do not much move us,
for their actions proceeding not of faith, howsoever glorious they seemed to
be, were not accepted. Some of them killed themselves thorough impatience, as
not being able to endure the reproach and shame, with they feared: as Lucretia
because she was defloured, and Cato Vticensis, for that Caesar prevailed, and
yet he bid his son promise himself all good of Cesars clemency. Some of
them, (but not many of that mind) did shorten their days for the desire of
immortality, as Cleombrotus Ambraciata: but this was a preposterous and
presumptuous desire in them, to hasten to immortality, without the calling of
the eternal and immortal God, whose gift it was.

2. Concerning the examples objected out of Scripture: as of Sampson we have
seen before, quest. 3. Razis is alleged out of an Apocryphal book, which is
not of canonical authority: in the same book, 2. Macchab. 12.42. Judas
Macchabeus is commended for sacrificing for certain idolaters, after they were
dead: who having idols found about them, died apparently in the state of
impenitencie: for such the Papists themselves forbid prayer to be made. As for
Jonas he had the spirit of prophecy, and that act of his was prophetical, and
therefore not to be imitated.

3. And of those which killed themselves to preserve their chastity, this
charitable judgment is to be given, that though the act, which they committed,
was unlawful, how good so ever the occasion and intention seemed to be: (for
we must not do evil, that good may come thereof) yet God might give them the
sight of their sin before their soul departed, and so they repenting of it,
it was not imputed unto them. And here Augustines resolution is sound: Non
veneramur eos nomine martyrum, qui sibi collum ligaverunt: Contr. lit. Petil.
l. 2. c. 49. cited Cause. 23. qu. 5. c. 10.
We do not reverence those as Martyrs, which have knetched or throtled their
own neck: sic fere Martyr. The conclusion then is, that it is not lawful for
any, upon what occasion so ever, to take away their own life, as wicked
Abimelech caused his page to thrust him through, and treacherous Judas hanged
himself. But every man must wait patiently upon the Creator, till he shall
call again into his hands, the souls and spirits of men, which he sent unto
their bodies.

5. Quest. Whether Saul is to be held a reprobate, and so everlastingly
condemned.
1. Some doubt not to affirm, that Saul commended his soul into Gods hands,
and obediently submitting himself unto Gods justice, which inflicted this
punishment upon him: Hanc domini iustitiam, vbi amplexatus est, post primam
temporalemque mortem, in secundam atque aeternam incidere non potuit: while he
embraced this justice of God, after the first and temporal death, he could not
fall into the second and everlasting death. Pelican.

Contra. 1. But Saul yielded not himself of an obedient mind unto the
punishment foretold, (for diabolical predictions work not obedience, but
rather diffidence) but of a desperate mind, forced by Gods justice, did cast
himself headlong into present danger. 2. Neither is the first death though it
be never so fearful and terrible, an exemption from everlasting death: for
the disobedient in Noah's time died in the flood, and yet afterward were in the
prison of hell. 1. Pet. 3.19.

2. Some therefore doubt not to affirm, that Saul, post foedam mortem,
abiectus est in perpetuos inferorum cruciatus: after a filthy death, was cast
into the perpetual pains of hell. Osiand. But seeing the Scripture does not
directly speak of his everlasting reprobation, but of his temporal reiection
from the kingdom, we are not hastily herein to precipitate our sentence.

3. Wherefore the safer way is, to leave Saul unto the judgment of God, and not
without the warrant of the Scripture to give any sentence of his comdemnation.
And yet by the whole course of the history, by Saul's wilful transgressions,
his disobedience to the Prophet in not staying his coming, falsifying of the
Lords word in sparing of Agag the king of Amalek: in putting to death the
innocent Priests: in persecuting David, and breaking his oath and faith there
given unto him, in consulting with a witch, and lastly in his desperate end,
it is evident, that more arguments may be gathered of Saul's condemnation, then
of his salvation: yet because nothing is expressly set down touching his
state with God, it is better so to leave it. sic fere Martyr.

6. Quest. v. 9. Of the Philistims rage toward Saul being dead.
1. Like as David cut off Goliaths head, and carried it about in triumph, so
now the Philistims cut off Saul's head, and rejoice in this victory and
conquest: such is the mutabilitie and change of these earthly accidents, which
are sometime up, sometime down. 2. Further, the Philistims are more cruel in
this battle, then they were when the Arc was taken in Eli his time, when Ophni
and Phinehes were slain: for then they did not so rage upon the bodies of the
dead: the reason is, because they had since that time received many
discomfitures by the hand of Samuel, Saul, and David: by which means their
hatred was more exasperate. 3. They laid up Saul's armor in the house of
Ashtaroth, and his head in the house of Dagon, 1. Chron. 11.10. giving the
glory of this victory unto their filthy Idols, and so robbing the true God
of his praise: this their vain joy continued not long: for afterward David was
raised up, to be revenged upon these despightfull uncircumcised Philistims. Mar.

7. Quest. v. 10. How the Philistims hanged up the body of Saul in Bethshan.
1. Here mention is made only of the body of Saul so hanged up: but 1. Chron.
11.12. it is gathered, that all the bodies of Saul's sons were so served. 2.
They are said here to be hanged up on the wall of Bethshan, Reconcil.
that is, in the street adjoining to the wall, 2. Sam. 21.12. 3. This
Bethshan, or Bethshean, Iud. 1.27. belonged unto the lot of Menasseh: but was
not yet recovered from the Philistims, as is noted before of Keilah, c. 27.6.
4. The Israelites by the law of Moses, were not to suffer the bodies of those
which were put to death, to hang all night upon the tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23. but the
Philistims being more inhumane, and rejecting the laws of the people of God,
do expose the bodies of these worthy men unto derision. And in this kind of
death Saul is accursed: for the curse of God is on him that hangs on a tree:
Saul was rejected of God in this life, and accursed in his death. 5. And herein
appears Gods just wrath and indignation against him, that does suffer his
own glory to be obscured among the Philistims, that he might bring upon Saul
this just and deserved punishment. When the Lord was angry with Israel for the
golden calfe set up in Horeb, and would presently have destroyed them, Moses
turned the Lords purpose by this persuasion, that the Egyptians would have
taken occasion thereby to have blasphemed God, Exodus 32.12. but here the Lord
neglects, and is careless of his own glory, that his justice might take
place in Saul's punishment. God receives dishonor two ways, either by the
evil life of those which profess his name, as David by his sin caused the
enemies of God to blaspheme, 2. Sam. 12.14. or else by the punishment of his
people, which is procured notwithstanding justly by their sins: so the people
are taught to pray for the turning away of Gods judgments, saying, Give not
thine heritage a reproach unto the heathen, Joel 2.17. And thus the Lord
sustained some dishonor, in the punishment of Saul among the Philistims: but
no dishonor at all among his own people, which did see that Saul's sins did
call for vengeance at Gods hands. Mart. We learn by this, that sin is so
grievous a thing in the sight of God, that he will not suffer it to go
unpunished, though it be with the hinderance for the time of his own glory.

8. Quest. v. 12. Of the fact of the men of Iabesh Gilead in rescuing the body
of Saul and of his sons.
1. These men of Iabesh dwelled on the further side of Jordan, whether the
Philistims had not approached: therefore by this it is evident, that they are
deceived, which read v. 7. that the men of Israel on the other side of Jorden,
when they saw them put to flight, left their cities and fled: so read, S.C.
L.B.G. for the Iabeshites dwelt on the further side of Jorden, who were so
far from flying and leaving their city, that they valiantly set upon a city
of the Philistims, and recovered the bodies of Saul, and of his sons: the
meaning then is, that they which were on this side Jorden, toward the
Philistims, fled away: for begheber, in transitu, indifferently signifies, on
either side, this, or the other. Iun. 2. These men of Iabesh did this exploit
to show their thankfulness unto Saul, by whose means they had been formerly
delivered from Nahash king of Ammon, c. 11. Pellic. 3. Though Saul died in his
sin, yet they would not be wanting toward him in an office and part of
humanity: for there is a kind of courtesy and duty to be performed even
toward the wicked. A child is to show his reverence toward a wicked father, not
enioyning him any evil thing, as Jonathan followed Saul to battle, and would
not be wanting in any duty. So neither are subjects to renounce their
obedience unto an evil Prince, standing under Gods curse: when Ambrose
excommunicated Theodosius the Emperor, he did not free the people of their
obedience and service unto him: Contr. Subjects not exempted from obedience
even to Princes standing excommunicate.
the practice of the Church of Rome is contrary, who when they excommunicate
Princes, do absolve their subjects from their fealty and allegiance. 4. But
this is to be understood of humanity to be performed to such wicked men, where
God has not commanded the contrary: for Saul sinned in sparing Agag,
contrary to Gods commandment, and Achab in letting Benhadad go. Mart.

9. Quest. v. 12. Why the men of Iabesh burned the bodies of Saul and his
sons.
1. Some think they did it to give unto them honorable burial, burning only
the flesh from the bones, not the bones and all to ashes, as they used to burn
malefactors. Pelican. 2. Some understand, that they burned odor for them, as
they did for Asa, 2. Chron. 16.15. and used to do for the Kings, Ierem. 34.5.
But the words of the text are, they burnt them there, that is, their bodies. 3.
The meaning then is, that they burnt the flesh only from the bones, for these
two reasons: both because the flesh was now corrupt and putrified, and least
their bodies afterward falling into the Philistims hand, might be exposed to
derision: Mar. and this was the cause, why the ancient Romans used to burn
the bodies of the dead. Iun.

10. Quest. v. 13. Why the men of Iabesh fasted seven days.
1. They did not fast (to the which they also added lamentations and prayer) to
procure any ease unto Saul being dead, as the Romanists think by their
superstitious prayers and obits, to relieve them which are in Purgatory:
Contr. Against Purgatory.
for every man lives by his own faith, not by an others: and the Apostle
says, that every one shall receive according to that, which is done in his
body, whether it were good or evil, 2. Cor. 5.10. therefore that which is
done without the body by others helps not: prayers may mutually help the
living, before the sentence be over: but after sentence, which every one
receives in his passage out of this life, it is too late, as is evident in the
parable of the rich glutton and Lazarus, Luke 16.2. They fasted then and
mourned only to show their grief, and to lament for the loss, which the
commonwealth of Israel received by this overthrow: Joseph. and they mourn
seven days in memory of the seven days of truce, which sometime Nahash the
king of Ammon gave them, within which time Saul came and delivered them. Borr.
This small comfort Israel had by their first King, whom they asked against the
will and pleasure of God. Mart.

To God only wise be praise thorough Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. Romans 16.27.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 2. read, Caietanus, for Chartalus. p. 4. r. (...), f. (...). p. 5. r.
iagnal, f. ragnal. p. 20. r. (...), f. (...). p. 36. r. your gods, f. your
goods. p. 39. r. ijthabelu, f. ijthabela. p. 49. r. sham, f. shun. p. 54. r.
samech, f. semech. and, shurec, f. shuree. p. 57. r. (...), f. (...). p. 58. r.
lemor, f. lenior. p. 65. r. R. Selemoh, f. R. Selenah. p. 66. r. proposed, f.
purposed. p. 68. r. Hanun, f. Haman. p. 72. r. unto his son, f. unto him. p.
77. r. Samuel and Saul 40. years, for Samuel and Saul 20. years. p. 79. r.
innocent party. r. daleth and resh. p. 80. r. Machir, f. Macher. p. 83. r.
condition, f. conditional. p. 88. r. by whom, f. by women. p. 100. r. but they
made them no new. p. 101. r. unusual, f. unlawful. p. 158. r. to plant the
Gospel. p. 164. r. A third pretext of absence. p. 167. r. highest places of the
church. ibid. r. meanenes, f. means. p. 214. r. plunged, f. plagued. ibid. r.
veeghesheh. p. 218. r. athnah. p. 132. l. 10. add in the margen, respons. 10.
ad inter. August. p. 234. r. sanctified, f. sacrificed. p. 276. r. to dispense,
for to dispose. p. 280. r. unlovely, f. vnliuely. p. 292. r. it being, f.
being it. ibid. l. 15. r. it was not then. p. 299. l. 2. r. sorts, f. sores.
ibid. l. 20. r. mistaking, f. misliking. p. 312. l. 8. r. without the Arc.


