SYNOPSIS PAPISMI, THAT IS, A GENERAL VIEW OF PAPISTRY; wherein the whole
mystery of iniquity, and sum of Antichristian doctrine is set down, which
is maintained this day by the Synagogue of Rome, against the Church of Christ,
together with An Antithesis of the true Christian faith, and an Antidotum or
counterpoyson out of the Scriptures, against the whore of Babylons filthy cup
of abominations: Divided into three books or Centuries, that is, so many
hundreds of Popish heresies and errors.

1. COR. 11.9. There must be heresies, that they which are approved amongst you
might be known.

TITUS. 3.10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition,
avoid.

AVG. DE VERA RELIG. CAP. 6. Ecclesia Catholica vtitur gentibus ad materiam
operationis suae, haereticis ad probationem doctrinae suae, schismaticis ad
documentum stabilitatis suae: alios inuitat, alios excludit, alios relinquit,
omnibus tamen gratiae Dei participandae dat potestatem: sieve illi informandi
adhuc, sieve reformandi, sieve recolligendi sunt.

The true Catholic Church does use the Gentiles as matter to work upon,
heretics for the trial of their doctrine, schismatikes to prove their
constancy: the first she inuiteth, the second she excludes, the third she
leaves, yet to them all she offers the grace of God: in instructing the
Gentiles, reforming of heretics, and bringing home again schismatikes.

Collected by Andrew Willet Bachelor of Divinity.

AT LONDON ^^^nted by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noster
row at the sign of the Talbot. 1592.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, MOST EXCELLENT, AND NOBLE PRINCESS QVEENE ELIZABETH,
OUR DREAD LADY, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc.
WHen we call to mind (most gracious and dread Sovereign) the manifold
blessings, which the Lord by your Highness hand has reached forth to this
Realm and Church of England, the long flourishing peace, which the land under
your prosperous government has these many years enjoyed, the like whereof
neither our forefathers have seen, nor other countries known: The notable
reformation also of the church, and purging of the house of God, which days
the holy Martyrs and servants of God long sighed for, and desired to see, but
saw them not: When we do consider these things, we nothing doubt to say, that
the prophecy of Esaias is fulfilled in these our days, who says concerning the
Church: Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers:
Isa. 49.23.
as it is also prophesied in the Psalms, Psalm. 49.16.
In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children, whom thou may make
Princes in all lands. For now who seeeth not, that many Christian Princes in
the world are become the children of the Church?

Your Majesty's renowned father king Henry the eight, and your Highness
brother of blessed memory king Edward the sixth, did but begin the foundation of
the Temple, and lay the plot, and with David prepared gold, silver, brass, 1.
Chron. 22.14.
iron and all things needful for the building: but it was his good pleasure,
that you with peaceable Solomon should finish the building, and with Zorobabel
should prosper with the stone of tin in your hand. The Lord has made you a
wall and a hedge to his vineyard to keep out the wild boar: Zach. 4.10.
a goodly tree to give shade to the beasts of the field, and succor to the
^oules of the air, a nurse to the people of God, Isa. 5.2. Dan. 4.9.
to carry them in your bosom, as the nurse bears the sucking child. The Lord
Christ would once again hang upon the breasts of a Virgin: Number. 11.12.
God has raised you up a Deborah to judge Israel, an Esther to deliver the
Church: the Lord has made you as that virtuous matrone that does cloth her
family with double raiment: Pro. 31.21.
your Realm flourishes with true religion, and abundance of peace* this is
our double apparel. Now seven women shall no more take hold of one man, Isa.
4.2.
saying, Come let us be called by thy name: but thousands of men make suit to
one woman, as all Israel went up to be judged of Deborah. Iud. 4.5.


What though the Papists fret and storm, and cut your Majesty very short,
Rhemist. annot. 1. Cor. 14. sect. 16. Iud. 1.6.
saying, that the Prince ought neither to give voice in counsel for matters of
religion, nor make Ecclesiastical laws, and would as Zedechiah his eyes were
put out, and Adonibesech his fingers cut off, so both take away the eye of your
judgment, and your right hand of power in Ecclesiastical matters? What though
another foul mouthed Jesuit does most impudently slander your Majesty,
saying in great contempt, I am reipsa Caluinistis in Anglia, mulier quaedam
summus Pontifex est? Bellarm. de notis Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 9. Psalm. 59.14.
As for them, let them wander and run up and down in the City, barking and
snarling like hungry dogs, seeking meat* and shall not be satisfied, as the
Psalm says, yet shall the building prosper under your hand: the people of God
do cry out with shoutings* Grace grace unto it; the whole Church of God from
all parts of the world saluteth you, Zach. 4.7. Psalm. 118.26. Psalm. 45.4.
saying: We have blessed you out of the house of God, and do encourage you to
go forward, gird thy sword to thy thigh prosper thou with thine honor, ride on,
because of the word of truth God has given into your hand a two edged sword:
with one edge i^ defends the Church from false religion; with the other, the
common wealth from oppression: August. ad fratres in eremo, ser. 14.
as an ancient father says, Tunc iustitia dicitu^ gladius ex vtraque part
acutus, quia hominis defendit corpus ab exterioribus iniurijs, and anima^ a
spiritualibus molestijs. To Kings and Princes it is especially said, Thou shall
walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and Dragon thou shall tread under
thy feet. Psalm. 91.14.
The Lion is the open enemy, the Aspe and dragon is the close hypocrite that
peruerteth religion. The good laws of Princes are as the pitch of Noah's arc,
Genesis 6.14.
it was pitched within and without: so good Princes are to provide, both for
the safety of the land from foreign enemies abroad, and to preserve the
soundnes of religion, from corruption of heresy at home. How lawful your
Majesty's government is, and how well pleasing before God, the sequel and
effect does abundantly show. Solomon asked wisdom, and he received both
riches and honor withal: none of all these has God denied to you: the Lord
loves you, his left hand is under your head, his right hand does embrace you,
as the wiseman says, At his right hand is length of days, at his left, riches
and honor: all these has the Lord granted unto you: Cant. 2.6. Pro. 3.16.
and thus the Lord honoreth those that honor him. And as your Majesty does
proceed and continue in aduauncing the Lords honor: so he is able yet to do
greater things for you.

Now then, seeing your Highness is our Zorobabel, the chief builder of Gods
house, and the rest of your faithful subjects are the helpers and workmen,
some as laborers under you: I your humble and meanest subject, as a poor
labourer, fit but to carry rubbish and stones, and to serve other builders,
have forced my self to do somewhat toward the building of Gods house: I have
therefore (may it please your Majesty) in this work set down the body and
sum of all Popish opinions whatsoever, wherein we dissent from them, and they
from the truth, and have endeavored to lay open their nakedness, that every man
may see their great brags, and small ability: words, but no matter: great
promises, yet little performed: and why, as Augustine says, Cont. Petilian.
2.98.
Oste^dere hoc non possunt, non quia ingenium deest, sed quia bona causa.

This labor of mine was thought to be very expedient for these times, and not
before enterprised by any, that men not learned, might in one volume find all
the controversies of religion, which their leisure would not suffer them to
collect them selves. Many of our learned countrymen have in some choice and
principal controversies, as the Lords valiant champions, maintained the truth
strongly against the common adversary: but this small labor, as it pleased
the Lord, was left for me: they have borne the heat of the day, the cool
euenings work is cast upon me. They have built with hewn stones, Isa. 9.10*
the brick-worke is my lot; they have squared the tall cedar trees, the wild
fig trees must be hewn out by my hand.

This simple work I have presumed to present to your Majesty, as a token of
my duty and service, a poor scholars gift, as a sign of my thankfulness to
God and your Majesty, by whom we have both leisure and maintenance to follow
our studies: for as the Poet says, Deus nobis haecotia fecit, God through you
has wrought us this peace. And I was emboldened the rather to offer this
simple labor to your Highness, remembering your Princely and gracious
disposition, which has been wont to accept with great favor and regard, the
meanest gifts of your subjects, yea has not refused to receive posies and
nosegaies at their hands: With the same Princely countenance, I beseech your
grace to receive this posie of mine, Fox. page 2093.
Non florum, sed foliorum. A princely mind your Highness knows, is as well
seen in accepting of small gifts, as giving of great: as Alexander said to a
soldier, upon whom he bestowed a city: Si tu non es dignus tanta recipere,
ego tamen dignus tanta donare: so the speech somewhat altered, me thinks I
hear your Majesty thus saying to me: Licet non tu dignus tantula donare, ego
tamen digna tantula accipere: though it be not fit for thee to offer so small a
gift, yet it stands with my Princely nature to receive it.

And now (O noble Queen, our dread Sovereign) the mother of Israel, a nurse
to the people of God, be strong and fear not, the Lord fights for you: it is
the truth, the ancient Catholic Apostolic faith, which we under your leading
and protection do profess. As for your enemies, Psalm. 28.42. Psalm. 92.10.
they shall be as the dust before the wind, and as the clay in the streets, but
your crown shall flourish, your horn shall be exalted. In you is that saying
verified as it was sometime in David, The stone which the builders refused,
Psalm. 118.22. Cant. 1.4.
is become the headstone of the corner. You were sometime black with sorrow, and
the sun of affliction has looked upon you: but now the Lord has made you
comely, beautiful as the morning, Cant. 6.9.
fair as the moon, giving his Church under; on abundance of blessings: so
that we may now all say, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be glad in it: yea we will not cease still to pray with the Church
of God, O Lord save now, send us now prosperity. Psalm. 118.25.
That the Lord would in mercy yet lengthen out these good days, and so
replenish your royal heart with his grace, that you may still bring forth fruit
in your age: that what work the Lord has yet to bring to pass in his Church,
Psalm. 92.14.
it may be finished by your hand: that both this your Realm of England may
still be strongly fenced and hedged about with all temporal blessings, Isa.
5.2.
as also the watchtower and watchmen of the Church may thrive and prosper in
their spiritual business. Psalm. 46.4. Habac. 2.14.
And as the Temple of God is now built and set up aloft, so the river of God
may flow, and the streams thereof make glad the people of God: that all the
land may be filled with knowledge, as the waters cover the sea: and as Aarons
silver bells in the Temple, so the voice of the Gospel may be heard over the
whole land. Psalm. 118.27.
And thus shall the Lord grant you your hearts desire: your sacrifice shall not
only be bound to the horns of the altar, but even turned to ashes: that is,
the Lord will not only incline his ear to your prayer, but grant your
request to the full. That at length your Majesty shall not doubt to say with
the kingly Prophet David, Psalm. 92.11.
Mine eye shall see my desire against mine enemies, and mine ear shall hear
my wish against the wicked that rise up against me. And let all the people of
God say Amen: even so be it O Lord, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, ANDREW WILLET.

The Preface to the Reader.
GOod Christian Reader, think not the time long, nor the labor lost, if I
shall in a few words open my mind further unto thee: and as leading thee by the
hand, show thee the way and entrance into this treatise following. We are not
ignorant how this famous Church of England the mother of us all, has been
these many years molested and troubled with hollow hearted brethren, sowers of
corrupt doctrine, deuisers of mischief, enemies to our peace, and in one word,
Romish Catholics and Papists. They have been from time to time, as pricks to
our sides, and thorns in our eyes, Canticl. 2.15. Math. 3.
as the Cananites were to Israel: they are the Foxes that destroy the Lords
vineyard, the progeny of the Pharisees, a generation of vipers, whose
property is to gnaw out the sides of their damme when they are brought forth:
even so have these vipers sought the destruction of their country. They are
the serpent by the way, that byteth the horse heels, and causes the rider to
fall backward: that is, Gene. 49.17. Ezech. 39.18.
subtly do undermine and hinder the prosperous success of religion. Of such
prophesied Ezechiel, They do eat the good pasture, and tread down the rest
with their feet: they have drunk of the deep waters, and troubled the
residue with their feet. They are not content themselves to eat the fat, and
drink the sweet of the land, but some of them have labored and practiced to
disturb our peace, and to trouble the quiet state of the land. But let not us
(good brethren) be offended at these things. First let us not be astonished, as
though some strange thing had befallen us: 1. Cor. 11.19.
for S. Paul has said, That heresies must be among us, that they which are
approved may be known: in time of persecution exercebant patientiam Ecclesiae,
they did prove the patience of the Church: but now as Augustine says, exercent
sapientiam, they do exercise the wisdom of the Church. Let not the number
and multitude offend us of those, which do band themselves against the Church:
for so it must be, Christ's flock is but a little flock. Let us not be afraid
of their wisdom, Luke 12.32.
power or strength: the scripture teaches us, that they in their generation
are wiser then the children of light: yet the Lord our God, that is with us,
and fights for us, is wiser and stronger then they. Let them not deceive us
with a show of holiness: 2. Cor. 11.14. 1. Pet. 4.15. In Psalm. 34. Conc. 2.
for Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light: neither let it move
us because they endure some trouble and loss of their goods, and imprisonment
of their bodies for their religion (which is falsely so called) for S. Peter
says, That men may suffer as evil doers, and so do these. And S. Augustine
says, Si poenae martyrs faceret, omnes carceres martyribus pleni essent,
omnes catenae martyrs traherent: If the punishment only, and not the cause
made Martyrs, al prisons should be full of Martyrs, and all that are bound with
fetters and chains should be Martyrs. But let us (not stumbling at any of
these stones) be constant in the faith, and go forward in the profession of the
Gospel, which is grounded upon the Scripture, sealed with the blood of Martyrs,
waited and attended upon these many years, as the mistress with the handmaid,
with peace, prosperity, and abundance of all blessings. With them there is no
peace to be had: Bellarm. de laicis. lib. 3. cap. 19. Deuteronomy. 22.10
their own Doctors teach, that no reconciliation can be made between us: And
indeed so it is, for there is no fellowship between light and darkness. The
Israelites were commanded, not to sow their ground with diverse seeds, nor to
plough with an ox and an ass. What is this else, but that the Church of God
cannot consist of believers and Idolaters of true Christians and hypocrites,
Catholics and Heretics, Protestants and Papists? Their seed and ours is
diverse: they sow the doctrine of men, and humane traditions: we sow the seed
of Gods word. The ox is only fit for the Lords plough, that chaweth the cud,
and deuideth the hoof, the ass does neither: Who is he that deuideth the
hoof, and chaweth the cud Augustine tells us, Homil. 35.
Fissa vngula pertinet ad discernendu^, quid dextru^, quid sinistru^: ruminatio
pertinet ad eos, qui cogitant postea quid audierint: He deuideth the hoof,
that deuideth and discerns what is good, and what evil: and they chaw the
cud, that do meditate of that, which they hear out of the word. But such are
not the common Catholics among Papists: for they do not allow every one, the
mistress, the maid, the ploughman and artificer to talk of Scripture, or move
questions and doubts in Religion: and so make them asses, not oxen to chaw the
cud. Rhemist. Prefat. sect. 7. Rhemist. 1. Joan. 4. sect. 1. Dan. 2.33. Ierem.
15.19.
They say it belongs not to every Christian, to discern between true and
false doctrine, but they must take their faith of their superiors, and obey
them in all things: and so neither would they have them divide the hoof,
taking from them their discerning judgment. There is no agreement therefore to
be looked for at their hands: no more then iron or clay can be tempred
together: Their old vessels cannot receive the new liquor of the Gospel: but
they must first become new themselves: they must first put off their beggarly
rags of Popish ceremonies and superstitions, or else they shall never put on
Christ: And to be short, Reuertantur illi ad te, ne tu reuertaris ad illos: Let
them return unto us, we will not return to them, as the Lord says to Jeremy.

But lest now we should be thought to speak without book, deeply charging
our adversaries with heresy, lies, false doctrine, and proving nothing: we
will take some pains of set down some principal opinions of the Papists,
which have in the purer ages of the Church been condemned for heresies.

Marcellina the companion of Carpocrates the archheretike, worshipped the
Images of Jesus August. here is. 7. So the Papists do worship the Images of
Saints, and in the second Nicene Council it was decreed, that the Image of God
should be worshipped with the same honor that God himself was.

The Heracleonites did anoint their sick which lay a dying, with oil and
balm, Here Is. 16.

The Caians did hold, that the sin of Judas in betraying Christ, was a
benefit to mankind, Here Is. 18. The Papists come somewhat near: One of them
affirms, that the Jews had sinned mortallie, if they had not crucified
Christ: Ex Iuell. defens. Apolog. p. 676.

The Pepuzians judged heretics, because they permitted women to be Priests,
Here Is. 27.

The heretics called Angelici were condemned, because they worshipped Angels,
Here Is. 39. Rhemists teach, that Angels may be worshipped, Annot. in Apocal. 3
sect. 6.

There was a sect of heretics that walked with bare feet, because God said to
Moses, put off Here Is. 68. And so are there of Friars that go barefoote, as the
Friars Flagellants, and Franciscanes.

The Priscillianists did make the Apocrypha, that is, books not Canonical of
equal authority Here Is. 70. So do the Papists, the books of Tobie, Judith,
Machabees, and others, which are not found in the Canon of the Hebrew, they
make the^ books of Canonical Scripture, and part of the word of God: yea, they
say, that whatsoever the Pastors of the Church do teach beside Scripture in
the unity of the Church, is to be taken for the word of God, Rhemist. annot.
1. Thessal. cap. 2 sect. 12.

An Archheretike called Marcus, did hold that Christ did not verily suffer and
indeed, but in Here Is. 14 The Appollinarists also affirmed, that Christ took
humane flesh without a soul, Here Is. 55. I pray you, how far are the Papists
from these heresies? for they affirm that Christ suffered not in soul: Nay
the Rhemists hold, that it is a blasphemous assertion so to say, Annot. Hebr.
5. v. 7. What is this else, but either with Marcus to say, that Christ suffered
but in show, and that he felt nothing in soul, when he cried out upon the
Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? for if there were no such
matter indeed, Christ must have uttered those words only in outward show and
pretense. Again, they cannot shift off handsomely from them the Appollinarists
heresy: for why did Christ take upon him our flesh and soul, but to redeem
man, that was lost both in body and soul? and therefore he must needs have
suffered both in body and soul: for if there were no use of the humane soul
in the work of our redemption, Cont. Felician. cap. 13.
you might as well say with the Appollinarists that Christ had no soul at all.
Thus Augustine reasons: Si totus homo perijt, totus beneficio saluatoris
indiguit, sitotut beneficio saluatoris indigebat, totum Christus veniendo
saluabit: If the whole man both in body and soul were lost, he wholly had
need of a Savior: and if he wholly needed a Savior; Christ by his coming did
wholly save him. Ergo* it follows that Christ must wholly have died and
suffered in body and soul to redeem man, that was wholly lost in body and
soul.

Anthropomorphites did imagine, that God was in shape and proportion like a
man, Here Is. 50. Do not our Rhemists savor strongly of this heresy, which
allow the image of God to be pictured like an old man with gray hairs in their
Churches? Annot Act. cap 17. v. 29.

Abeliani* thought it not lawful for their sort to live without wives, and yet
they never used, nor kept company with their wives, Here Is. 87. Do not the
Papists come near them, which hold that their priests which were married
before orders, ought not afterward to have access to their wives, yet are they
their wives still, neither is the marriage knot dissolved between them?
Rhemist. Act. 21. sect. 1.

Pelagian heretics did hold three pernicious opinions. First, that a man may
be perfect in this life, and keep all the Commandments, Here Is. 88. So the
Rhemists say, it is possible to keep all the precepts of the law, Annot. Joan.
^4. sect. 1. Secondly, the Pelagians say, that grace is given unto men only to
this end, that they may more easily do those things which they are commanded
to do by their own free will, Here Is. 88. So the Rhemists say, that man was
never without free will, but having the grace of Christ, it is truly made
free, Annot. Joan. 8. sect. 2. What is this else, but that his free will is made
more free, and that grace helps him not wholly to work, but more easily
only? Thirdly, the Pelagians hold, Gratiam Dei non ad singulos actus dari:
That the grace of God is not needful to be given at every assay, but that
their free will in most things is sufficient, August. Epist. 106. So the
Rhemists say, that though the Gentiles believed specially by Gods grace, yet
they believed also of their own free will, Act. 13. sect. 2. What say they
else, but that a man may believe by his own free will without grace.

The Manichees condemned the eating of flesh, as being unclean and impure,
Here Is. 46. So Manichees: They held that flesh was unclean by creation. The
Papists by reason of the curse: for God cursed the earth, and not the waters
(say they) and therefore upon fasting days fish is preferred before flesh,
Durand. lib. 6. capit. de alijs ieiunijs. So they both agree in this, that
flesh is a thing impure and unclean: for if they had not so thought, why did
not that popish Bishop of London Stokeslie, rather suffer the pigge to be
eaten, which was found in one Frebarnes house in Lent time, Frebarn. Fox. page
1585.
his wife being great with child longing for a piece thereof, then command it,
as an unclean thing to be buried in Finsburie fields, and so the good creature
of God to be spoiled and lost?

There was also another most blasphemous opinion of the Manichees: for they
held that the parts and members of Christ were dispersed every where, and that
in their meats and drinks, they did deliver the members of Christ, which were
tied and bound in the creatures. Tales (says Augustine ^unt electi eorum. vt
non sint saluandi a Deo, August. in Psalm. 104.
sed saluatores Dei, liberant enim membra Christi* cum manducant: The elect
amongst them for so they call their principals) do make themselves the saviors
and redeemers of God, for they do set at liberty (as they imagine) the
members of Christ, he is not their savior. Compare now the opinion of the
Papists with these heretics: see if they be not cousin germans: for as they
made themselves, saluatores Christi, saviors of Christ: so is it a saying
among the Papists, that Sacerdos est creator createris sui: the Priest at
Mass, which by five words speaking makes the body of Christ, is a maker, say
they, of his maker, a creator of his creator, Ex Iuell. lib. artic. p. 615. But
herein the Papists go beyond the Manichees: for they delivered the body and
members of Christ from the prison of the creatures, and sent them up to heaven:
the Papists bring them down from heaven, and close them in the creature, under
the shape of bread and wine.

Thus far we thought good to show, how near the Papists come to the
heretics of old time: that it might appear to the world, that we do not
unjustly charge them with heresy, and that we have good cause to shun and
abhor their poisoned doctrine. Many other heresies I could have produced;
which are revived by our adversaries, and raked again as it were out of their
graves, where they did quietly rest. But that I am not of purpose now to deal
in this matter: which may in a several Treatise (God willing) hereafter as
time and opportunity shall serve, be handled more at large.

I have only by the way given a taste of the bitter and sower doctrine of
Popery: that our countrymen, which have been any thing that way infected, may
take warning, that if they have sipped of the whore of Babylons cup of
fornication, they should leave of, before they have drunk more deeply, lest
they in the end be constrained, to draw out the very dregs thereof, and to be
drunken with their intoxicate cup. If they will in time be warned, they may: a
word to a wise man is sufficient: and if they be wise, they will also take heed
in time, I say unto them as Augustine did sometime to the Donatists: Si
sapitis, been and recte, si autem non sapitis, nos vestri curam gessisse non
poenitebit, quia et si cor vestrum ad pacem non conuertitur, Cont. Petilianum.
3.59.
pax nostra tamen ad nos reuertitur: If you will be learned it is well, and as
we wish: but if you will not, it repents us not, that we have had some care
of you: for although your heart be not converted to the peace of the Gospel,
yet our peace returns to us again.

Here by the way, I must remember my self of one thing, which I had almost
ouerslipped. Every where both in this Preface and in this whole book, speaking
of our adversaries, I call them Papists, as we are known by the name of
Protestants: I suppose our English Romanists will take no offense or grief
hereby so to be called: although I have heard, that some of them hold great
scorn to be named Papists, yet I see no reason, why they should so do. The
Rhemists like this name well enough, because it is not derived from any one
man, Anno^. Act. 11. sect. 4.
but from their Popes and chief Bishops, to whom (say they) we are bound to
cleave in Religion, and obey in all things: So to be a Papist (say they) is to
be a Christian man, a child of the Church, and a subject to Christ's Vicar.
Seeing then this name pleases their ghostly fathers of Rhemes so well, there
is no reason why they should mislike it: and therefore we will use it still, as
best expressing their profession, who are pinned upon the Popes sleeue for
their faith and Religion: As likewise the name of Protestants we refuse not:
which name I think took beginning in England in King Henry the eights days:
when there was a general protestation made in the name of the King, the whole
Council and Clergy of England against the Pope: See Sicidan. Fox page 1083.
In the which protestation, thus we find: England has taken her leave of
popish crafts for ever, never to be deluded with them hereafter: Roman Bishops
have nothing to do with English people: the one does not traffic with the
other: at the least, though they will have to deal with us, we will none of
their merchandise, none of their stuff. Thus we see how a Papist and a
Protestant are defined: A Papist is he that cleaves to the Pope in Religion,
and is obedient to him in all things: A Protestant is he, that professes the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and has renounced the jurisdiction of the sea of
Rome, and the forced and unnatural obedience to the Pope. These names
therefore as best fitting both our professions, seeing no cause to the
contrary, I purpose every where to use and retain throughout this Treatise.

I would here finish and make an end of this Preface, but that first I must
make the Reader acquainted, with the order and method, which I have followed
in setting down the controversies: The whole body therefore of the
controversies between the Papists and us, our worthy and learned countriman
D. Whitakers has digested and disposed into a singular Method, the which I
have propounded to my self throughout this discourse to observe.

The heresies and errors therefore of Popery, do either impugn the offices
of Christ, with his benefits and merits, or his person: the most of them are
of the first kind, some errors they maintain against his person, but not
many.

First, the name of Christ shows his offices: for it signifies anointed: he
was anointed to be our Prophet, King and Priest: Jesus betokens a Savior,
and sets forth the benefits of our redemption and salvation. First then of
his offices, and then of the benefits, that do arise and spring thereof.

The first office of our Savior Christ, is to be our heavenly teacher and
Prophet. His heavenly doctrine is contained no where else but in the Scriptures.
The first general controversy then must be of the Scriptures: where there
arise many questions: as of the Canonical books of the Scripture, of the
vulgar translation of Scripture, of the perspicuitie, and plainness,
authority, interpretation and perfection of Scripture, with such other.

The second office of Christ is to be our King: and because his kingdom is his
Church: here we are to handle the controversies about the Church: Which is
either the Church Militant upon earth, or the Church Triumphant in heaven.

The Church militant is to be considered, either in general, where these
questions are moved, what the Church is, whether it be visible or not, by what
marks it is known, whether it may err, what authority it has. Then the
parts of the Church, which are either assembled and gathered together, as in
general Councels: where these doubts must be discussed, whether general
Councels be necessary, by whom they ought to be summoned, whether they can
err, whether the Pope be above Councels or not, and such like. Or else the
parts of the church are severally to be considered, and they are of three
sorts, either the chief parts, the middle and mean parts, the lowest and
basest parts of the Church: The chief member they make to be the Pope: where
there are many questions and of great weight, as whether the regiment of the
Church be Monarchical, whether Peter were appointed head of the Church,
whether the Pope be Peter's successor, whether he may err, whether the Pope be
Antichrist, with such other. The middle parts, are their Clerks, which are
either secular, as they call them, which have any Ecclesiastical function,
where we must enquire of their election and degrees of their single life, and
such like, the Regular Clerks are their Monks, and other of that profession,
where we must entreat, of vows, of their solitary life, their habit, their
Canonical hours, with other matters. The lowest members are the lay men:
where the questions about the Civil Magistrate must be handled: as whether he
may put heretics to death, whether he have any power and authority in
Ecclesiastical matters, and hitherto of the Militant Church.

The triumphant Church consists either of Angels, or other Saints departed:
Concerning the Angels, we dissent about the orders and degrees of them, about
their ministry and office, and whether they are to be prayed unto.

Concerning the Saints departed, there are many questions in controversy, as
of Purgatory* Lymbus Patrum, whether they are to be prayed unto, of their
Relics, Images, Temples, Holy days, and such like.

The third office of Christ is his Priesthood, whereof there are two parts, his
intercession, where we must enquire, whether Christ be the only Mediator of
intercession* and his Sacrifice, where the maine and great controversy
concerning the Sacraments does offer it self: for by the Sacraments the power
and efficacy of the death of Christ is derived unto us.

Here first we must entreat of the Sacraments in general, as of their number,
their efficacy, the difference between the Sacraments of the old and new
Testament: then in particular, as of Baptism, and the several questions
thereto belonging, of the Lords Supper, where also the great controversy about
their Idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass, and other necessary questions must be
handled. Then follow in order five other popish Sacraments to be considered of,
confirmation, penance, extreme unction, orders, matrimony. And these are the
controversies concerning the offices of Christ.

The controversies which concern the benefits of our redemption, with other
several questions, are these, as of predestination, of sin, of the law, of
free will, of faith, of good works, the particular questions are set forth at
large in other places.

Lastly, there remain some questions, about the person of Christ, (...)
whether he be (...), that is, God of himself, whether he increased in
wisdom, whether he suffered in soul, whether he merited for himself, with
such other.

Thus have we the sum and body of Antichristian doctrine, which we purpose by
the grace of God to go through, beginning at the first, and so prosecuting
every particular question, till we are come to the last. My purpose is not to
set down all the heresies, which impugn the Christian faith, but only those
which are maintained by the Church of Rome this day; who are the chief
troublers and disquieters of the peace of our Church: I say therefore with
Augustine, Omnis Christianus Catholicus ista no^ debes credere, sed no^ omnis,
qui ista no^ credit, co^sequenter se debet Christianum Catholicum ^utare vel
dicere. Every true Catholic Christian is bound not to believe any of these
errors set down in this book: but it follows not, that whosoever believes not
these, is a true Catholic: for there are other heresies in the world, which
destroy the faith, as the heresies of the Anabaptists, Family of Love,
Libertines, and such like. But our special purpose and drift is, to weed out
the Popish cockle and darnell, that troubles our field. Neither have I set
forth at large the controversies between us: for that laborious work other of
our learned countrymen have taken in hand, as D. Whitakers in Cambridge, D.
Reynoldes in Oxford, and besides, it far exceeds my strength and ability:
I have only briefly set down the grounds of Popery, as I have collected
them out of Bellarmine, the stoutest champion of their side, our English
Rhemistes, Eckius, Canisius, and other Papists, as also out of the late
Chapter of Trent, for it deserves not the name of a Counsel. And with all as
an Antidotum or counterpoyson, I have opposed and set against them, the
confession of the Protestants and Church of God: with reasons and Arguments of
both sides, and places of Scripture annexed: adding also throughout the
judgment of Augustine, who of all the fathers, is most plentiful in these
matters, which fall in question in our days.

The benefit, which the Christian Reader shall reap in some measure (I trust)
by this simple labor of mine, is threefold. First the knowledge of all Popish
errors, which much avails: Multum adiuuat cor fidele nosce, quid credendum
non sit, August. de heresib. epilog.
etiamsi disputandi facultate id refutare non possit: It much helps a
Christian toward belief, to know what is not to be believed, though he can not
refell it by Argument. Secondly he shall understand both their principal
Objections, which they do entangle simple men withal, as also he shall learn
how to defend and maintain the truth. Thirdly the chief places of Scripture,
which make for them or against them, are briefly every where expounded and
opened.

This whole work I have divided into three parts or books: the first
contains the controversies of the Scriptures and the Militant Church: the
second the controversies of the Triumphant Church: and of the Sacraments: the
third the questions, concerning the benefits of our redemption, and as
touching the person of Christ: Which books I have thus divided, not so much in
respect of the matter which they contain: for then the controversies of the
Militant and Triu^phant Church ought not to have been sundred: but that there
might be some equality and indifferent proportion in the Volumes, every one of
them comprehending a Centurie that is an hundred of Popish errors either under
or over.

But the rather I have so done, because I had proceeded no further, then to the
end of the controversies of the Militant Church when this first book went out
of my hands: the which I was moved upon some occasion to publish, before the
rest were finished, which shall not stay long after, God assisting me. Wherein
I do also follow the counsel and example of Augustine, who writing of the like
argument of heresies, does thus conclude his book: Hunc librum, August. lib.
here is. epilog.
antequam totum hoc opus perfeci vobis credidi esse mittendum, vt cum,
quicunque legentis, ad id, quod restat implendum, quod tam magnum esse
cernitis, orationib. adiuuetis. This book I thought good (says he) to send
abroad, before the rest be finished, that whosoever reads it, might help me
with their prayers, to the better performing of that which remains: Which I
beseech thee also (good Christian Reader) to afoord me, that being mutuallie
assisted one with the prayers of an other, we may walk on with strength and
cheerfulness in our Christian race, till we have by Jesus Christ obtained the
price of everlasting life. Amen.

THE FIRST BOOK OR CENTVRIE CONTAINING THE CONTROVERSIES OF RELIGION, WHICH
ARISE IN QVEstion between the Church of God and the Papists, about the word
of God contained in the Scriptures, and the Church Militant here upon earth,
with the parts and members thereof.
THE FIRST GENERAL Controversy of the holy Scriptures.
ACcording to the method, which we will (God assisting us by his spirit)
observe throughout this whole Treatise of the controversies, in the first place
we are to entreat of such matters, as concern the Prophetical office of
Christ. He is our Prophet, our heavenly teacher, and Doctor. Math. 23. verse. 8.
from him proceeds all holy knowledge: we have not seen God, nor the high
things of God: but the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the
father, he has declared him. John. 1.18. Wherefore all the true sheep of
Christ, will hear his voice. John. 10.3. His voice is not else where heard but
only in the Scriptures: We must hear Moses and the Prophets. Luke. 16.29.
First of all therefore this great and most famous controversy between us and
our adversaries concerning the Scriptures must be handled: which is distributed
into seven several questions.

1 Concerning the Canonical Scripture, what books are to be received into the
sacred Canon, what books to be rejected and counted apocryphal.

2 Concerning the authentical Edition of the holy Scriptures, whether the
Hebrew Greek or Latin translation is chiefly to be followed.

3 Whether the Scriptures ought to be translated into the vulgar and English
tongue: and whether public prayers and divine service ought to be used in the
same tongue.

4 Whether the scriptures are authorized by the Church, and not rather so
known to be of them selves.

5 Concerning the perspicuitie and playnnes of the Scripture, whether it be so
hard, that the common people may not safely be admitted to the reading thereof.

6 Concerning the interpretation of Scripture: which question is divided into
three parts: first whether the Scripture admit diverse senses and expositions:
secondly who has the chief authority to expound Scripture: thirdly what
means ought to be used in expounding of it

7 Concerning the perfection of the Scripture, three parts of the question.
First, whether the Scriptures be necessary: secondly whether they be
sufficient to salvation: thirdly whether there be any traditions beside
necessary to salvation.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERNING the Canonical Scripture.
Of the state of the first Question.
WE have not any thing in this place to deal with those heretics, which deny
either the whole Scripture, or any part thereof: but only with our adversaries
the Papists, that holding all those books to be Scripture, which we do
acknowledge, do add unto them other books which are not canonical: so that
they offend not as other heretics, in denying any part of the Scripture, but,
which is as bad in adding unto it, for both these are accursed. Revel. 22.18.

First of all briefly before we proceed, let us see who they were that offend
in the first kind. Some heretics generally rejected the whole Scripture, some
certain parts thereof. The Sadducees received no Scripture, beside the five
books of Moses, the Maniches condemned the whole old testament, and so did
wicked Marcion.

The books of Moses the Ptolemaites refused, the book of the Psalms the
Nicolaitanes, and the Anabaptists in our days: there wanted not which
condemned the book of the Preacher and the Canticles as wanton and lascivious
books: and the Anabaptists are not here behind with their parts. The holy and
excellent book of Job has also found enemies, and some of the Rabbis which
do think that the story is but fained: which heresy is confuted Ezech 14.14.
for there Noah, Job, Daniel are named together: so that it is manifest, that
such a man there was.

The new testament the Maniches most impiously affirmed to be full of lies.
Cerdon the heretic condemned all but Lukes Gospel. The Valentinians could away
with none but John's Gospel. The Alogians of all other hated John's writings.
The Ebionites only admitted Matthewes Gospel. The Acts of the Apostles the
Seuerian heretics contemned. The Marcionites the Epistles to Timothy, to
Titus, to the Hebrews. The Ebionites could not away with any of S. Paul's
works. ex Whitakero, cont. 1. de Script. cap. 3. Unto these add the
Zwencfeldians and Libertines that refuse to be judged by the Scripture, calling
it a dead letter, and fly unto the inward and secret revelations of the
spirit. And by your leave the Papists are not far from this heresy some of
them: although the Jesuit cry never so much with open mouth, that we belie
them, De verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 1. Take but a little pains to peruse that
worthy learned man's and reverent fathers defense of the Apology p. 521. there
you shall find how that Lodouicus a Canon Lateran in Rome, said in the Council
of Trent, that the Scripture is but mortuum atramentu^, dead ink. The Bishop
of Poitiers said, that it was, but res mammis and muta, a dead and dumb thing.
Albertus Pigghius, that the Scriptures were but muti Iudices, dumb Judges.
Eckius calls it Euangelium nigrum, and theologiam atramentariam, the black
Gospel and inkie divinity: and it is nasus cereus, a nose of wax says he.
And now in comes Hosius with his part: that it is but lost labor which is
bestowed in the Scripture: for the Scripture is a creature, and a certain bare
letter. But the Jesuit says, that we abuse the name of that man, for those are
not his own words, but he reports them of Zuinckfeldius: Be it so for this
time, though M. Jewel bestow some pains to prove them to be according to his
own meaning. Though these be not Hosius own words, yet these are not much
better, yea far worse, who speaking of David's writing of the Psalms, says
thus, Quid ni scriberet, scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim, why might
not he write (says he) being a temporal Prince, as Horace says, we write
ballades every body both learned and unlearned. p. 522.

I pray you now how much do these Papists differ from the Libertines and
Zuinkfeldians, unless it be in this, that the Libertins cleave to secret
revelations, the Papists are pinned upon the Popes sleeue, affirming that it
is no Scripture nor Gospel without the determination of the Church. Nay one of
them says, determinatio Ecclesiae appellatur Eua^gelium, the determination of
the Church is called the Gospel. Johannes Maria! will you yet hear of greater
impiety? Anno Domini.1240. or thereabout there was a book set forth by the
Friars, called Euangelium aeternum, full of their own fables, and abominable
errors: they taught that Christ's Gospel was not to be compared unto it, and
that the Gospel of Christ should be preached but fifty years. This book with
much a do was condemned by the Pope, (but after long disputation) and it was
burnt secretly, lest the friars should have been discredited: and withal the
book of Guilielmus de S. amore, which he had written against the Friars, and
disputed against their Gospel, was commanded to be burned with the other.
Besides these heresies, their opinion also is to be rejected, that think that
the holy writers might in some things be deceived, as mistaking one thing for
another, or failing in their memory. To this opinion Erasmus inclined, whom
Bellarmine takes pain to confute, lib. 1. cap. 6. He might as well have
turned his argument upon Melchior Canus their own champion, who thinks that
Stephen Act. 7. in telling so long a story might forget him self in some
things Cau. lib. 2. cap. 18. ex Whitakero, but now to the question.

The Papists Assertion.
THere are certain books annexed to the old Testament, which the Papists
Manasses, the two books of Esdras, commonly called the third and fourth of
Esdras: also other which are not usually in our English Bibles, as an appendix
to the book of Job, the 151. Psalm, a book called the Pastor. All these by
our adversaries are rejected. The question between us is concerning these
books: first certain pieces joined to canonical books; as seven Chapters of
Esther, certain stories annexed to Daniel, as of Bell and the Dragon, of
Susanna, the Song of the three children: also the Epistle of Baruch joined to
Jeremy. The^ follow certain whole books, as Tobie, Judith, the Wisdom of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, two books of the Machabees: these six books with the
other three appendices or pieces of books the Papists hold to be canonical,
and of as firm authority as any part of the Scripture. Arguments they have
none, beside cartaine testimonies of some fathers and Councels, which we
purpose not to deal withal, leaving them to our learned country men who have
taken in hand to discuss these controversies to the full.

The Protestants confession.
WE are agreed concerning the new testament, that all the books thereof as they
stand are to be received of all for Scripture: for as for those forged Gospels
of Thomas, S. Andrew, of Nicodemus and the like, though the Church were
troubled with them in times past, yet their memory being now worn out, there
is no question of the^. Concerning the books on both sides acknowledged, if
some one man seem to doubt of some one part, as Luther does of the Epistle of
James and Jude, it ought no more to prejudice us, then Catetanus opinion does
hurt them who called more books in question then Luther did, as the Epistle of
James, of Jude, the second of Peter, the second and third of John, the last
Chapter of Mark.

We differ not then in the new Testament, unless it be concerning the author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which over adversaries stoutly affirm to be S.
Paul's, which we deny not, neither certainly can affirm it, seeing in some
Greek copies it is left out, and in the Syriacke translation. But it mattereth
not who was the author, seeing we receive it as canonical: for the title is no
part of the book, and so neither of Scripture: and we receive many books in
the old Testament, the authors whereof are not perfectly known.

So then all the question is about the Apocrypha of the old Testament: they are
called Apocrypha, because they are hid and obscure, not because their authors
are unknown: for as I said, we know not by whom certain Canonical books
were written: neither are they so called because of some untruths contained in
them contrary to Scripture, as the most of them have* for it follows not, that
every book which has no untruth or lie, should straight ways be taken for
Scripture, but they are therefore judged and called Apocrypha, because they were
not in former time received into public and authentic authority in the
Church, neither to be alleged as grounds of our faith though they may be read
for example of life, and may have other profitable use. But the Canonical
Scripture only has this privilege to give rules of faith, and thereupon it
has the name, that we may be bold to believe and ground our faith upon the
canonical and holy Scripture, which is the only word of God. Wherefore out of
this number of Canonical Scripture we exclude all the books before named, and
therefore let not the reader be deceived, that although they be joined in one
volume with the Scripture; to think that they are for that of the same
authority and credit with the rest: first we will show one reason in general,
and afterward come unto the particular books in order.

1 All canonical scripture in the old Testament was written by Prophets: we
have a sure word of the prophets, says S. Peter 2.1.19. and S. Paul, Romans
16.26. calls them the Scriptures of the Prophets. But none of those books
aforenamed, of Tobias, Judith and the rest, were written by the Prophets: for
they were all written since Malachies time, who was the last Prophet, as the
Church complains, Psalm. 74.9. There is not one Prophet; nor any that can
tell us how long. Ergo none of these books are canonical.

2 All the canonical books of the old Testament, were acknowledged of the
Jews and Hebrews, for they were then only the Church of God, and where should
Scripture be found but in the Church? to them, says S. Paul, were committed
the oracles of God, Romans *3.2. But the Jews received none of these books: for
none of them are written in the Hebrew tongue, neither did they receive them
with the like authority as other books of Scripture; and this some of the
Papists can not deny. Ergo thy are not Canonical.

3 There is no Scripture of the old Testament, but it has approbation of the
new: for as the Prophets bear witness to Christ, so he again does witness
for the Prophets, and therefore it is a true proposition of Caietane, though he
be controlled and checked of Catharinus an other Papist for it, that there is
no Scripture, which was not either written or approved by the Apostles: but in
the whole new Testament you shall not find one testimony cited either in the
Gospel or the Epistles out of any of the Apocrypha, as out of other books of
Scripture: therefore having no approbation of the new Testament, we conclude
they are none of the old.

4 It shall appear in the several discourse of the particular books, that
there is somewhat even in the books themselves to be found, that barreth them
from being Canonical.

OF THE BOOK OF BARVCH.
The Papists.
THis is their best reason for the authority of this book, because Baruch was
Ieremies scribe: and therefore Baruch can not be refused, unless also we doubt
of Jeremy. Bellarm. lib. 1. de verbo. Dei. cap. 8.

The Protestants.
THis book was neither written by Jeremy nor Baruch: first because it is in
Greek: if either Jeremy or Baruch had written it, it is most like they would
have written in Hebrew. Secondly, the phrase and manner of speech shows that
it was never written in Hebrew: for in the 6. Chapter in the Epistle of
Jeremy, it is said that the Israelites should be in captivity seven
generations, that is 70. years, but it can not be found in any Hebrew book
that generation is taken for the space of 70. years.

OF THE SEVEN APOCRYPHAL Chapters of Esther.
The Papists.
ONe of their chief Arguments, besides testimonies and authorities, which would
make to great a Volume, is this (which is common also to the rest of the
Apocrypha) they are read in the Church, and have been of ancient time, Ergo
they are Canonical. I answer, that it is no good argument. Hierome says
plainly, Legit Ecclesia, sedeos inter Scripturas Canonicas non recipit,
Praefat. in lib. Solomon. The Church indeed (says he) reads them, yet for
all that they are not Canonical. And Augustine was wo^t to read unto the
people the Epistles of the Donatistes, and his aunsweres unto them. Epist. 203.

The Protestants.
THe most of our reasons against the authority of the 7. Chapters added to
Esther (for of the 10 first Chapters, which are found in the Hebrew, we make no
doubt at all) are drawn from the matter of the book it self.

1 In the second of the Canonical Esther. ver. 16. it is said that the
conspiracy of the two Eunuchs against the king, was in the 7. year of
Assuerus: but in the 11. Chap. ver. 2. of the Apocryphal Esther, we read that
Mardocheus did dream of this conspiracy in the second year. Bellarmine
answers, that both are true, for the dream was in the second year, and the
conspiracy in the seventh; so belike, there was five years between. But in
the 11. Chapter, it is said that Mardocheus was much troubled about that
dream, and the next night after his dream the conspiracy was enterprised.

2 The true history of Esther says that Mardocheus had no reward at that time
of the king. cap. 6.3. but the forged story says, that at the same time the
king gave him great gifts, which can not be meant, of that great honor which
afterward was bestowed upon Mardoche: for then Haman (being hanged the same
day) could work him no despite, whereas the forged story says, that after the
king had rewarded him, then Haman began to stomach him, because of those two
Eunuchs.

3 Again the story which is added, was written many years after Mardoches
and Esthers death, under the reign of Ptolomaeus and Cleopatra, as it
appears. cap. 11.1. it is not like therefore to be a true story: Bellarmins
ridiculous conjecture is this, that there were two stories written in Hebrew of
Esther, the one co^pendious and short, which we now have: the other more large,
which might be translated by Lisimachus there spoken of cap. 11. whose
translation we now only have, the original being perished. What goodly gesses
here be, to make Canonical Scripture? what need two books of one thing? If
the first were written by the spirit of God and so were Canonical, what need
a second? the spirit of God uses not to correct his own writings: and this
can not be that ample and large story imagined, being shorter, and not so full
as the first.

4 Besides the false story says, that Haman was a Macedonian. Cap. 16. v. 10.
the true story says, he was an Agagite or Amalekite. cap. 8.3. how can these
two agree? Nay the forged book says, that Haman would have destroyed the
king, and so conveyed the kimgdome of the Persians to the Macedonians: which
could in no wise be: for the kingdom of the Macedonians was not yet spoken of:
and so it continued in small or no reputation till Phillippus the father of
Alexander, who was many years after. Vide plura* Whitach. quaest. 1. cap. 8.
De Scripturis.

5 In the latter Chapters that is repeated, which was set down in the former
part, which argues, that the story was not written by one man: and it is not
like he would write one part in Hebrew, another in Greek. If any say (as the
Jesuit says) that this part was in Hebrew, and being translated into Greek,
was lost: why was one part rather lost then the other? and was it not as like
to be preserved in Hebrew as in Greek? These are very bare and suspicious
conjectures.

OF CERTAIN CHAPTERS annexed to Daniell.
THere are three parcels joined to Daniell, the song of the 3. children, the
story of Susanna, of Bell and the Dragon, in the vulgar Latin, which are not
any part of Canonical Scripture.

1 They are neither extant in Hebrew at this day, nor are like to have been
translated out of Hebrew into Greek: but compiled first in Greek, and
therefore not written by Daniell: for v. 54.58. of the story of Susanna, where
one of the Elders says, he saw her under a Lentiske tree, the other under a
prime tree: he uses a certain paronomasie or allusion unto the Greek words,
which ca^ not stand in the Hebrew, as of the tree (...), he says the Angel of
the Lord (...), shall cut you in two: and so of the tree (...), shall divide
thee in two. As if a man should thus allude in English: thou wast under the
prune tree: the Lord shall prime thee. This allusion is not in the Hebrew, as
the learned have very well observed, but only in the Greek.

2 The time is uncertain when this story should be done. It was in the
captivity: for Susanna dwelt in Babylon, but Daniell could not then be so
young a child as the story makes, for he was carried away in the first
captivity with Iehoiakim as it is Dan. 1. And Ezechiell, that lived about that
time does speak of the great prudence and sage wisdom of Daniel, Ezech.
28.3. and joins him with Noah and Job. cap. 14. All this proves that Daniell
could not be so very a babe in the beginning of the captivity, as the story
makes him.

3 In the story of Daniell it is said that he was 6. days in the Lyo^s den,
but the true story says he was there but one night. cap. 6. The Jesuit
answers, he was twice in the Lions den, or rather he thinks there were two
Daniels, the one of the tribe of Judah, which was that great Prophet: the other
of Leui, which was the principal in those two stories of Susanna, and of Bell
and the Dragon. But this is a poor shift, to invent another Daniell, whom the
Scripture never knew: and if it were so, why are all their acts joined
together, as if one Daniell had done and write them all.

OF THE BOOK OF TOBIE.
1 THis book is not found in the Hebrew, in the which tongue all the oracles of
God were kept. Ergo it is worthelie doubted of.

2 Our adversaries them selves confess, that in Hieromes time it was not
received for Canonical. The Jesuit answers: that it might be doubted of
before it was determined in a General Council: to whom (says he) it
appertains to define of Canonical Scripture: As though this were not a
greater doubt, whether a Counsel has any such authority, to determine which
books ought to be received for Canonical, for Canus a Papist makes question
of it. Lib. 2. cap. 8. And the Jesuit him self says that the Church can not,
Facere Canonicum de non Canonico, make a book not canonical, to be
canonical, but only to declare those to be Canonical, which are so in deed.
Wherefore the Papists take to much upon them, to make this book within the
Canon, being of it self not Canonical, and so adjudged by antiquity.

3 He that reads the book it self shall find that both the style, and the
matter is not such as beseems Canonical Scripture: read Tremell. in cap. 3.
ver. 8. cap. 13. ver. 15.

OF THE BOOK OF IVDITH.
AN escpeciall Argument against this book is, that the history can not be
assigned to any time.

1 It is pretty sport to see how the Papists do moyle them selves about this
point: and can not agree amongst them selves. Some hold that this story fell
out after the captivity in Cambises time, as Lyranus, and Driedo: some in
Darius Histaspis reign, as Gerardus, Mercator: some would have it before the
captivity in Sedechias time, as Genebrard: some in Josias time, as Johan.
Benedictus: but the Jesuit confuteth them all, and brings the story to
Manasses reign: but he has also mist the cushin.

2 It appears that this story could not be after the captivity for we read
not of any Nabuchadneser afterward, for the kingdom was translated from the
Assirians to the Persians and Meedes. Again it could not be before either in
Josias time, Sedechias, or Manasses, first because in the 5. Chap. v. 18. it is
said that the temple had been destroyed and cast down, which could not be in
any of those kings reigns. It is but a shift of Bellarmines, to say those
words were foysted into the text: it is rather to be thought, that the Jesuit
is put to his tru^ps, not having else, what to answer. Secondly Judith being at
this time in the flower of her age, and living afterward many years till she
was 105. year old, all which time, and many years after her death, the book
says in the last Chapter, the land had rest: this can not agree with Manasses
time: for within 40. years or not much above, the land fell into great
trouble, straight after Josias death. Where then is this long time of rest? And
the Jesuit that still grou^deth upon impossibilities and vnlikele-hoods, that
Judith was at this time 40. year old, which was (says he) in the beginning of
Manasses reign, and so to dye about 7. years before Josias: yet for all his
scanning is driven to this shift, that the many years peace after her death,
must be understood of poor 7. years. Thirdly, if all this happened in
Manasses time, whom the Chaldeans took and carried away prisoner, and had much
troubled and afflicted the country of Iudaea: what need had Holofernes to
enquire so curiously of Achior the Ammonite, of the country their City,
people, kings, and such like: Judith ca. 5.
seeing they had known the country, to well before in spoiling and wasting of
it, as the Jews by woeful experience had felt.

OF THE BOOK OF WISDOM.
The Papists.
Our adversaries reason thus: they say that S. Paul. Romans 11.34. using this
speech: who has known the Lords mind or been his counselor? does allege
it out of the 4. Chapter of this book. v. 13. Ergo it is Canonical. We
answer. First the Apostle seems not in that place to cite any testimony,
though the words which he uses* may else where be found. Secondly though the
like words are read in the book of Wisdom, yet is it not necessary the
Apostle should borrow them from thence, but rather they are alleged out of the
40. of Esaias. 13. Where the Prophet says, who has instructed the spirit of God
or was his counselor? And this also is the opinion of the Rhemistes, that S.
Paul in that place uses the Prophets words.

The Protestants.
Our reasons against the authority of this book are these and such like.

1 Because this book is not found in the Hebrew, but written only in Greek:
wherefore it is not Canonical seeing the Jews had all the oracles of God.

2 Philo a Jew is thought by the Papists them selves to be the author of this
book, who lived after Christ in the time of Caligula, neither him self was a
Christian or believed in Christ: therefore an unlike man to be a writer of
Canonical Scripture. Bellarmine says, it was another Philo, who was more
ancient. Indeed Josephus makes mention of a Philo before this time, but he
was an Heathen and no Jew.

3 If this book were written by Solomon, why is it not extant in Hebrew? for
Solomon wrote in Hebrew and not in Greek. Many of the Papists also do prove,
that it was not written by Solomon: for though Solomon in the 2. Chapter be
brought in praying unto God: that is no good argument to prove Solomon the
author, for the author might speak in the person of Solomon.

OF THE BOOK CALLED Ecclesiasticus.
The Papists.
THey have none but common and general arguments for the authority of this
book, as that it was of old read in the church, and diverse of the fathers
alleged testimonies out of it. All this proves not, as we have showed before,
that it was Canonical, but that it was well esteemed and thought of, because
of many wholesome and good precepts which are contained in it.

The Protestants.
WE do thus improve the authority of this book.

1 The author in the Preface says, that he tra^slateth in this book such
things, as before were collected by his grandfather in Hebrew, and excuses him
self, because that things translated out of the Hebrew do loose the grace, and
have not the same force: so then it appears that this book can not be
Canonical being imperfect: neither was his grandfathers work (which is now
lost) to be thought any part of the Scripture, seeing he was no Prophet him
self, but a compiler and a collector of certain things out of the Prophets.

2 He exhorts his countrymen to take it in good worth, and so craves pardon:
but the spirit of God uses not to make any such excuse, whose works are most
perfect, and fear not the judgment of men.

3 This book says. cap. 46. v. 20. that Samuel prophesied after his death,
and from the earth lift up his voice. Whereas the Canonical Scripture says
not that it was Samuel, but that Saul so imagined, and thought it to be
Samuel. 1. Sam. 28. And Augustine thinks it was, phantasma Samuelis, but a
show only and representation of Samuel, and an illusion of the devil. Lib.
ad Dulcitiu^, quaest. 6. For it is not to be thought, that the devil ca^
disease the souls of any men, much less of Saints departed.

OF THE TWO BOOKS OF the Machabees.
Our Arguments against the authority of this book are these ensuing, for our
adversaries bring nothing on their part, but such Arguments drawn from
testimonies and authorities, as do generally serve for all the Apocrypha, which
are answered before.

1 Judas is commended. 2. book. chap. 12. for offering sacrifice for the dead:
which was not commanded by the law, neither is it the custom of the Jews so
to do to this day: and again they were manifest Idolaters: for there were
found jewels under their coats consecrate to the Idols of the Iamnites. And
our adversaries grant them selves, that prayer is not to be made, for open
malefactors dying impenitently.

2 Lib. 2. cap. 2. many things are reported of the arc, the holy fire, the
altar the tabernacle, which should be hid by Jeremy in a cave, and that the
Lord would show the people these things at their return. Here are many things
unlikely and untrue. First, it is found, says the text in the writings of
Jeremy: but no such story is there found. Secondly Jeremy was in prison till
the very taking of the City: and the City being taken the temple was spoiled,
the holy things defaced and carried away, how could they then be conveyed by
Jeremy? Thirdly in their return, they found neither arc nor fire, nor any
such thing: but says the Jesuit, the Jews in their conversion to God in the
end of the world, may have them again: as though, when they shall believe in
Christ, they will any more look back to the ceremonies or rites of the law,
for what use then I pray you shall they have of altar or sacrifice or any such
like.

3 There is a great disagreeing in the story between the two books
concerning the death of Antiochus. Lib. 1. cap. 6. v. 6.16. It is said that
Antiochus dyed for grief in Babylon, hearing of the good success of the Jews.
Lib. 2.1. ver. 16. Antiochus was with the rest of his soldiers slain in the
temple of Nanea, and his head cut of and thrown forth. Chap. 9. the same
Antiochus falling sick by the way dyed with a most filthy and stinking
smell, consumed of worms: How could this man dye thrice, in Babylon, in Nanea,
and by the way in a strange country. It is confessed by the Jesuit, that it
was the same Antiochus, who says he lost his army in the temple, and sickned
by the way and dyed at Babylon. But the story says that their heads were cut
of: I think the^ he could not live, and that he dyed in a strange country,
therefore not at Babylon in his bed. These things hang not together.

4 Further the author of these books says, that he abridgeth the story of one
Jason a Syrenean. Lib. 2. cap. 2. v. 23. Who was an Heathen: but the spirit of
God uses not, neither needs to borow of profane writers. He says that this
work was not easy but paineful to him, but required sweating and watching. v.
26. But to the holy writers of Scripture, though their own labor and diligence
was not wanting, yet was not the work hard or molestious unto them. Lastly the
author faith he writes for pleasure and recreation of the Reader, and craves
pardon, if he have not done well. Lib. 2.15.39. But to read for pleasure is no
end of Scripture, neither does the spirit of God use any excuse either for
matter or manner.

Our adversaries say that S. Paul likewise confesses, that he was rude in
speaking. 1. Cor. 11.6. We answer, he so says, because the false Apostles so
gave out of him, not that he was so indeed: and yet in that place S. Paul does
not excuse him self, for his not sufficient ha^dling of his matter, as this
author does: neither is that speech of S. Luke any thing like: for there the
Evangelist doubts not to say, that he had attained to an exact knowledge of
all things. Upon these premises we conclude, that these books of the Machabees
are not Canonical, nor to be taken for any part of holy Scripture, though we
deny not, but that there may be some profitable use of them for the story.

AUGUSTINES IVDGEMENT OF the books called Apocrypha.
FIrst, generally of them all thus he writes. Quas itaque Scripturas dicimus
nisi Canonicas legis and Prophetarum, de unit. Eccle. 16. We acknowledge no
Canonical Scripture of the old Testament, but the law and the Prophets, but
none of the Apocrypha were written by any of the Prophets. Again he says:
Omnes literae, quib. Christus Prophetatus est, apud Iudaeos sunt Psalm. 56. All
the books, which do Prophecy of Christ, were kept amongst the Jews: but
none of the Apocrypha were written in Hebrew. Ergo. Concerning the story of Bell
and the Dragon he calls it a fable, de mirabilib. lib. 2. cap. 32. Of the
same credit is the story of Susanna.

The book of Judith was not (says he) received in the Canon of the Jews. De
Ciuit. Dei. 18.26.

The two books of Ecclesiasticus and the wisdom of Solomon are only said to
be Solomon's, propter eloquij nonnullam similitudinem, because of some affinity
and likeness of the style. De Ciuit. Dei. 17.20. So he thinks that Solomon
was not indeed the author of them: how then can that book be Canonical, which
gives it self a false title: being called the wisdom of Solomon, and was
never compiled by Solomon.

THE SECOND QVESTION CONCERning the authentical and most approved Edition of
the Scriptures.
The Papists.
WHereas it is confessed that the Hebrew Edition of the old Testament by the
Prophets: and that the new Testament was written in Greek by the Apostles and
the Evangelists, yet our adversaries do generally hold, as it was decreed in
the Tride^tine Chapter. Sess. 4. Decret. 2. That in all sermons, readings,
disputations, controversies, the vulgar Latin translation should be taken for
authentike before the Hebrew or Greek, and that no man should presume upon any
occasion to reject it, or appeal from it.

The Protestants.
WE do truly affirm, that although there are diverse Editio^s of the old
Testament besides the Hebrew, and some of them very ancient, as the
translation of the Septuagints, compiled by 72. auncie^ts of the Jews, at the
instigation of Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, 300. years before Christ:
and after Christ there were other translations in Greek made by Aquila,
Synomachus, Theodotion, and others: also a Chalde Paraphrase compiled by the
Jews, and last of all diverse Latin translations, the which, as Augustine
says, in his time were so many, that they could not be nu^bred: yet of all the
rest the Hebrew being the most ancient and the mother of the rest, and freest
from corruptions, ought to be received as most authentike. And for the new
Testament, though there be a Syriacke translation very ancient, yet the
Greek ought to be preferred (being the same tongue, wherein the Apostles and
the Evangelists wrote) to be the only authentike copy. As for the Latin
translation of the Bible, we are able to prove it to be very corrupt and
faulty and therefore not authentike.

The Papists Arguments.
1 THe Latin Church has used the vulgar Latin translation for the space of
800. or 900. years, and it is not like that the Church all this while was
without the true Edition of the Scriptures. Ergo it is only authentical. We
answer. First, by this Argument it follows that this vulgar Latin being
generally used, was preferred before other Latin translations, which were at
the first in great number, not that therefore it is more authentike then the
Hebrew in the old, and the Geeeke in the new Testaments. Secondly, there were
other Churches besides the Latin all this while, as amongst the Greeks famous
congregations and Churches: that be it in the Latin Church, the vulgar
translation was retained being erroneous, yet the whole Church continued not in
that error, which were not so tied and bound to the Latin translation.
Thirdly, if men all this while (knowledge decreasing, and a way being in
preparing for Antichrist) were negligent in correcting and amendi^^ the common
translation, this is no good Argument to make it authentical.

^ As the Hebrews had an authentike translation in their own tongue, and (...)
in theirs, why should not the Latin Church have it also authentical in Latin.
We answer. First, it is no good reason, because the Lord did consecrate the
Hebrew and Greek tongue, and therein would have his word written, that
therefore he would or should also have made the Latin as well authentical, as
they. Secondly, if the Latin Church must have an authentike translation, why
should not other countries likewise have their authenticals? The Armenians had
the Scriptures of old translated by Chrysostom, the Sclauonians by Hierome,
the Goths by Vlphilas, why should not these also as well be authentical? and
so look into how many toungs the Scriptures should be translated so many
authentical translations should there be.

3 They say that all other translations, which are come forth since are
erroneous, and much differ amongst them selves. Answer. First, this is no
reason to prefere it before the Hebrew and Greek, though it were better the^
all other tra^slations. Secondly, they charge us falsely, that our tra^slations
are dissonant and erroneous: for their disagreement is not in such substantial
points, and where any of them do swerve from the original, we allow them not:
and yet there is not the meanest of them, but may justly compare with theirs,
yea and be preferred before it. Thirdly, if their translation were so pure, as
they say Beza him self makes it, he would not have set forth a new Edition:
and he prefers it in some places before other translations, but is far of
from making it authentical, and so are we: these are the Jesuits arguments.
De verb. Dei lib. 2. cap. 10. and some of our Rhemists in their Preface to the
new Testament. Some of our Arguments are these, for it is not necessary to
repeat all, and it were to long.

1 If the Latin translation be authentical, as it was decreed in the Council
of Trent, then it must have been so from the beginning, so soon as there was
any Latin translation: for the Council had not authority to make that
authentical, which was not, but only to declare it so to be. But the Latin
translation, for the space of 600. years after Christ was not received as
authentical: for we find that the Latin writers as Lactantius, Hilarious,
Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Augustinus, and others did not use the same Latin
translation: Ergo, this vulgar Latin having not been always, since it was
extant authentical, why should it now begin?

2 That Edition, which was made, and framed, and first written by the Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, is to be preferred before that, which was not co^piled
by any Prophet or Apostle. But such are the Hebrew in the old Testament, and
the Greek Edition in the new, by the confession of our adversaries, Bellarmin.
cap. 7. lib. 2. Such is not the Latin, for it is uncertain, by whom it was
written: for the Jesuit confesses, that it is not all of Hieromes Edition: as
the book of the Psalms, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, which they
think were not translated by Hierome: But let us grant that the whole was of
Hieromes doing, yet was he no Prophet nor Apostle, says he, Aliud est vatem
esse, aliud interpretem, it is one thing to be a Prophet, another to be an
interpreter. Wherefore it is no reason, that Hieromes, or whose translation else
soever should be received before the writings of Prophets and Apostles.

But say our adversaries, if we had a perfect copy of the Hebrew and Greek
editions, we confess they were to be preferred: but now they are full of
faults, and greatly corrupted. We answer. First, the Jesuit him self
disputing against Canus and Lindanus two Archpapistes, that though there may be
some scapes in the translations by the fault of some Libraries and imperfect
copies, yet concerning the doctrine of faith and manners, says, there is no
corruption in them. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Secondly, though there may be and are some
words falsely written, and by error thrust into the text, yet they shall never
prove that they are more corrupt, the Hebrew and Greek, then the Latin: for it
follows no more, that because of some scapes the Latin is to be preferred
before them, the^ that a cloak altogether patched and ragged is better then a
cloak of velvet that has but one piece.

3 The Jesuit him self, and other Papists confess, that in some cases it is
very necessary to have recourse to the original: as when some word seems to
be mistaken by the writer, as where cecinit is read for cecidit: dorix, for
vorax, cor for coram, or when the Latin copies do vary, or if the sentence in
Latin be ambiguous, and lastly, the force and property of the words is better
understood in the original. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 11. Ergo by the Jesuits
confession, the original or fountains are more certain and sure without
doubtfulnesse and ambiguitie, therefore more authentical then the Latin.

4 There are many and great errors in the vulgar translation, and contrary to
the original, Ergo it is not authe^tike. Some of the places we will quote, as
Genes. 3. ipsa conteret, for ipsum, she shall break the Serpents head, where
we do read, that not the woman, but her seed shall break his head. Genes. 6.
ver. 6. for figmentum cordis malum: the thoughts of man's heart are evil, they
read, intenta ad malum cogitatio, inclined to evil: and so extenuate original
sin. Genes. 14.18. for protulit panem and vinum, Melchisedech brought forth
bread and wine: they read, obtulit he offered, or made an oblation of bread and
wine, and would hereby establish the sacrifice of their Mass. Ecclesiasticus.
16.14. for secundum opera, a man shall receive according to his works: they
read after the merit of his works. In their Latin translatio^s of the Psalms
there are many corruptions. Psalm. 67. v. 12. si dormiatis inter medios cleros,
though ye sleep between two lots, without any sense: the Hebrew thus inter
ollas, though you have lain amongst the pots, as being black with affliction.
v. 22. they read conuertam in profundum maris: I will turn them into the
bottom of the sea, for reduca^ profundo maris, I will bring them from the depth
of the sea, clean contrary. Psalm. 132.15. vidua^ eius benedicam, I will bless
his widow, for victu^, I will bless his victuails. So in the new Testament,
are many false readings. Luc. 1.28. plena gratia, for gratis dilecta, hayle
Marie full of grace, for freely beloved. Luc. 15.8. euertit domu^, for
euerrit: she overthrew the house, for she swept the house. 1. Cor. 15. v. 51.
non omnes immutabimur, we shall not all be changed, for omnes immutabimur, we
shall all be changed. Ephe. 2.10. creati in bonis operib. created in good
works, for ad opera bona, created unto good works. An hundred more errors
and over, you may find noted in the readings of our learned country man D.
Whitakers. 2. quaest. de Scrip. 10.11.12. cap. these I have set down for a taste.

Lastly we will rehearse Augustines judgment: Vtcunque est, ei linguae magis
credatur, vnde est in aliam per interpres facta translatio: Howsoever the case
stands (says he) we ought to give more credit to that tongue, out of the
which other are translated. Lib. 15. de Ciuit. cap. 13. Ergo the Hebrew in the
old Testament, and the Greek in the new, out of the which the Latin and all
other tra^slations have issued, ought to have the only pre-eminence.

THE THIRD QVESTION: CONCERNING the vulgar translation of Scripture.
The Papists.
THey do not absolutely condemn the translation of the Scriptures into the
vulgar tongue, what soever they have thought in times past: neither would they
generally have every man permitted to read the Scripture, but such only as
have especial license from their ordinary, having the testimony of their
Curates that they be humble and devout persons, Rhenens. praefat. sect. 6. So
then they hold it dangerous for all men to read Scripture, and they would not
willingly license any, but their Pope holy devout Catholics; they are like to
make a mad piece of work, that go about to pick their faith out of Scripture,
say the Rhemists, annot. 1. Cor. 1.5. This then is their opinion, that it is
neither necessary nor convenient for all men to have access to the
Scriptures: we will see some of their reasons.

1 From the time of Esdras till Christ, and in our Saviors time, the
Scriptures were not in the vulgar tongue, but only in the Hebrew, which the
Jews understood not after the captivity: Ergo it is not now necessary to have
them in the vulgar tou^g. That the people understood not Hebrew, the Jesuit
proves out of the 8. of Nehemiah: where it is said, that Esdras did expound
the law to the people, because they understood it not. We answer, that the
text says clean contrary, that he read the law before the people that
understood it. v. 3. and they might give the sense, though the people
understood the language. Concerning the places objected out of the Gospel, to
prove the Jews spoke another language the^ Hebrew, as it appears by those
speeches Marc. 5. Talitha cumi, Math. 27. Golgotha, which savor not of the
Hebrew tongue, we answer, that although they spoke not pure Hebrew, but many
strange words were used, yet they understood the Hebrew, for why else does
Christ bid the people to search the Scriptures? And they were not the Jews,
but the Roman soldiers that understood not the voice of Christ upon the
Cross, saying, he called for Elias.

2 The Apostles (says the Jesuit) wrote their Epistles only in Hebrew or
Greek, and not in the vulgar tounges of the nations to whom they preached,
Ergo it is not necessary that the scriptures should be in the vulgar tongue. We
answer. First, it had been an infinite labor for the Apostles, to have left
their writings in every language, neither was it necessary, seeing out of the
original they might be translated into every language. Secondly, they preached
the same things unto the Gentiles in their own tou^gs, which they afterward
left in writing. Thirdly, the Greek tou^g, wherein they wrote, was universally
known, and few countries were ignorant of it, especially in the East parts.

3 There is no cause (say they) why the Scriptures should be translated: if it
be for the understanding of the people, they understand them not being
translated neither. We answer: many things they may easily understand: and
for the harder places, they are nearer the understanding of them being
translated, then before: for then they have two great lets, the tongue unknown,
and the obscure and hid sense; now they need not to labor for the tongue, but
only for the sense.

4 The Scriptures are occasion of offense and heresy, being not right
understood, Ergo. First* because many surfeit of meats and drinks, it is no
reason that sober men should be forbidden the use of them: no more for
heretics and wicked men's sakes ought the people of God to be barred from
Scripture. Secondly, more have perished by ignorance in Scripture, then by
misunderstanding it: and the Scripture, was ordained of God to meet with
offenses, and to confute heresies. 2. Tim. 3.15. Wherefore these men make them
selves wiser then God, that think the Scripture is an occasion of those
diseases, for the which it is apppointed a remedy.

The Protestants.
WE do believe and hold that it is requisite, expedient and necessary for the
Scriptures to be uttered and set forth in the vulgar and common speech, and
that none upon any occasion ought to be prohibited the reading thereof for
knowledge and instructions sake: and that Christian Magistrates ought to
provide, that the people may have the Scriptures in their mother and known
tongue. Wherefore great wrong was offered to the people of England that diverse
100. years, till king Henry the eight, could not be suffered to have the
Scriptures in English. And how I pray you did the Papists storm, when as
Tindals translation came forth? some affirming that it was impossible to have
the Scriptures translated into English, some that it would make the people
heretics: others that it would cause the^ to rebel. Fox. page 117. col. 1.
What foul and shameful slanders were these? For the vulgar translations of
Scripture we reason thus.

1 It is Gods commandment, that the Scriptures should be read before the
people, that they may learn to fear God, Deuteronomy. 31. verse. 11.12. The people
are commanded to write the law upon their gates, and in their houses to
confer and talk with their children and teach them the law* Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.8.
And our Savior bids the people search the Scripture, John. 5. v. 39. Ergo
what God has commanded, no man ought to prohibit or forbid: the people
therefore must not be kept from reading of Scripture.

2 Without Scripture there is no faith, faith is necessary for all people,
Ergo the knowledge of the Scripture: that faith comes by the scriptures, read
John. 20.31. these things are written, that ye might believe Jesus Christ to be
the son of God. Again the weapons of Christian men, are not denied to any,
whereby they should fight against their spiritual enemies, but the word of God
is a special part of our harness, Ephe. 6.
and a principal weapon, even the sword of the spirit Ergo.

3 The Gospel may be preached in the vulgar tongue, as our blessed Savior and
the holy Apostles taught the people: Ergo the word of God may be read and
written in the vulgar tongue. The proposition our adversaries grant, that
Sermons may be made in the vulgar tongue: but it follows not, say they, that
therefore Scripture should be in the mother tongue. Rhem. 1. Cor. 14.8. But I
pray you how can the preacher allege Scripture in his Sermon, unless it be
recited in the vulgar tongue? or how should the people know they preach the
word, unless they may compare their doctrine, with Scripture as the Berrheans
did? Act. 17.

4 We have the practice of the Church of God in times past for our warrant: for
in Chrisostomes time the people had vulgar translations: whereupon he
exhorts them to get them Bibles, or at the least the new Testament, the Acts
of the Apostles, the Gospels. Homil. 9. Epist. ad Coloss. We heard before that
the Armenians, Sclauonians, Goths had the Scripture in their own language: so
many hundred years ago in England king Alured translated the Psalter: a copy
whereof was found in Crowland Abbey, called S. Guthlakes Psalter, as M. La^bert
witnesses: and Bid our learned country man, translated S. John's Gospel. Fox.
page 1115. col. 2. The Rhemistes also confess that more then 300. year ago
the Italians had the Bible translated, and the French men above 200. years
ago. Praefatan Testam. 4. sect. Why should not the people of God have the same
liberty now freely to read the Scriptures, as they have had in times past?

5 Let us hear Augustines opinion: Lectiones diuinas (says he) and in
Ecclesia, sicut consuestis, audite, and in domib. vestris relegite. I would
have you both to attend unto the public readings in the Church, and in your
house to read over again the holy lessons: but how could the people read them
at home, if they were not in their vulgar tongue?

AN APPENDIX OR PART OF THIS question, concerning public prayers and divine
service in the vulgar tongue.
The Papists.
Tride^tine Counsel, that the service of the church which they call the mass,
should not be celebrated in the vulgar tou^g. Sect. 22. cap. 8. And it is the
common practice every where of the Romish church to use the Latin tongue only.
We must be content (say they) with those three toungs which God honored upon
the Cross: namely the Hebrew, Greek and Latin. This liberty only they
grant, that their Priest may expound some things, as he reads, and show the
meaning to the people

1 Thus they argue: the majesty and gravity of the sacred business, do
require also to be uttered in a sage, sanctified and grave language, Ergo not
in the vulgar. We answer, the gravity* reverence, and holiness consists
not in words, phrases, and soundes, though never so eloquent, but in the things
them selves: neither is any tongue that is understood, before the Lord counted
barbarous: for S. Paul says, that he is a barbaria^, and speaks barbarously
in the Church, that can not be understood. 1. Cor. 14.11. And Acts. 2.11. the
very strangers and barbarians heard the Apostles utter in their languages the
wonderful things of God: they thought the tongue no disgrace to those holy
mysteries they uttered.

2 Leuit. 16. ver. 17. The people is commanded to stand without, till the
Priest went in and made attoneme^t for them: they understood not the Priest,
for they heard him not, Ergo it is not necessary the people should understand
the Minister. We answer. First, that was a type of our Savior Christ, who
even so ascended into heaven, as the high Priest did into the holy place: but
types and figures prove nothing. Secondly, they understood not the priest,
because they heard him not: but they can not prove that the Priest uttered any
thing in their hearing at any time, which they understood not.

3 We must only use those toungs in holy affairs, which were sanctified in
the Cross: that is Hebrew, Greek, Latin. We answer: those toungs were not
then used for any such purpose, but that the death of Christ might by those
common and universal toungs be the further spread abroad. And surely if they
would prove that these toungs were hereby sanctified, me thinks Pilate was no
fit instrument of that sanctification, by whose appointment the title was
written.

The Protestants.
WE do affirm, that as it has been the commendable use of all ancient
Churches, to have the service in the vulgar tongue, that the people might
understand, and be better stirred up to devotion: so the same godly use ought
for ever to remain and be retained in the Church of God.

1 This is most agreeable to S. Paul's doctrine. 1. Cor 14. who would have all
things done to edifying: but by an unknown tongue no man is edified: and he
says, he had rather speak five words to be understood, then ten thousand
otherwise. Some of the Papists say, that S. Paul speaks of preaching not of
praying: but in the 14. ver. he speaks namely of prayer, and in the 16. of
the peoples saying Ame^, which was not given at Sermons, but in the end of
prayers: this is but a weak answer. The Rhemistes and the Jesuit say he
speaks of certain extraordinary Hymns and giving of thanks, whereof S.
Paul speaks, Ephe. 5.19. Answer S. Paul speaks generally of all public
exercise in the Church, whether of prayer, preaching, singing, that it should
all be done in a known tongue: for he uses the general terms of speaking,
(...), and of the voice, as ver. 11. If I understand not the power of the voice
(he says not of the song, or preaching) I shall be to him that speaks, a
barbarian: so he misliketh not only preaching, or singing, but any kind of
speaking in the Church in a strange tongue. This place of S. Paul is to evident
and plain, the^ that it may be so easily wrested and depraved by their
heretical and Antichristian gloses.

2 Who sees not that prayers made with the understanding are more comfortable
and fruitful: the other nothing to profit at all, nor yet to be auaylable
before God? Howsoever our adversaries say, that the heart and affection may
pray, though the understanding pray not, yet S. Paul says, they speak in the
air: their prayer is but wind 1. Cor. 14.9. Therefore not amiss did that
godly Martyr M. Wisehart, compare the ridiculous gestures of the Priest at
Mass, being not understood of the people, to the playing of an ape. Fox p.
1269. col. 2. And one John Riburne was unjustly troubled of Longla^d Bishop of
Lincoln anno 1530. for saying, if we had our Pater noster in English, one
should say it nine times, against once now. Fox. page 984. col. 2. And was not
that ghostly and Bishoplike counsel think you of the Bishop of Cauaillon to
the Merindolia^s in France? that it was sufficient to know their Pater noster,
and Creed in Latin: it was not necessary to salvation to understand or expound
the Articles of faith: for there were many Bishops, Curates, yea Doctors of
Divinity, who^ it would trouble to expound the Creed or Pater noster. Fox.
Martirol. page 949. col. 2.

3 We will conclude with Augustine. Quare dicta sunt, nisi vt sciantur? quare
sonuerunt, nisi vt audiantur? quare audita sunt, nisi vt intelligantur? tract.
in Johan. 21. Why are things spoken in the Church (says he) but to be known?
why are they pronounced, but to be heard? why are they heard but to be
understood? Ergo, Lessons, and Scriptures, and public prayers must be used in
a known tongue, and easy to be understood.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION: OF THE authority of the Scriptures.
The Papists.
Eckius says, so Pigghius, that the authority of the Scripture depends of
the authority of the Church necessarily. Hermannus a Papist most impudently
affirms, that the Scripture should be of no more credit then Aesopes Fables,
without the approbation of the Church: a foul blasphemy. But our Papists of
later time, being ashamed of their forefathers ignorance, they say that the
Scriptures in them selves are perfect, sufficient, authentical, but that to us
it appears not so, neither are we bound to take them for Scripture without
the authority of the Church: so Canus, Bellarmin. Stapleton: so that, (say
they) in respect of us the Church has absolute authority to determine, which
is Scripture, which not. Ex Whitacher. quaest. 3. de Script. cap. 1.

1 There is no more certain authority, the^ of the Church, Ergo the church
must determine of scripture, sic Stapleton. We answer. First, the majesty of
the Scriptures them selves is more certain, and the inward testimony of the
spirit, without the which we can not be persuaded of the truth and authority
of the Scripture. Secondly, if they mean by the church, the sinagogue of Rome,
it has nothing to do to judge of Scripture, being the seat of Antichrist:
neither is the authority of that Church to be credited, but rather suspected
and mistrusted.

2 There are certain writings of the Prophets not canonical, and other
writings of some that were no Prophets, made canonical, Ergo the Church has
authority to judge of Scripture, sic Stapleton. For the first, where he
obiecteth that there are many writings of the Prophets as of Solomon, Nathan,
Ahiia, Ieedo. 2. Chronic. 9.29. that are lost, and if they were extant, should
not be received. We answer. First, it is not to be doubted of, but some part
of the canonical Scripture is lost. Secondly, how proves he that if they were
extant, they were not to be acknowledged for Scripture.

To the second, that books not made by Prophets are judged canonical, as of
Tobie, Judith. We answer, that these books ought not to be canonical,
neither that ever they were so taken, till of late it was decreed by Councels
of no great antiquity: for in the Laodicene Council and other ancient
Councels, they were deemed not to be canonical.

3 Certain books of the new Testament before doubted of, as the Epistle to
the Hebrews, the Apocalipse, the 2. Epistle of Peter, the second of John, are
received into authority by the Church: and other books, as the Gospel of
Thomas, Mathias, Andrew, Peter, were rejected by the authority of the Church.
We answer. First, we deny not but that the Church is to discern between the
true Scriptures and forged books, but this she does not of her own authority,
but following the direction of Gods spirit speaking in those writings: for the
Church looking into the sacred and divine matter of the Apostles writings was
moved to acknowledge them for the word of God, though of some they were doubted
of: and finding the other to be fabulous books did by the direction of the
same spirit reject them. Secondly, Augustine and Hierome think that the Canon
of Scripture might be confirmed in the Apostles time, John being the suruiuer
of the^ all, who both acknowledged the true writings of the Apostles, and
condemned the contrary. If it be so (the spirit of God in the Apostles having
determined this question already concerning the canonical Scripture) the
Church has no authority to alter or change that decree. Plura. apud
Whitacher. quaest. 3. de Scriptur. cap. 5.

The Protestants.
WE do not despise the sentence of the Church, as our adversaries do falsely
charge us: but we confess that it is the duty of the Church to give
testimony to the Scriptures, as the Goldsmith does try the gold: Fulk. annot.
2. Gal. 2. But the Church ought not to set the Lords stamp upon false coin,
as the Papists do in making Apocryphal books canonical. Neither do we
only believe the Scripture, because of the Churches testimony, nor chiefly,
but because the spirit of God does so teach us* and the Scriptures them selves
do testify for them selves: so that every man is bound to acknowledge the
Scripture, though there were no public approbation of the Church: Fulk. 2.
Galat. 6. Whitacher. quaest. 3. cap. 1. de Scripturis. We do reason thus.

1 The Jesuit does reason strongly for us: he brings five arguments to prove
the Scripture to be the word of God: veritas vaticiniorum, the constant and
perpetual truth of the Prophecies: incredibilis scriptorum conspiratio, the
wonderful harmony and consent of holy writers of the Scripture: testis est
Deus ipse, the spirit of God is a principal witness unto us: testis est ipsa
Scriptura, the Scripture it self bears witness, as 2. Tim. 3. all Scripture
is given by inspiration: testis est diuinorum numerus infinitus miraculorum:
lastly the many and great miracles wrought by the Prophets and Apostles do
testify for the truth thereof. He makes no mention at all of the testimony
of the Church, but says the same that we hold* that the spirit of God inwardly
working in our hearts by the Scriptures them selves, which we find to be most
perfect, consonant, true, of singular majesty, does teach us which is the word
of God. Bellarmin. de verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.

2 The Scripture gives authority to the Church, Ergo the Church gives not
authority to the Scripture: the first we prove by our adversaries own
confession: for being asked, how they know that the Church erreth not, they
allege such places of Scripture, as Math. 28.20. I am with you to the end of
the world, and the like: how then does the Church give authority to Scripture,
seeing it takes her warrant and authority from thence? the Jesuit him self
says, that nihil est certius vel notius Scripturis, nothing is more certain
or notoriously known then Scripture: and again, sacra Scriptura est regula
credendi certissima, the holy Scripture is the most certain rule of faith.
Bellarm. de verbo. 1.2. If the authority of Scripture then be most certain,
what reason is it, that they should depend upon the judgment of the Church
which is nothing so certain? the less certain ought (rather and so does
indeed) depend of the more certain, the Church upon the Scripture, not
contrariwise, for the Scriptures are the foundation of the Church. Ephe. 2.20.

3 To believe the Scripture is a work of faith* the Church can not infuse
faith into us, but the spirit of God, Ergo the spirit of God not the Church
teaches us to believe Scripture* argum. Whitach. 18.

4 If the Scriptures depend upon the approbation of the Church, then the
promises of salvation and eternal life contained in the Scriptures do so
likewise: but it is absurd to think that the promises of God do stand upon
the allowance of men, Ergo neither the Scriptures. argum. Caluini.

5 The Scripture is the chief judge, and ought so to be in all controversies:
we may appeal from the Church to the Scripture, not from the Scripture to the
Church: the Church is subject to the Scriptures, the rule of faith is in the
scriptures, not in the Church: for the company of faithful which is the
Church, are ruled by faith: they do not ouerrule faith, neither are a rule
thereof: the Church is a point of belief, as in the Creed, not a rule or
measure thereof: Ergo the Church is not the chief judge of Scripture, but it
self to be judged by scripture. Whitach. argum. 16.

6 We have evident places of scripture. John. 5.34. says Christ, I receive no
witness of men: but the scripture is the voice of Christ, and of the same
authority, Ergo. Ver. 36. I have a greater testimony the^ of John, the
scriptures do testify of me. Ver. 39. The testimony of the scriptures is
greater the^ the record of John, Ergo then of the Church. 1. John. 5.6. the
spirit bears witness, that the spirit, that is, the doctrine of the spirit
is the truth. And. ver. 9. if we receive the witness of man, the witness of
God is greater, Ergo, not the judgment of the Church, but the witness of the
spirit does certify and assure us of the truth and authority of scripture.

7 I will add one saying out of Augustine, Mihi certum est, nusquam a Christi
authoritate discedere, non enim reperio valentiorem. Contra Academic. lib. 3.
cap. 20* I am resolved for no cause to leave the authority of Christ (speaking
in the scriptures) for I find none more forcible: Ergo the authority of
scripture is above the Church, which is denied by the Rhemistes. annot. 2. Gal.
sect. 2.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERNING the perspicuitie and playnnes of the Scripture.
The Papists.
Our adversaries do hold that the scriptures are most hard, difficult, and
obscure. Bellarmine says, necessario fatendum est, Scripturas esse
obscurissimas, it must needs be granted that the scriptures are most obscure.
de verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 1. They do not only affirm that some things are
obscure in the scriptures: but that they are all hard, and doubtful, and
uncertain, and compare the^ therefore to a leaden rule, which may be turned
every way, Petrus a Soto. And to a nose of wax, Lindanus a Papist, ex Tilmanno,
de verbo Dei error 5. Our Rhemistes say, it is all one to affirm some things
to be hard in a writer, and the writer to be hard: so they conclude, that the
scriptures are both in respect of the matter and manner, very hard, and
therefore dangerous for the ignorant to read them. Rhemens. annot. in. 2. Pet.
3. ver. 16.

1 They object that place. 2. Pet. 3.16. where the Apostle says, speaking of
S. Paul's Epistles, that many things are hard. Ergo the Epistles of S. Paul
are hard, and so the scriptures: this is Bellarmine and the Jesuits argument.
We answer. First, he says not that Paul's Epistles are hard, but many things,
which he entreats of. Secondly, they are hard not to all* but the unstable
and unlearned do pervert them. Thirdly, We deny not, but that some places in
the scripture are obscure, and have need of interpretation: but it follows
not, that therefore the whole scripture is obscure: and because of some hard
places, that the people should be forbidden the reading of all.

2 The scriptures are obscure both in the respect of the matter and manner:
first the matter is high and mystical: as of the Trinity, of the incarnation
of the word, of the nature of Angels, and such like. We answer, these
mysteries may be said to be obscure three diverse ways. First, in their own
nature: so are they hard indeed, for by humane reason, we can not attain to
the depth of the^. Secondly, in respect of their handling in the scripture: so
are they not obscure, for all these things are plainly declared in the word, as
the nature of such deep mysteries will afoord. Thirdly, in respect of us: so
must they needs be obscure, if men be not contented with the knowledge in the
word, but curiously search further. Luther therefore does aptly distinguish of
these things, he says that, res Dei, the things of God are obscure, the very
depth of his mysteries can not be comprehended of us, but, res Scripturae,
these things, as they are opened in scripture, are plain, if we will content
our selves with that knowledge.

Secondly (says Bellarmine) the manner of handling is hard and obscure: there
are many tropes, metaphores, allegories, Hebraismes, which can not easily be
understood. We answer. First, many of these are rather ornaments of the
scripture, as tropes, metaphores, then impediments to the reader. Secondly,
though the phrase of scripture seem hard at the first, yet by further travel
in the scriptures it may become easy and plain: for all things are not
understood at the first. Thirdly, we deny not but that some places are
obscure, and had need to be opened.

3 If the scriptures be not hard, what need so many Comme^taries, and
expositions. Rhemist. 2. Pet. 16. We answer. First, so many Commentaries are
not requisite, some may be spared. Secondly, expositions are needful for the
understanding of dark places: but many things are plain enough without
expositions, and may be understood of the simple.

The Protestants.
WE do not hold that the scripture is every where so plain and evident, that
it need no interpretation, as our adversaries do slander us, and therefore
here they do fight with their own shadow. Bellarm. lib. 3. de verbo cap. 1. We
confess, that the Lord in the Scriptures has tempered hard things and easy
together, that we might be exercised in the Scriptures, and might knock and
labor by prayer and study, for the opening of the sense: and that there might
be order kept in the Church, some to be hearers, some teachers and expounders,
by whose diligent search and travel, the harder places may be opened to the
people. But this we affirm against our adversaries: first that all points of
faith necessary to salvation, are plainly set forth in the Scriptures:
secondly that the Scriptures may with great profit be read of the simple and
unlearned, notwithstanding the hardness of some places, which in time also
using the means they come to the understanding of. Ex Fulk. annot. 2. Pet.
3.16. Whitacher. quaest. 4. cap. 1.

1 First, that which we maintain is evident out of the scripture, Deuteronomy. 30.11.
the commandment, which I command thee, is not hid from thee, nor far of.
And as it follows, thou need not ascend to the heavens, or go beyond the
sea: the word is near unto thee, even in thy mouth and heart, to do it. argum.
Brentij. Ergo the scriptures are plain. First the Jesuit answers, that it
is meant only of the decalogue and the ten commandments, that they are easy,
not of the whole Scripture. As though if the commandments be easy the rest of
the scriptures be not likewise, as the Prophets and historical books being but
comme^taries and expositions of the decalogues. S. Paul. Romans 10.6.
understands this place of the whole doctrine of faith, who better knew the
meaning of Moses then the Jesuit.

2 2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is to them only that are lost, Ergo
the Scriptures are plain to the faithful. The Jesuit answers. S. Paul
speaks of the knowledge of Christ, not of the Scriptures. First it is
manifest out of the 2. verse, that S. Paul speaks of that Gospel, which he
preached to the Corinthians, which is the same he wrote unto them: wherefore if
the Gospel preached were easy and plain, why is not the Gospel written by
him, I mean the doctrine of faith being the same, which he preached? Secondly
if they grant that the knowledge of Christ is easy, we ask no more: for this
is that we say, that the doctrine of faith and salvation is plainly expressed
in Scripture.

3 This is the difference between the new Testament and the old: the old is
compared to a clasped book. Isay. 29.11. the new to a book opened. Apoca. 5.
the knowledge of Christians far exceeds the knowledge of the Jews: it was
lawful for them to read the scriptures, much more for all Christians. The
Jesuit answers that our knowledge is greater then theirs, not in all
scripture, but in the mysteries for our redemption only. We answer, this is
all we desire: for if the mystery of salvation and redemption be plainly
opened in the scripture, why should not the people be admitted to the reading
of the word, to be confirmed in the knowledge of their redemption? who sees
not what silly aunsweres these be?

4 Augustine thus writes of this matter, In ijs (inquit) quae aperte in
Scripturis ^osita sunt, inueniuntur ea omnia, quae fidem continent moresque
viuendi. De doctrine. Christia. lib. 2. cap. 9. The plain and easy places of
scripture contain all things necessary unto faith and good life, Ergo the
doctrine of salvation in the scriptures is not hard and difficult, but easy of
good Christians to be understood.

THE SIXTH QVESTION CONCERNING the interpretation of Scripture.
THis question does divide it self into three parts: First concerning the
diverse senses of the scripture. Secondly, to who^ the chief authority to
expound scripture is committed. Thidly, what means must be used in the
interpretation of scripture.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SIXTH QVEstion: of the diverse senses of Scripture.
The Papists.


The Allegorical sense is, when besides the plain historical and literal
meaning, somewhat is signified which by an allegory is referred unto Christ or
the Church, as Gal. 4. beside the truth of the story of the bond and free
woman, S. Paul applies it unto the two Testaments, Ergo one place may have
more senses then one.

The Tropologicall sense is, when as there is somewhat signified appertaining
to manners, as Deuteronomy. 25. Thou shall not mussell the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn, this by S. Paul is applied to the Ministers of the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. Ergo, the scripture has diverse senses.

The Anagogicall sense is, when the place is applied to decipher and set forth
the kingdom of heaven and eternal things, as Psalm. 94. I swear unto them, if
they should enter into my rest: this is literally understood of the rest in
Canaan, and spiritually of life eternal, Ergo many senses: thus reasons.
Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Scriptur. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
WE affirm that of one place of scripture there can be but one sense, which we
call the literal sense, when as the words are either taken properly, or
figuratively to express the thing which is meant: as in this place, the seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head, the literal sense is of Christ,
who should triumph over Satan, though it be spoken in a borrowed and figurative
speech. There can be therefore but one sense, which is the literal: as for
those three kinds, they are not diverse senses, but diverse applicatio^s only
and collections out of one and the same sense.

1 It shall appear by a several induction of all these kinds: In the first
example of the Allegorical sense Galathes 4, the Apostle says not that there
is a double sense, but that it may be allegorically applied, which is
historically set down. There is then but one sense of the place, part whereof
consists in the story, part in the allegory: so that the whole sense is
contained in them both. Concerning the second example of the Tropologicall:
there is not a twofold sense of that place, but one whole general sense; that
as the mouth of the ox was not to be musled, so the Minister of the Gospel
must be provided for. Likewise of the Anagogicall kind: it is not one sense to
understand the rest of Canaan, an other of the kingdom of God: but there is
one whole sense, that as they for their Idolatry were deprived of the land of
promise, so we should take heed lest by our disobedience we lose the hope of
the kingdom of heaven. So we conclude that those are not diverse senses, but
one sense diversely applied.

2 The literal sense is the only sense of the place, because out of that sense
only may an argument strongly be framed: wherefore seeing allegories and
tropes do not conclude, they are not the senses of the place. An allegory or
type may be part of the literal sense, and then it concludes: but when an
allegory is framed beside the literal sense, it concludes not, and therefore
is no part of the sense: as to reason thus, the oxes mouth must not be musled,
Ergo the Minister must be maintained, it follows well, because it is part of
the sense: but allegories devised beside the sense prove not, though they may
illustrate.

The Papists.
THeir other assertion is this, that it is lawful to allegorise scripture both
in the old and new Testament. Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 3. They reason thus.
Rhemens. 4. ver. 5. The Apostle applies the rest of the Sabbath to the
eternal rest. Ergo, the like applications of the fathers are lawful. See
annot. Heb. 7.2. the Apostle (say they) finds great mysteries, even in the
very names: Ergo it is lawful to make allegories.

The Protestants.
WE say, it is dangerous to make allegories of Scripture without the warrant
and direction of Gods spirit: this was the occasion that diverse of the
ancient fathers greatly erred: as the Jesuit him self reprehe^deth Papias,
Justinius, Lactantius, for allegorising that place Revel. 20. which made them
fall into the error of the Chiliastes, by false interpreting of the thousand
years there mentioned.

To their arguments our learned countryman D. Fulk answers. First, it
follows not, because it was lawful for the Apostles governed by the spirit
to make allegories, that it is therefore lawful for others. Secondly, when the
fathers or any other writers can be assured of the same spirit, which the holy
writers had, and of the like dexterity in understanding and expounding
Scripture, they may likewise be bold to make allegories.

Let us hear what Augustine says of this matter. Sicut mihi multum errare
videntur, qui nullas res gestas aliquid aliud praeter id, quod eo modo gesta
sunt, significare arbitrantur: ita multum audere, qui prorsus ibi omnia
significationib. allegoricis inuoluta esse contendunt. As they are much
deceived, which think that the stories in the scripture do signify no other
thing, but that which was done: so they are to rash and bold, that would draw
all things to allegories, which they read in scripture. Ergo, it is not lawful
for any to invent allegories of scripture, as it seems good to them selves.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SIXTH QVEtion to whom the chief authority to expound
Scripture is committed.
The Papists.
Sect. 4. The Rhemistes say; that the sense of the scriptures must be learned
of the fathers and pastors of the Church. Praefat. Sect. 18. If the fathers
agree not, the matter is referred to a general Council: if there it be not
determined, we must have recourse to the Pope and his Cardinals. The Jesuit
dare not refer the matter to the Pope alone to expound scripture, but joins
the College of Cardinals with him. Bellarm. lib. 3. de script. cap. 3.

1 They object that place Deuteronomy. 17.9. where the people are commanded to
resort unto the Priest or Judge in doubtful matters. Ergo, there ought to be
a chief and supreme judge in Ecclesiastical matters, Bellarm. We answer.
First, here the civil Magistrate and the Judge are joined together, as ver.
12. Wherefore if they will gather hereby, that the Pope must be supreme Judge
in all Ecclesiastical matters, then the Emperor ought to be as well in
civil. Secondly, the text says, they shall come to the Priests. ver. 9.
assigning many, not to one only Priest. Thirdly, they must judge according to
the law. v. 11. not as they list the^ selves. Fourthly, here is no mention made
of doubts in interpreting scripture, but of controversies that may fall out
between man and man, either Ecclesiastical to be decided by the Priest, or
civil by the Magistrate. Fifthly, we grant that in every country there ought
be a supreme and high seat of judgment for determining of controuersiall
matters between men: but it follows not that there should be a supreme judge
over the whole Church especially in such matters as this concerning the sense
of the scriptures, which i^ not committed to the judgment of men, neither is
any such controversy named in that palce. ver. 8.

2 Ecclesiastes 12.11. The wisema^ co^pareth the words of the wise to nails
which are fastened, given by one pastor: Ergo the Pope is supreme judge. We
answer, the wise men are here understood to be the Pastors and Ministers of
Gods word, but this one pastor signifies neither the high Priest in the old
law, nor the Pope in the new, but Jesus Christ, the high shepherd for our
souls. What great boldness is this to attribute that to the Pope, which is
only proper to Christ?

3 They also pick out some places in the new Testament, as Math. 16.19. to
thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Christ says so to Peter,
Ergo the Pope has authority to expound scripture. We answer. First, by the
keys here is meant commission to preach the Gospel, not only to expound
doubts. Secondly, they were given to all the Apostles, not to Peter only,
Math. 28. v. 18.19. Thirdly, the Pope is not successor of Peter, no more then
any other godly Bishop, nor so much unless he follow Peter's steps. So they
abuse that place Math. 18.17. he that will not hear the Church etc. Ergo the
Bishops and chief pastors must expound the doubt in scriptures. Answer.
First, our Savior speaks here of the discipline of the Church, of
correctio^s and admonitions, not of interpreting scripture, which depends not
upon the will and fantacie of Pope, Cardinals, or Popish Councels, but must be
tried by the scriptures them selves. Secondly, we must give ear to the Church,
but with a double condition: we must be sure it is the Church of God, secondly,
we must not hear them, contrary to the scriptures, but so long as they do
teach the doctrine of Christ.

The Protestants.
WE have a more compendious way to come to the understanding of the scripture:
It were to long when we doubt of any place to stay till we have the general
consent of the pastors of the Church, or to expect a general Council, or go
up to Rome. And it were to much to trouble the Popes gravity with every
question: The Lord has showed us a more easy and ready way: see that we need
not ascend to heaven or compass the earth or pass the Alps: but the word of
God is amongst us, the scriptures them selves and the spirit of God opening
our hearts do teach us how to understand them: the interpretation of Scripture
is not assigned to any succession of pastors, or tried to any place or persons.
Our arguments follow, some few of them.

1 That only has power to give the sense of Scripture, which does beget us
faith: the spirit only by the Scriptures begets faith. Romans 10.17. faith
comes of hearing the word, Ergo the spirit of God is the only interpreter of
scripture. The proposition also is clear: for seeing the Scripture is the true
sense and meaning thereof, if any should give the sense of the scripture, but
that which works faith, then upon him should our faith be grounded. If the
Pope therefore give the sense of Scripture, and our faith arises of the
Scripture understood, then our faith is builded upon the Popes sense. argum.
Whitach. 2. and 9.

2 The Scriptures ca^ not be interpreted but by the same spirit, wherewith they
were written, but that spirit is found no where but in the Scriptures, Ergo.
The first part the Papists them selves grant: the second is thus proved: the
spirit of the Apostles is not given by secret inspiration, that sauoureth of
Anabaptisme: where is it the^ to be found? whether is it like that S. Peter's
spirit should be found in the Popes chair, or in his Epistles? or if they
have S. Peter's spirit, where is S. Paul's found but in his writings? Yet it is
all one spirit, and appears not else where but in the Scriptures: where every
man may find it as well as the Pope: the spiritual man judges all things. 1.
Cor. 2.15. you have an ointment from him that is holy, and you have known all
things: and ver. 27. you need not that any man teach you. By these places it is
evident, that every faithful man by the spirit of God may understand the
scriptures.

3 The doctrine of the Church must be examined by the Scriptures, Ergo the
scriptures are not to stand to the judgment of the Church. The former part is
proved by the example of the Berrheans. Act. 17.11. If they did well in
examining Paul's doctrine, much more may the decrees of the Pope, Church,
Councils be examined by the scriptures. But they knew not whether Paul was an
Apostle or not* therefore they might examine his doctrine, says the Jesuit.
Answer, it is no matter for the person of Paul, they examined his doctrine,
which depends not upon the person. Secondly, they could not be ignorant of
his Apostleship, who was famous throughout the Churches. Thirdly, they doubted
only whether Paul was an Apostle, but we are sure the Pope is none, neither
successor of any Apostle, but very Antichrist, Ergo we have more just cause to
examine his decrees.

4 Lastly, let Augustine speak: Nouit charitas vestra omnes nos vnum magistrum
habere, and sub illo condiscipulos esse, nec ideo magistri sumus, quia de
superiore loco loquimur vobis, sed magister est omnium, qui habitat in nobis
omnib. You know brethren (says he) that we are all fellow scholars under one
master, and though we speak to you out of an higher place, yet are we not
your master, he is the teacher and master of us all that dwells in our hearts.
Ergo the spirit of God speaking in the scriptures is the chief and best
interpreter thereof.

THE THIRD PART OF THE SIXTH QVEstion: concerning the means or method to be
used in interpreting of Scripture.
The Papists.
Stapleton. Concerning the three first, we have already touched them in part:
they appear to be insufficient. First, the Councels and fathers he made chief
interpreters of Scripture before, and now they are but means: what other chief
judge then is there to use these means? surely none but the scriptures.
Secondly, these means are most uncertain, the practice of the Church is often
changed, fathers agree not in their expositio^s, and Councels can not always
be had.

Concerning the rule of faith consisting of unwritten verities: he groundeth it
falsely upon that place. Romans 12.6. let us prophecy according to the rule of
faith, and Gal. 6.16. as many as walk according to this rule. This rule was a
certain platform of Religion, given by the Apostles before the Scriptures
were written, according to the which (say they) the Scriptures were afterward
compiled by the Apostles. Rhemens. in Romans 12.6. Answer, S. Paul means no
other rule, but that which is set down in his writings, no other form of
doctrine but that contained in his Epistles, as in the 6. to the Galathians,
speaking of this rule, he alludeth to the former verse, where he says he
rejoiced in nothing but in the Cross of Christ: his rule therefore is to
receive Christ only without the ceremonies or works of the law: against the
which heresy he disputes in the whole Epistle. But of all other it is a great
blasphemy to say that the Apostles set down the Scriptures by a rule, as
though the spirit of God, by whom they spoke, had need of any such direction.

The Protestants.
WHen we say that the scriptures must expound them selves, our meaning is, that
by certain compendious and ready means, we should labor to understand the
scriptures by them selves: the means are especially these four. First, to
have recourse to the original tongue, as in the old Testament to the Hebrew, in
the new to the Greek: as 1. Tim. 2.15. through bearing of children they shall be
saved, if they continue in faith and love: In the English it is doubtful,
whether this clause, if they continue in faith, be referred to children, or to
those that bear them: but read the Greek and the doubt is removed: for
bearing of children is all one word in the original (...), so that it must
needs be understood of the women: for this word (...)* bearing of children is
in the singular number, that which follows of the plural, and it is but an
action, not a person, so that it should be improperly said, if they continue*
that is, in bearing of children.

Stapleton obiecteth against this mean: that it is not now needful, seeing
there is a perfect and absolute translation authorized by the Council of
Trent, he means the vulgar Latin. We answer. First, it is no perfect but an
erroneous translation, and very corrupt. Secondly, if it were never so
perfect, yet for more certainty, it is profitable to search the original:
every man will trust his own skill, rather then another man's. Thirdly, the
Council did fondly in authorizing an old blind translation, before the
authentical copies of the Hebrew and Greek.

2 Secondly, the scope of the place, the circumstance of it, with that which
goes before, and comes after must, be wayghed, which will bring great light
to the place we have in hand: an example we have 1. Pet. 4.8. love covers
multitude of sins: the Papists gather out of these words, that love does
justify us before God and takes away our sins: but by the circunstance of
the place, the Apostole saying immediately before: have fervent love among you,
it is evident he understands brotherly love amongst our selves, whereby
faults are buried, forgeuen, and forgotten.

Stapleton obiecteth: that this is but an uncertain way, and many times
fails: for the scripture passes many times from one matter and argument to
another: how then can it help to consider the circumstance of the place being
of a diverse matter? We answer, we say not that any of these means serves
for every place, but when one fails, to use another: when the circumstance
helps not, to run to the original, if there we find, no succor to compare
places together, and when we may, to use them all, or the most.

3 Thirdly the conference of places is very profitable, as James. 2.21. Abraham
was justified by works, compare it with that place Romans 4.2. there S. Paul
says flatly that Abraham was not justified by works: Wherefore seeing one
Apostle is not contrary to the other: we must needs gather, that this word
justified is diversely taken, Paul says that Abraham was not justified that
is, made righteous before God by his works. James says he was justified, that
is declared to be just before men, and so Thom. Aquinas expounds it.

Stapleton obiecteth, that this means in co^paring of places is of it self
many times of small force. Answer, as though we affirm that these means must
be used asunder, and not rather jointly together, and where one fails,
another to help. Secondly, some things are found but once in the scriptures.
Answer, they are then either very plain, or not greatly necessary. Thirdly,
heretics have erred in comparing of Scripture. Answer, they compared them not
diligently, nor with a sincere mind, but corruptly and negligently.

4 The fourth rule is the analogy and proportion of faith, which is nothing
else but the sum and grounds of Religion gathered out of scripture, such as
are contained in the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments, and in
our whole Catechism. We must take heed, that in the interpretation of
Scripture we swerve not from this rule of faith, nor impugn any principle of
Religion. Wherefore the Papists interpretation of those words of Christ we do
reject. Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body: who would have the very flesh of
Christ present in the Sacrament: for this is against the article of the Creed,
that Christ is ascended into heaven, and there sits till his coming again
in judgment.

Concerning these means, thus writes Augustine. Rarissime inuenitur
ambiguitas in verbis proprijs, quam non aut circumstantia ipsa sermonis qua
cognoscitur Scripturarum intentio, aut interpretum collatio, aut praecedentes
soluat inspectio, de doctrine. Christ. lib. 3.4. There is almost no ambiguitie
in any word properly used (that is not metaphorical or borrowed) which may not
either by the circumstance of the place, the conference and comparing of
interpreters, or by looking into the originals, easily be taken away. Augustine
we see approves this method, though our adversaries like it not.

Besides these, prayer must be used before we enterprise any thing, that the
Lord would direct us. And they which ca^ not so easily take this course, which
is prescribed, shall do well to seek help of learned and godly expositors, or
to consult with their Pastors and Ministers. Ex Whitacher. quaest. 5. cap. 9.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION: CONCERNING the perfection and sufficiency of Scripture.
THis question is divided into three parts. First, whether the Scriptures be
absolutely necessary. Secondly, whether they be sufficient without unwritten
traditions. Thirdly, whether there be any traditions of faith and manners
beside the Scriptures.

THE FIRST PART OF THE Necessity of the Scriptures.
The Papists.
THe Jesuit labors to prove, that the Scriptures are not simply necessary:
Petrus a Soto) the Scripture was not always extant, and it is not necessary
unto faith: And the Scripture it not now so necessary since Christ, as it was
before. Tilman. de verbo Dei error. 17.

1 There was no Scripture from Adam to Moses, for the space of two thousand
years, and yet true Religion was kept and continued, and why might not true
Religion be as well preserved a 1500. year after Christ without scripture, as
before.

We answer: It follows not, because in times past God taught his church by a
lively voice, that the written word is not necessary now: for the Lord saw it
good, that his word should be left in writing, that we might have a certain
rule of our faith in this corrupt and sinful age. And what else is this, but to
co^troll the wisdom of God, saying it is not necessary or needful for the
Church, which the Lord saw to be needful: for if the Lord had thought it as
good for us to be taught without Scripture, as in that simple and innocent age
of the world (I mean innocent in respect of us) he would not have moved and
stirred up his Apostles to write.

2 After the time of Moses, when the law was written, yet there were many that
feared God amongst the Gentiles, which had not the Scriptures, as Job, and the
other his friends, Ergo the scripture not necessary. The Jews also them
selves used traditions more then Scriptures, as Psalm. 44. v. 1.2. the fathers
did report the works of God to their children: by the negligence also of the
Priests the law was lost, as 2. King. 22. we read that the volume of the law
was found, which had been missing a long time.

We answer. First, eue^ the faithful amongst the Gentiles did read the
scripture, as the Eunuke Act. 8. had the book of the Prophet Isay. Secondly,
the Jews declared the works of God unto their children, but the same were
also written, as how the heathen were cast out before them, and of their
deliverance out of Egypt: those were the things they heard of their fathers, as
we read Psalm. 44. and 78. yet all these things are recorded in the books of
Moses. Thirdly, what though the Priests were negligent in preserving the
scriptures, it is no good argument to prove that therefore they are not
necessary, neither was the whole book of the law lost, but either Moses own
manuscript, or the book of Deuteronomie. Yet he has proved nothing.

3 The Church after Christ wanted the Scriptures many years, Ergo they are not
necessary.

We answer, it is a great untruth: for the old Testament the Church could not
be without, and the new Testament was written not long after in the age of the
Apostles: whose lively voice and preachings were unto them, as their writings
are now to us. See now, what strong arguments they bring: the scriptures were
not necessary in the time of the Patriarchs, when God taught them by his own
voice, they were not necessary in the time of the Prophets and Apostles, when
they had me^ inspired of God to teach them, Ergo they are not now necessary,
when neither God teaches from heaven, neither have we any Prophets or
Apostles to instruct us by heavenly revelations: nay rather because they were
not necessary then, when they had other effectual means, notwithstanding
they are necessary now, seeing there is no other way of instruction left unto
us.

The Protestants.
THat the scriptures are necessary for the people of God, the reading,
preaching, and understanding whereof is the only and ordinary means to beget
faith in us, we thus prove out of the Scriptures them selves.

1 The scriptures contain necessary knowledge to salvation, which can not be
learned but out of the scripture, Ergo they are necessary. The knowledge of
the law is necessary, but that only is derived from the Scripture: as the
Apostle witnesses Romans 7.7. he had not known lust to be sin, unless the
law had said, thou shall not lust. And if the right knowledge of the law is not
learned, but out of the scripture: much more the knowledge of the Gospel, is
more high and mystical, and more strange unto our nature.

2 That whereby we are kept from error and doubtfulnes in matters of faith is
necessary: but this is performed by the scripture, Ergo. First the Scripture
keeps us from error. Math. 22.29. ye err not knowing the scriptures (says
our Savior). The ignorance of scripture was cause of their error. Secondly,
if our knowledge were only builded upon tradition without scripture, we should
be doubtful and uncertain of the truth, so S. Luke says in his Preface to
Theophilus: I have written (says he) that thou might be certain of those
things, whereof thou have been instructed: Hence we conclude, that although we
might know the truth without scripture, as Theophilus did, yet we can not know
it certainly without.

3 If the scriptures be not necessary, then we may be without them, but this
can not be, Ergo the scriptures can not be spared: for then God had done a
needless and superfluous work in stirring up the Prophets and Apostles to
write. S. Paul says, that what soever is written, is written for our
learning, that through patience and consolation of the scriptures we might have
hope. Romans 15.4. The Lord saw in wisdom that his people could not be without
the Scriptures, which are necessary for their learning, for their comfort, and
to strengthen their hope: how then dare our adversaries say, that the
scriptures are not necessary, seeing these things wrought in us by the
scriptures, knowledge, consolation, hope, are most necessary.

4 Let Augustine now put in his verdict: Illud credo, quod etia^ hinc diuinoru^
eloquiorum clarissima authoritas esset, si homo illud sine dispendio salutis
ignorare non posset. de peccator. merit. and remiss. lib. 2.36. I think (says
he) that even concerning this matter (speaking of the original or beginning of
the soul) the Scriptures would not have been silent, if we might not safely
be ignorant of this matter, without danger of salvation, Ergo whatsoever is
necessary to salvation, is only to be found in scripture (for other matters
there not expressed, there in no danger in not knowing them) therefore the
Scriptures by this Fathers judgment are most necessary.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SEVENTH question, of the sufficiency of Scripture.
The Papists.
THey do straungely affirm, that the Scriptures contain not all things
necessary Bellarm. cap. 3.4. Lindanus a Papist says, that the scriptures
contain not all things necessary to salvation. Andradius, that their approved
traditions are of equal authority with the Scripture* Ex Tilman. de verbo
error. 2.

1 First, the Jesuit thus reasons against the sufficiency of Scripture.
There are diverse books of canonical Scripture lost and perished, Ergo that
part of canonical scripture, which remains is not sufficient: that much is
lost, he thus proves: 1. Chron. cap. vlt. mention is made of the books of
Nathan and Gad. 2. Chron. 9. of the books of Ahiiah and Ieedo: and in the new
Testament. Col. 4. of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Laodiceans: all those
books are lost.

We answer. First, we deny not, but that some books are now wanting, which
were part of canonical scripture, and yet that which remains is sufficient:
as some of Solomo^s books are perished, which he wrote of herbs and pla^ts,
and many of his Proverbs: the Lord saw that they were not so greatly
necessary for us to salvation. Secondly, there is not so much wanting, as the
Jesuit would bear us in hand, for the books of the Prophets which he names,
are the same with the books of the Chronicles and of the Kings, which no doubt
were written by those Prophets. And as for the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Laodicea^s, there was never any such: the text is, written from the Laodiceans,
it was the Epistle rather of the Laodiceans to S. Paul, unto the which he
partly makes answer in the Epistle to the Colossians, and therefore he would
have it read also in their Church.

2 If the Apostles had any such meaning to contriue in the scriptures the sum
of faith and all necessary knowledge, it is very like Christ would have given
them some express commandment so to do: but we read not of any such strict
commandment, Ergo they had no such purpose. Bellarmine.

We answer. First, they them selves dare not deny, but that the Apostles
wrote by the instinct of the spirit: what is that else, but the commandment
of God? Acts. 16.6. Paul was forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word
in Asia: and ver. 10. when he had seen a vision of a man of Macedonia
appearing unto him: the Apostle concludes that they were called of God:
wherefore what they did by the secret moving of the spirit, was done at the
commandment of God. Secondly, Apocal. 11.1.14.13. John is bidde^ to write
that which he saw: no doubt the other Apostles had the like commandment.

3 There are many points, which we ought in no wise to be ignorant of, which
the scriptures speak either obscurelie of, or not at all.

First, these things are obscurely and doubtfully set down in Scripture, the
equality of the persons in Trinity, the proceeding of the holy Ghost, from
the Father and the Son, the doctrine of original sin.

We answer. First, if these things be found at all in the Scriptures, it is
sufficient concerning the question we have in hand. Secondly, the Scripture
does manifestly declare the truth in all those points, the equality of the
persons is directly proved. 1. John. 5.7. the procession of the spirit. John.
15.26. the spirit is there said to be sent from the Father and the Son. And
Ioh. 14.26. Original sin is described plainly by the Apostle. Romans 5.12.
though the name be not found in Scripture.

Secondly, there are diverse things necessary to be known, not at all
declared in Scripture. First, as that Marie continued a perpetual Virgin. We
answer, the Scripture says every where she was a Virgin, neither makes
mention of any children she had, and therefore out of the Scripture we gather,
that she continued. Secondly, Basile says that it is sufficient to know she
was a Virgin before the birth of Christ. Secondly, to know that the Pasch or
Easter must be kept upon the Lords day is necessary. Answer, there is no
such necessiitie in it to salvation: neither needed the Church so much to have
contended about it in times past: these are the mighty weapons, which our
adversaries use.

The Protestants.
WE do not affirm, as our adversaries charge us, that all things necessary to
salvation, are expressly contained in scripture, that is, in so many words:
but this we hold, that all things, which are necessarily to be known of us,
are either expressly declared in Scripture, or necessarily concluded out of
Scripture, and so contained in them. We also grant, that it was not Gospel
only which was written, but all that Christ and his Apostles taught by lively
voice: the whole sum whereof and substance is contained in the written word:
and so we conclude, that nothing necessary to salvation either concerning
faith or manners, is else where to be found but in the holy Scriptures.

1 S. Paul says: if we, or an Angel preach unto you otherwise then that
which we have preached, let him be accursed, Ergo the Scripture contains all
things necessary.

First, the Jesuit answers, that S. Paul speaks not only of his
writings, but also of his preachings which were not written.

We answer, that the sum of all S. Paul's preachings is contained in his
Epistles and other holy writings: for S. Paul confirmed his doctrine out of
the scriptures, as Act. 17.10. the Berrheans examined his doctrine by the
scriptures, and found it to be consonant, and to agree in all things.

Secondly, he conde^neth, those which preach any thing, not besides or
otherwise, but contrary: and therefore not any other doctrine besides
Scripture is forbidden, but that which is contrary. We answer, whatsoever is
imposed as necessary to salvation beside the Scripture, praeter Scripturas, is
also contra Scripturas, contrary to Scripture, as are all Popish traditions,
which they lay a necessity upon, both beside and contrary to Scripture.
Neither did those false Apostles against whom S. Paul writes so much, bring
in another or contrary Gospel, as the Apostle says ver. 7. as they did labor
to corrupt and pervert that Gospel, which S. Paul taught. Therefore all
traditions whether praeter, or co^tra, beside or contrary to Scripture, are
notably by this place overthrown.

2 John. 20.31. these things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus
Christ is the son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through
his name, Ergo the Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation: for
they suffice to work in us faith, and faith brings us to eternal life.

First, Bellarmine answers, that John speaks only of that which he had
written. Answer. If this one Apostles writings were able to work faith, the
whole body of Scripture much more: but he rather speaks of all other holy
writings, of the Apostles, for he was the suruiuer of them all, and
acknowledged their writings and approved them. Secondly (says he) the Apostle
says not that those writings only suffice, but they are profitable, and
referred to this end to work faith. Answer. The Scripture is not one of the
means, but the sole, whole, and only means: for if they perfectly work
faith, what need any other helps: but the first is true, for they do beget
in us a perfect faith, which shall bring us to eternal life, Ergo they are the
only means of faith.

3 The whole Scripture (says S. Paul) is profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and instruct in righteousness. 2. Tim. 3.16. Ergo it contains all
things necessary: for what else is requisite besides these four, to teach the
right faith, improve error, to instruct in righteousness and virtue, and to
correct vice?

First they answer, the Apostle means as well every book of Scripture, as
the whole, every part therefore has this perfection as well as the whole. But
you will not say, that every book contains all things necessary to
salvation: therefore this perfection is not so to be taken.

We answer. First, S. Paul understands the body of Scripture as ver. 15.
thou have known the Scriptures, he speaks of them all. Secondly, if every
part had these vtilities, you might as well conclude that every word and
syllable has them, for they are parts of Scripture. Thirdly, it appears by
these four great vtilities here set down, that the Apostle means not any
part or parts of Scripture, but the whole, for every part of Scripture is not
profitable for all these ends, but the whole.

Secondly, they say it follows not: the Scripture is profitable, therefore
sufficient, they also grant it is profitable. Answer, but we conclude out of
S. Paul, that the Scripture is not only profitable, but sufficient, as it
follows v. 17. that the man of God may be absolute, perfectly instructed to
every good work. If then the scriptures are able perfectly to instruct us,
then are they sufficient, then need we no other helps.

4 Lastly, Augustine thus writes, in Psalm. 66. Ne putetis (says he) ex alijs
Scripturis petendum, quod forte hic deest. Think not (says he) that it is to
be found in any other writings if it be not in Scripture. And in another place:
In Euangelio quaeramus, nam si ibi non inuenimus, vbi inueniemus? Let us (says
he) seek to be resolved in the Gospel, if we find not there, where shall we
find it? Ergo by the judgment of Augustine there is no truth necessary to be
known, which is not to be found in the Scripture.

THE THIRD PART OF THE SEVENTH question: whether there be any traditions,
beside Scripture concerning faith and manners.
The Papists.
some particular: some are free, some necessary, some are Apostolical,
invented by the Apostles, some Ecclesiastical by the Church: so thus they
conclude: all traditions decreed in Councels, and judged Apostolical: and
whatsoever the Church of Rome receives as Apostolical, are not to be doubted,
but to be Apostolical indeed. Secondly, all Apostolical traditions are of
equal authority with the writings of the Apostles. Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 2.
and 9. and they are that part of the word of God which is unwritten, as well as
the scriptures are that part which is written: Let us see what arguments they
bring for these traditions.

1 They give an instance of certain traditions, as the Baptism of infants,
and the not rebaptising of those, which were before Baptized by heretics: We
answer, these two customs of the Church are grounded upon scripture: for as
children were in the time of the law Circumcised, so are they now under the
Gospel Baptized: and that promise Gene. 17. I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed, as it belonged to them and their children, so does it appertain to
us and our children.

Concerning the other point, that they whom heretics have once Baptized, ought
not to be Baptized again: S. Augustine does prove it out of the scripture.
Ephe. 4. there is one Faith, one Baptism, Ergo not to be repeated.

But now they come in with other traditions, as the Lenton fast, which they use
most fondly and superstitiously: the eight Ecclesiastical orders, Bishops,
Prists, Deaco^s, Subdeacons, Acolythistes, Readers, Exorcistes, Doore-keepers,
the worshipping of Images, with many other: these they would face us out to be
Apostolical traditions, and to have been universally observed, which are but
their vain brags, and Thrasonicall crakes: they shall never prove them
universal, much less Apostolical: And because they find no scripture to
establish these their superstitious fantasies by, they fly unto tradition,
which is their only haven, where they hope to find succor: but all in vain.
Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 9. Consul. Whitacher. quaest. 6. cap. 4.

2 They proceed and allege scripture for their traditions, as that place
John. 16.12. I have many things to say, but you can not bear them now, Ergo
say they, there are many traditions not written.

We answer. First, it follows not, because Christ declared not all things at
that time, that therefore he kept them from his Apostles all together. Nay
whatsoever afterward the Apostles learned of the spirit of God, they had
heard before of Christ, for it was the office of the spirit, but to put them
in remembrance of Christ's sayings. John. 14.26. which they had heard before,
but understood them not, and so forgot them. Wherefore these things, which
Christ forbeareth to speak, are the same things, which are contained in the
Apostles writings. Secondly, if there were other matters, which Christ uttered
not, how follows it, nay what great presumption is it to say, that those
trifles and apish toys, which the Papists use in their Idolatrous sacrifice,
and their other beggarly ceremonies (which boys may well laugh at) are those
profou^d matters, which the Apostles were not then able to conceive.

3 That of all other, they take to be an invincible place. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
keep the instructions or traditions, which ye have been taught either by word,
or by Epistle, Ergo there are traditions besides scripture.

We answer: when S. Paul wrote this Epistle, all the scriptures were not
written: wherefore besides these two short Epistles, which do not contain the
sum of the Gospel, nor all necessary precepts, he by his preaching
supplied, what was wanting, and so declared unto them the whole mystery of the
Gospel, as he says. 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. these he calls his traditions, because
yet he had not written his other Epistles, wherein those instructions and
traditions are contained. This then is but a weak argument: the Thessalonians
had other instructions and traditions beside the two Epistles written unto
them, Ergo they had other traditions, beside all the writings of S. Paul and
the other Apostles: this is their main and weighty argument.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we grant, that all things are not written which our Savior Christ and
the Apostles taught, and that it was the Gospel, which they preached, as well
as this which is written: yet in substance they preached the same Gospel,
which now is expressed in the scripture: neither was there any necessary
precept delivered in their Sermons, which is not now to be found in the
scriptures. Secondly, we deny not but there were certain rites and orders
ordained by the Apostles in diverse churches, which were not committed to
writing, because they were not to continue and endure for ever in the Church:
as that precept Act. 16. that the Gentiles should abstain from strangled, and
from blood. Thirdly, we also grant that the Church may use external rites and
orders either left by tradition, or ordained by the Church for decency and
comeliness, and tending to edification. But we constantly affirm, that there
are no traditions in the Church of God necessary to salvation beside
scripture: wherein all things are contained necessary to salvation, both
concerning faith and manners.

1 It is not lawful, as to take ought from the word of God, so to add any
thing unto it. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Apocal. 22.18. But they which bring in traditions
necessary beside the scriptures, do add unto them, Ergo.

To the proposition the Jesuit answers, that all addition to the word of
God is not forbidden, for the Prophets did write after Moses, and the Apostles
after the Evangelists. We answer: that those holy men had authority from
God to compile scripture, if the Papists have the like Apostolic authority
for their traditions, let them show it, and we will believe them. Secondly, the
Prophets did but explane Moses, and expound the law, and the Apostles did as
it were set forth their Commentaries upon the Gospel: this therefore was no
addition, because they did not derogate from the perfection of the scriptures
any way.

To the assumptio^ they answer, that their traditions are but expositio^s of
Scripture. We answer, their traditions are clean contrary to Scripture, as
the worshipping of Images, and the sacrifice of their Mass: and they add to
Scripture, making it imperfect, saying, it does not contain all things
necessary to salvation. Wherefore they can not escape that curse, which they
run into that add to the word of God.

2 All traditions among the Jews besides the law were condemned Math. 15.3.
Ergo all unwritten traditions now must be abolished. The Jesuit answers.
First, Christ condemned not the ancient traditions of Moses, but those which
were newly and lately invented. Answer, first the Scripture makes no mention
of any such traditions of Moses: Christ bids them search the Scriptures, not
run unto traditions. Secondly, these seemed to be ancient traditions,
bearing the name of Elders traditions, and they were in great authority
amongst, the Jews: most like because of some long continuance.

Secondly (says he) Christ finds fault with wicked and impious traditions.
Answer. First, their traditions were not openly and plainly evil and
pernicious, but had some show of holiness, as the washing of pots, and tables,
and beds. I would the Papists did not here take the^ selves by the nose, whose
traditions come nearer to open impiety, and blasphemy, then theirs did.
Secondly, Christ in opposing the Scripture against traditions, therein
condemns all traditions not written, besides the Scripture.

3 If Paul preaching the whole Gospel. Act. 20.27. did say none other things
then Moses and the Prophets, then all things necessary to salvation are
contained in the Scriptures. For it can not be said to be a whole and perfect
Gospel, if any thing necessary to salvation be wanting. But Paul preached
nothing, but out of Moses and the Prophets. Act. 26.22. Ergo much more now is
the Scripture a perfect rule of faith: we having beside Moses and the
Prophets, the holy writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.

4 Last of all, although we might multiply many arguments, but these I trust,
strongly concluding out of Scripture, may serve as a sufficient bulwark
against all Popish paper* bullets. Let us hear in the knitting up the
judgment of Augustine. In his rebus inquit, in quib nihil certi statuit
Scriptura, mos populi Dei, vel instituta maiorum, pro lege tenenda. Epist. 86.
In all those things (says he) speaking of external rules, and ceremonies, of
the which we have no certain rule out of Scripture, the custom of the people
of God, and the godly constitutions of our forefathers must stand for a law:
but concerning matters of faith and good manners the Scriptures do give certain
rules: as in another place: In ijs quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt,
inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem, moresque viuendi, De doctrine.
Christian. 2.9. all things appertaining to faith, and the rule of life, are
plainly expressed in the Scripture, Ergo by the sentence of Augustine,
traditions besides scripture have nothing to do with the doctrine of faith and
manners, but do consist only in external rites and customs of the Church.

THE SECOND GENERAL CONTROVERSY, CONCERNING THE CHVRCH.
Having now finished the questions between our adversaries and us, concerning
the Scriptures, and word of God, which all do belong to the Prophetical office
of Christ: in the next place such controversies are to be handled as do
concern the Kingly office of Christ. And seeing the Church of Christ is his
kingdom, where he rules and reigns, we must entreat of the Church: and
first in general of the whole, and in special of the parts and members. This
present controversy concerning the Church in general stands upon five
principal questions.

1 Of the definition of the Catholic Church: two parts of the question.
First, whether wicked men and infidels, be true members of the Church.
Secondly, whether the Catholic Church be invisible.

2 Whether the Catholic Church may err, and whether the visible Church may
fail upon earth.

3 Concerning the true notes and marks of the Church.

4 Of the authority of the Church: two parts. First, whether the Church have
authority in matters of faith beside the Scriptures, and whether we ought to
believe in the Church. Secondly, concerning the ceremonies of the Church.

5 Whether the Church of Rome be the true Church: two parts. First, whether it
be the Catholic Church. Secondly, whether the Church of Rome be a true visible
Church: of these now in their place and order.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF THE definition of the Catholic Church.
The Papists.
THe Catholic Church (say they) is a visible company of men professing the
same faith and Religion, and acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be their chief
pastor, and the Vicare of Christ upon earth. Bellarmin. de Eccles. Lib. 3. cap.
2. Canisius capit. de praecept. Eccles. articul. 9. Lindanus. lib. 4. cap. 84.

The Protestants.
THe Catholic and universal Church is the invisible company of the faithful
elected and chosen to eternal life. John. 10.16. A particular Church is a
member of the universal and Catholic Church, and it is a visible company and
congregation of men, amongst whom the pure word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments rightly administered: in the which visible congregation, there may
be and are many hypocrites, evil and unfaithful men found, and shall be to the
end of the world. Ex Amand. Polano. So then between the universal and
particular Church, there is a treble difference. First, the one is dispersed
over all the world, the other in some one country, city or any certain place.
Secondly, the universal consists only of the elect, the particular both of
good and bad. Thirdly, the Catholic is invisible, the other is visible and to
be seen.

The question between us and our adversaries, is about the universal
Catholic Church, which they do falsely define in three points. First, they hold
that wicked men are true members of the Catholic Church. Secondly, they allow
not this distinction of the Church visible and invisible, but do affirm that
the Catholic Church is visible. Thirdly, they make the Catholic Church to be
in subjection to the Bishop of Rome. Concerning this last point, it belongs
to the controversy of the Bishop of Rome, and therefore we will not touch it
in this place. The other two are now to be handled in this question as two
parts thereof.

THE FIRST PART OF THIS FIRST question, whether wicked men and infidels may be
true members of the Church.
The Papists.
THey affirm that not only the predestinate, but eue^ reprobates also may
belong unto the Church, and be true members thereof. Bellarmin. Lib. 3. de 7.
Nay they deny that the elect which are unborn, and not yet called, do
appertain to the Church of Christ. Rhemistes. annot. in. 1. Tim. 3. Sect. 10.
This then is generally their opinion, that there is no internal grace or virtue
required in the members of the Church, but only the external and public
outward profession. Bellarmin. cap. 2. And therefore they doubt not to say that
even wicked men and reprobates remaining in the public profession of the
Church, are true members of the body of Christ. Rhemistes. annot. in Johan. 15.
Sect. 1.

1 They first allege certain places of Scripture, as Math. 3. the Church is
compared to a barn floor, where there is both chaff and corn. Math. 13. to a
net cast into the sea, where all manner of fish are gathered together. 2. Tim.
2. to a house, wherein there be vessels of honor and dishonor, Ergo both good
and bad are members of the Church. Bellarmin. cap. 7. lib. 3.

We answer. All these places must be understood of the visible Church: which
is known by the public preaching of the word, and therefore Math. 3. compared
to a fan, and Math. 13. to a draw net, the Apostles, pastors and teachers are
the fisher men. Wherefore we deny not but that wicked men may be in the
Church, but not of it: yea they may be members of the visible Church for a
time, but can not be truly ingraffed into the body of Christ. Fulk. annot.
Johan. 15. Sect. 1.

2 The Church (say they) is compared to a body. 1. Cor. 12. as in the body
there are some parts, which have neither sense nor life: so in the Church
there are some members, which have neither faith nor charity, which is the
life of the Church, Ergo wicked men may be right members of the Church.
Bellarm. cap. 10. there may be also some fruitless branches in the vine, and
so evil men may be members of Christ. Rhemist. annot. 15. Johan. 1. every
branch not bearing fruit in me shall be cast forth, Ergo there may be fruitless
branches in Christ.

We answer to the first, who would have said, as the Jesuit does, that there
are parts in the body, that receive neither life nor sense of the body: does
he mean the nails and hears, as he seems to give instance in the end of
the Chapter: but they are no parts of the body but excrements: he is so deep
in his sophistry, that he has forgotten Philosophy: and yet they receive
some gift from the body, for they grow and increase, but the wicked receive no
grace at all from the Church. The Rhemistes yet are more reasonable, that say
the wicked in the church, are as ill humors and superfluous excrements in the
body, rather then lively parts thereof. 1. Johan. 2. Sect. 10.

To the second, is a dead bow or a branch, I pray you, any part of the tree? I
think not: the tree can not conveniently spare any one of the parts thereof:
but the dead parts are hurtful and combersome, and it does the tree good to
cut them of. But that they have prevented us, we would have used no better
argument against them, then this drawn from the resemblance of a man's body:
for as what is in the body receiving no life nor power from the body is not
properly a part of the body, howsoever it seem to be joined to the body: so
the wicked although they be in the outward face of the Church, yet because they
are not partakers of the spiritual life thereof by Christ, are not truly to be
judged members of it.

3 If wicked men should not be right members of the Church, but the faithful
and predestinate, we should be uncertain which is the true Church, which is
not to be admitted, because the whole doctrine, and all the principles of
Religion do depend of the testimony of the Church. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 10.

We answer. First, although it is necessary that the true Church should be
certainly known, yet not for that cause, which the Jesuit pretends: for the
Religion of Christians is grounded upon the Scriptures, and although the true
Church does give a notable testimony thereunto, yet does not our faith depend
upon their witness, testimony, or allowance. Secondly, the true visible
Church is certainly known by the preaching of the word and the right use of
the Sacraments: so that we doubt not but there is the true Church, where we
find these marks: neither is it needful to know the estate of every
particular member thereof, for so long, as all actions in the Church are
directed and ordered by the rule of Gods word, we need not to doubt to commit
our selves to that Church, howsoever otherwise men do stand before God: and
yet, so much as is necessary, the faithful may be judged and known by their
fruits.

Thirdly, though we admit that wicked men are members: yet the uncertainty
remains still: for they them selves hold that neither men not Baptized, or
persons excommunicate, or heretics can be of the Church: but many may live in
the Church, whom we know not to be Baptized, which may be ipso facto, by the
deed doing excommunicate without public sentence, and heretics also:
wherefore even amongst themselves they are uncertain, who are members of the
Church.

The Protestants.
WE hold that the Catholic Church consists only of the predestinate, and
comprehends the universal number of all those which shall be saved, not only
those now living on earth, Fulk. annot. 1. Johan. 2. Sect. 10. Fox. page 609.
but all that have been since the beginning of the world: of this Church S.
Paul was even being a persecuter, for he was never a member of the devil nor
reprobate, as John Husse says articul. 2. Of this Church Judas the traitor
never was, though he were reputed for a Disciple of Christ for a while Huss.
articul. 7. Therefore the wicked and reprobate though they live in the outward
assembly of Christians, are no more the true members of Christ, then the tares
in the field may be counted wheat or good corn.

1 The true members of Christ, are also his sheep, the wicked are not the
sheep of Christ, Ergo neither his members.

The sheep of Christ hear his voice: they do not hear his voice, John. 10.
verse. 3.
Ergo if they shall answer, that hypocrites and wicked men do hear Christ's
voice, so long as they continue in the outward profession of Christians, we
thus improve it: Christ's sheep do follow him in life and example John. 15.4.
but so do not they. If it shall be yet answered that they may also a while
walk in Christ's steps: this is not enough, for all Christ's shall be saved.
ver. 9. wherefore the Gospel understands such folowers, as continue to the
end.

2 Christ is the head of his Church, and all the parts thereof, but he is not
the head of the wicked and reprobate, Ergo. The Jesuit grants that he is
the head, even of those parts that shall perish. Bellarmin. cap. 7. We thus
answer, Christ is the head only of those, for whom he gave him self. Ephe.
5.23.25: but he gave not him self for the wicked, Ergo. If this be denied, we
thus proceed, Christ dyed only for those whom he sanctifies and cleanses,
to make them a glorious Church without spot and wrincle. Ephe. 5.26.27. But
this can not agree any wise to the wicked, Ergo.

3 The Church of God is the whole family of the children of God in heaven and
earth, Ephe. 3.15. they both make but one Church, the wicked are not of this
family: for who would say that the Saints in heaven, and wicked and reprobate
men upon the earth, are fellow servant, and of one household, Ergo they are not
of the Catholic Church.

4 Of all other that is a most evident place. 1. John. 2.19. they went out of
us, but were not of us, Ergo heretics and reprobates are not of the church.
Bellarmine answers: though they were not of us, that is, of the Church:
animis and voluntate, in soul, and mind, and purpose of heart, yet they were
of us, externa professione, in external profession. Thus they are not ashamed,
such is there great boldness, to contradict the scriptures, for the Apostle
says, non era^t ex nobis, they were not of us: they say, yes, forsooth, after a
sort, era^t ex nobis, they were of us: the Apostle says nay, they say yea, he
says indeed exierunt ex nobis, they went out of us, which sounds nothing
like, as erant ex nobis, they were of us, as the Jesuit subtillie would
conclude.

De Baptis. lib. 6. cap. 3.
5 Let Augustine speak for us both, Illa columba, vnica, pudica, casta, sponsa
sine macula and ruga non intelligitur, nisi in bonis, justice, sanctis. That
lovely dove (says he) the chaste, undefiled, and unspotted spouse (that is the
Church of God) is only understood of those that are righteous, faithful,
holy, Ergo the wicked are not of the Church, which is the spouse of Christ.

THE SECOND PART OF THE QVESTION, whether the Catholic Church be invisible.
The Papists.
THey do affirm that the Catholic Church is and has been always visible:
Rhemens. annot in Math. cap. 5. Sect. 3. Neither do they mean any particular
Church so to have been visible, but the universal catholic church, which they
define to be a visible congregation of all faithful men. Canisius. cap. de
fide and Symbol. articul. 18. Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 12. ration. 7.

1 The foundation of the Church is visible: therefore the Church is visible:
the proportion they prove thus: for whether we affirm Christ, or Peter to be
the foundation of the Church: both of them are now visible in him which is the
Vicare of Christ, and Peter's successor.

We answer. First, we utterly deny either Peter to be the foundation of the
Church, or else the Pope to be his lawful successor: for Peter is no more the
foundation of the Church, then all the Prophets and Apostles. Ephe. 2.20.
whose doctrine is the foundation, not their persons. And as for the Pope, we
care not so much for outward succession in place, which notwithstanding they
can not prove to have been perpetual without interruption, as we do require a
succession of faith and doctrine. Secondly, we affirm that Christ is the
foundation, but not the visible beholding of Christ, with the carnal eyes, but
believing in his name, for when Peter had uttered that notable confession of
Christ, he said that flesh and blood had not revealed it but his father in
heaven: but if the beholding of Christ, had given Peter a sight of the
foundation, the^ flesh had revealed it unto him, his carnal eyes had brought
him to Christ. Thirdly, we may much better return this argument upon them
selves: that because the foundation of the Church, which is faith in Christ, is
invisible, therefore the Church is invisible.

2 They heap up many places of Scriptures, but to small purpose as Math. 18.
tell the Church. Acts. 15. when they came to Jerusalem they were received of
the Church, Philip. 3.6. Paul persecuted the Church: how could the church be
persecuted, how could it receive the Apostles, if it were not visible?
Bellarmin. cap. 12.

We answer, what goodly reasons here be: a particular church such as was at
Jerusalem may be seen, Ergo the catholic and universal. Secondly, a
particular church may be sometime visible, Ergo always. Thirdly, the church is
visible unto the faithful, as in time of persecution, for to Paul it was not
known, when he persecuted it, but only to the brethren, Ergo it is visible to
the world. For these three points they must prove that the catholic church not
a particular is visible, that the Church is not sometime but always visible, yea
and to the world, or else they say nothing: for shame masters make better
arguments.

3 He has set his tabernacle in the sun. Psalm. 19. The Church is as a City
upon an hill, Math. 5. Ergo it is always visible. Bellarmin. ibid. Rhemist.
Math. 5. Sect. 3.

We answer. First, the Apostles them selves, even at this time, when Christ
spoke these words unto them, were not so in sole, or in monte, in the sun,
or upon the hill, that they were seen of the world, nay they were not seen
nor acknowledged of the Scribes and Pharisees in Iewrie: the Church is seen of
the faithful, it is visible to them that search for her out of the Scriptures:
they that ca^ see the mountain, shall see the City, the mountain is Christ,
the City is the Church. No marvel if the Church be not always visible to
the world, for they see not, neither do they know Christ. Secondly, the church
is said to be on a hill: because the truth seeks no corners, heretics and
false t^achers fly into the desert and into secret places, Math. 24. ver. 26.
But the truth is not ashamed: the Apostles confessed Christ, eue^ before Kings
and Princes, Mark 13.19. so Augustine expounds it. Cont. Faustum. lib. 13.
cap. 13.

The Protestants.
COncerning the catholic church, we hold, that because, it is an article of
our faith, it is always unto the world invisible, and not to be espied but by
the eyes of faith. Fulk. Math. 5. Sect. 5.

Concerning particular churches* if by visible, they understand that which may
be seen, so we grant they are always visible. Fulk. Act. 11. v. 24. If for
that which is actually visible: we say it is not so always visible to the
world, nay it may sometimes be so hid and secret, that the members know not one
another. Fulk. in Math. 5. Sect. 3.

1 To the Hebrews it is thus written. cap. 13. v. 18.23.24. you are not come to
the mountain, which might be touched, but to the City of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, etc. Ergo the church is invisible, and here opposed to
the visible hill of Sinay.

Bellarmine answers, that this is understood of the triumphant church in
heaven, not of the militant upon earth.

To this we make answer, the Apostle understands the whole universal church
in heaven and earth, which both make but one family, Ephe. 3.15. for here he
names not only the spirits of just men which are in heaven, but the
faithful upon earth, whose names are written in heaven: the congregation
(says he) of the first borne: the words are (...) and (...), a gathering
together, collection or congregation, which must needs be understood of men
upon earth. Again (says he) ye are come, not ye shall come: they had now left
the smoking mountain Sinay, and were come to Sion, the church under the
Gospel. Wherefore this is a most firm and invincible argument: the catholic
church is the universal number of Gods chosen in heaven and in earth, Ergo
invisible.

2 We will give an instance: In the days of Elias the church was not visible,
for he camplaineth, and says that he was only left alone, 1. King. 19.10.
Ergo the church is not always visible.

Annot. in Romans 11. ver. 4.
The Rhemistes answer. First, at that time the church was visible in Iudaea,
the soldiers were numbered to 1000. thousand, 2. Chron. 17. We answer again.
First, belike they have taken a more exact account of them then the Lord him
self: for he (says he) had reserved 7000, 1. King. 19.18. that had not bowed
their knees to Baall, they say there were ten hundred thousand. Again Elias,
if he had known such a number, could not have been left so comfortless, as in
grief of heart to desire to dye. But be it granted that the church was visible
in Iudaea at this time, though it were not so to Elias: yet where was that
visible church in the days of Achaz, and Manasseh, when Iudaea fell also to
Idolatry? Thirdly, to believe that there is an holy catholic church is an
article of our faith, Ergo it is invisible.

Bellarmin answers. First, the holiness of the church is invisible. We
reply, so the church is partly visible, partly invisible by his confession.
First, why the^ do ye define the catholic church to be a visible congregation,
if it be not wholly and altogether visible? they know that difinitio must
co^uenire definito, the definition must agree wholly to that which is defined:
but now it is not: for they say, the catholic holy church is partly visible as
it is a church, partly invisible as it is holy. Secondly, do we not say in the
Creed, Credo Catholicam, as well as Credo Sanctam, I believe a catholic
church, as well as I believe the holy church? then it is also invisible, as it
is catholic, because this also is part of the article: see I pray you what
shifting is here?

Secondly, he answers, that some thing is seen in the church, some thing
believed: for we see that visible company of men, which make the church, but
whether that company be the true church, we do not see it, but believe it.

We reply again. First, the Jesuit has not yet proved that some thing is
seen in the church, some thing believed: but one thing is seen, namely the
congregation as they are men, another thing is believed, that they are the
church: the sight and belief now by his own confession are not both in the
church. Secondly, we deny that the universal company of the catholic
church, which is the number of the predestinate can be seen, therefore all is
believed, and nothing seen. Thirdly, he says that by faith we know which is
the true church: Ergo by faith we know which are the members of the church:
Ergo by faith the members do know them selves to be of the Church: therefore
faith is requisite in the true members of the church: the^ unfaithful men can
not be true members of the church, which point the Jesuit strongly before
maintained against us. Mendacem oportet esse memorem, a liar had need have a
good memory: lest he tell contrary tales, and so has the Jesuit here, for
before he denied that faith was requisite to make a true member of the church:
here he says that without faith a member ca^ not be known, much less
therefore made.

3 The Rhemistes confess in these very words, that in the reign of (their
imagined and supposed) Antichrist the external state of the Roman church, and
public intercourse of the faithful with the same shall cease, and that there
shall be only a communion in heart with it, and practice in secret, Annot. in. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Sect. 10. Where then (I pray you) shall be your tabernaculum in sole,
ciuitas in monte, candela splendens in domo: your tabernacle in the sun, your
City in a mountain, your candle shining in the house, that is, say you, in
the world. Math. 5. Sect. 3. Ergo out of their own words we conclude, that
the church shall not always be visible, and notoriously known in the world.

Lastly, we will conclude with Augustine. Aliquando in sola domo Noah Ecclesia
erat: in solo Abraham Ecclesia erat: in solo Loath and domo eius Ecclesia erat:
in solo Henoch Ecclesia erat: Sometime the church was only in Henochs house,
Enarrat. in Psalm. 128.
sometime only in Noah, some time in Abraham alone, in Loath and his house. How
then has the church been always so visible and notoriously known to the
world, when it has layen hidden some time in one house, yea in one man.

THE SECOND QVESTION, whether the Church may err.
THis question is divided into two parts. First, whether the catholic church
may err at all, or not? Secondly, whether the visible church upon earth may
fall away from God into Idolatry and apostasy.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE Catholic Church may err in doctrine.
The Papists.
THey do teach that the catholic church can not possibly err, not only in
matters absolutely necessary to salvation, but not in any thing, which it
imposes and commands, whether it be contained in the word of God or not:
yea that it can not err in these things, which beside the word of God are
commanded. And by the church here, they do mean not only the Pastors and
Bishops, but the whole company of the faithful: so that neither that which
all the pastors of the church do teach, can be erroneous, nor what is received
generally of the whole church. Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 14. Rhemist.
annot an Johan. 14. ver. 16.

1 The church (say they) is the pillar of truth* 1. Tim. 3. Ergo it can not
err. We answer. First, it is no otherwise the pillar of truth, then a virgin
without spot and wrincle, Ephe. 5.27. As that place does not privilege the
church from all sin and imperfection of life, so neither does this place
exempt her from all error in doctrine. Secondly, she is called the pillar of
truth in respect of us, because the truth is preserved in the true church, and
is not else where to be found: not because the truth depends upon the church:
for S. Paul sends not Timothy in this place to learn of the church, as
though it could not possibly be deceived: but (says he) these things have I
written, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of God. ver.
14.15. Ergo the word of God is the rule of truth, and the church has no
warrant, to be kept from error, but as she is lead and governed by the word of
God. Thirdly, the argument follows not, for Peter was a pillar and yet erred.
Gallat. 2.9.11.

2 They heap many arguments together. The church has the spirit of God, to
lead it into all truth, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Math.
16. God has given it Apostles, teachers, Evangelists to keep it in the
truth. Ephe. 4. Christ has prayed for the church, that it may be sanctified in
the verity. John. 17. Christ prayed that Peter's faith should not fail, Ergo
the church can not err. Rhemens. annot. 1. Timoth. 3.15.

We answer: every one of the elect has the spirit of God, neither shall the
gates of hell prevail against the faith of any one of the elect to overthrow
it: Christ prays for every one of his Disciples that they may be sanctified
in the truth. John. 17.20. wherefore it follows as well by these arguments,
that no one faithful man can fall into error. The pastors and teachers, so
long as they follow the Apostles doctrine, may keep the church from error, but
it is not gathered out of that place. Ephe. 4. that the pastors if they swerve
from Gods word can not err.

Concerning Peter, Christ prayed for him that his faith should not fail in
that grievous tentation, which he fell into. Secondly, he prayed not for him as
governor of the church, but as he prays for every faithful man. John.
17.23. Thirdly, for all this prayer Peter erred* Gallat. 2.

3 This argument was used in the Council of Basil: the Church is without
spot, and wrincle. Ephe. 5.27. Ergo without error.

We answer. First, S. Paul speaks there of a glorious church, such as it
shall be in the kingdom of heaven, not of the church as it is upon earth: so
Revel. 7.14. The elders, which sat round about the throne, which are the
Saints in heaven, were seen in long white robes, which they had washed white
in the blood of the Lamb.

2 It follows out of this place that the church is as well without sin, as
free from error: which the divines in the Council did also grant. But seeing
by their own confession every member of the church, being clothed in this
mortal flesh sins, how can the church be without sin? If the church
consist of men, and all men are sinners, how is the church free? If all the
parts and members be sinful, how is not the whole also polluted with sin?
If all the parts of the body be sick and diseased, how can the whole be
sound? The church also is not ashamed to confess her self to be black. Cant.
1.5. she shall be made bewtifull and glorious without all spot and blemish in the
kingdom of God: and even now also is made righteous and just before God
through Christ: not because she has no sin, but because it is remitted: and
although some errors and imperfections remain, yet shall they be no
hinderaunce to her salvation.

The Protestants.
WE doubt not to say, that the church of God may err in some points not
necessary to salvation: but can not fall clean away from God into any
damnable error. Fulk. annot. in Ephe. 5. ver. 29. That the church may err, as
we say, we do show it thus: and by the Church, we understand the whole company
and congregation, the pastors with the people.

1 When our Savior Christ suffered, the church erred in faith, Ergo it may
err: the proposition is thus proved. The church was either in the Scribes and
Pharisees, or else in the Apostles: but both of them erred: they in putting
Christ to death, the other in their incredulity, not believing rightly in the
resurrection of Christ.

Bellarmine answers, first that the Pharisees were privileged not to err,
Lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 17.
only till the coming of Christ. We reply again. First, after Christ was
come they sat in Moses chair, and Christ bids they should be heard. Math.
23.2. if they erred not before, neither could they now, for they were not
displaced out of Moses chair: but the truth is, they never had any such
privilege not to err. Secondly, if the Pharisees were now prone to error,
then by our adversaries own confession, they ceased to be the church, Ergo the
church was not now visible, for in them it was not: and the Apostles fled from
Christ, and shifted for them selves: how could then the church be visible to
the world?

Secondly, the Jesuit answers concerning the Apostles. First, the Apostles
were not yet entered into their office and Bishoprike, but only appointed to
it, and therefore they might err. We reply again. First they were not only
appointed Apostles, but partly already they had exercised their Apostleship:
for they were sent forth to preach the Gospel, and had power and commission to
work miracles, and heal diseases Math. 10* how then is not the Jesuit
ashamed to say, that they were not yet Pastors nor Apostles? Secondly, if the
Pharisees erred, and the Apostles erred, then all the world was in error, Ergo
by their saying at this instant there was no church upon the earth, which is a
great absurdity, for the church erreth not, they say.

Secondly, (says the Jesuit) the Apostles erred not in faith: they were
reproved for not believing the resurrection: which belief because they had not
yet received, they could not loose it. We reply. First, though they had not
erred in any material point: yet if there were any error at all in them, it is
sufficient for our purpose: that they erred it is manifest, for they fled away
from Christ. Secondly, he excuses them for their infidelity concerning the
resurrection, because this faith they had not yet received. But had not Christ
(I pray you) often instructed them of this matter: and if this were no such
error in them, then Christ was to sharp in reproving them for their
infidelity. Thirdly, it appears, that they wholly were deceived concerning
the Messiah: Luke. 24.21. the two Disciples say, they trusted that it had been
he that should have delivered Israel: see then what weak aunswers these are:
did these fellows think, that their gloses should not be examined? or that
their dreams should be taken for oracles?

2 The church of the Jews erred before our Savior Christ's coming, Ergo the
true church may err.

The proposition is proved: In the time of the reign of good kings, they did
offer sacrifice upon hill altars, but only to the Lord, which was an error. 2.
Kings. 12.3.14.4. The feast of the Passover was not kept so precisely
according to Gods word at any time before, no not in the reign of the best
kings, as it was in the 18. year of Josias reign, 2. King. 23.22. The feast
of Tabernacles had not been so solemnly and truly kept from the days of Joshua,
as it was in Nehemiahs time* Nehem. 8.18. Ergo all this while the church of the
Jews erred somewhat in the external worship of God. Fulk. Ephesians. cap. 5.
Sect. 4.

Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 7.
3 Augustine says, Quomodo erit Ecclesia in isto tempore, perfecta sine macula
and ruga, cuius me^bra non mendaciter confitentur se habere peccata. How can
the church be perfect in this life, without spot or wrincle, whose members do
truly confess, that they are not without sin? Ergo the church sins and is
imperfect, and why not subject to error? But in the Council of Basil it was
denied, as ye heard, that the church could sin.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER THE visible Church may fail upon the earth.
The Papists.
Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 13.

1 These and such places of Scripture they stand upon, Math. 16. the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, Math. 28. I will be with you to the end of
the world. Psalm. 88. his throne shall be as the Sun, and endure as the Moon,
Ergo the visible church shall not fail upon earth. Bellarmin.

We answer: that these places must be understood, of the catholic and
universal church, whereof we deny not, but every true particular church is a
part. This church is the spouse of Christ, this church shall not perish, this
is the kingdom of Christ, with this church will he always be present to the end
of the world: we deny not but that the invisible church shall continue upon
the earth so long as the world endures. Secondly, those places are improperly
understood of the visible church, for therein are both good and bad: how the^
can that be the spouse of Christ, where there are many infidels and wicked
ones, which have not espoused themselves unto him? how can it be called his
kingdom, whereas it is not of all acknowledged? But in the true catholic
church all and every one are espoused to Christ: all and every one have the
kingdom of God within them, as it is Luke. 17. ver. 21.

2 They do abuse that place of S. Paul Ephe. 4.11. he gave some to be
Apostles, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the gathering
together of the Saints: Ergo the church shall always be visible till all the
Saints are gathered together. Bellarmin. cap. 13. Rhemistes. Ephesians. 4. Sect. 5.

We answer: this place proves that the church has never wanted pastors and
teachers for the continuance of the truth, neither shall ever be without them,
as the Lord said by the Prophet Isay. 59. ver. 21. My spirit, which is upon
thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor the mouth of thy seed for ever. We therefore deny not but that in
all ages, yea in the most ignorant times of Popery, God raised up faithful
teachers unto his church: although they were not mitred and croziard Bishops,
neither could show any outward pomp or boast of any glorious succession: Such
were Gulielmus de S. Amore, Arnoldus de noua villa. an. 1240. Berengarius,
Ioachim Abbas, in the time of Innocentius 3. Wikclef, Bruto, Swinderby, Ex Foxi
Protestat.
Badby, and others about. anno. 1400. with many, which were not known to the
world: for the truth never in any age wanted witnesses.

By the continuance of the truth and right faith, we gather, that there have
been always faithful teachers, though not notorious to the world, and shall be:
but who they were, and where they lived, what pomp, what authority they were
of, it is not material to know: wherefore an outward visible succession of
Bishops and Pastors is not necessary for the continuance of the truth: neither
can it be concluded out of this place.

3 Thus they reason, there have been always some faithful men, which have
outwardly professed their faith: for if they dissembled or cloaked their
profession, then were they not faithful: Ergo the church has been always
visible, as in the time of persecution. Bellarmine.

We answer. First, the Jesuit does clean pervert and change the state of
the question: for he defines a visible church, to be multitudo congregata, in
qua sint praelati and subditi: a multitude or company gathered together, where
there are both Prelates and Bishops, and people obedient unto them. And now he
gives an instance of persecution, wherein some faithful Christians may give
an outward profession of their faith: where is now that multitude congregate
together? where is that jurisdiction of Prelates? where is that visible and
glorious succession? We deny not but that in time of persecution the faithful
may be known to them selves: and yet some time they are not: for in Israel
there were seven thousand faithful beside Elias, yet he knew none of them. But
it follows not, that therefore the church is then visible to the world, and
notoriously known to men, for so the Rhemistes say, in Math. 5. Sect. 3. and
Act. 11. Sect. 3. Thus they fly manifestly from the question.

The Protestants.
WE deny not, but that the catholic universal church, as it has hitherto
continued since the beginning of the world, so shall it endure to the end: the
Lord shall never want upon earth a company of faithful men, which shall truly
serve him: though it be not necessary, neither has always been seen, that
they should be in any one place. A visible church we define to be a
congregation of men, amongst whom the word is truly preached, and the
Sacraments administered: such a Church has not always been, neither can we be
assured that it shall always be found upon the earth, wherein the worship of God
publicly and visibly is practiced.

1 In the reign of Ahaz king of Judah there was no visible church, where the
pure worship of God was practiced, for both Israel under Pekah, and Judah under
Ahaz, fell to Idolatry, and followed the custom of the Gentiles. 2. Kings.
16.3. yea Vriah the high Priest consented with the king to set up Idolatry.
Likewise in the days of Manasseh, who did evil after the abomination of the
heathen. 2. Kings. 21.2. there was no place, where God was publicly
worshipped. for Judah was corrupted, Israel was carried away captive, Ergo
there was a time, when there was no visible Church.

2 In the Passion of our Savior there was no visible church, such a church we
still mean, as where there are, Prelati and subditi, pastores and oues,
Prelates and people, pastors and sheep. We prove it thus.

The visible Church was not amongst the Pharisees and Priests, for they
shamefully and wickedly erred. Bellarmin. 17. It was not among the Apostles,
for they also erred, therefore after the Papists opinion they were not the
Church: for the Church (say they) erreth not. Secondly he says, they were yet
but material parts, not formal, that is, not Bishops or Pastors, how then
could there be a visible Church, which was without the formal and principal
parts, that is Pastors and Bishops, Ergo there was then no visible Church.

3 When the abhominatio^ of desolation shall stand in the temple, and there
shall be a general defection and apostasy from the faith, then shall the
visible church fail upon earth: But the first is true Math. 24.15. 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. Ergo.

To the first place the Jesuit answers that it must be understood of the
destruction of the temple. cap. 16. But the Rhemistes more liberal then so,
affirm that it shall be especially accomplished in Antichrists time, when as
the sacrifice of the Mass shall utterly be abolished. annot. in Math. 24. ver.
15.

To the next place, concerning that defectio^ and apostasy, which S. Paul
speaks of, first he says, that it shall be a defection from the Roman Empire:
but the Rhemistes say, it shall be a defection from most points of Christian
Religion. Secondly, the Jesuit answers, that though it be a defection from
the Roman faith, yet it shall not be general but particular: but the
Rhemistes better advised grant it shall be a revolt of kingdoms, peoples,
provinces: and the public intercourse of the faithful with the church of Rome
shall cease, they shall only communicate with it in heart. annot. in 2 Thessalonians.
2. Sect. 6.

Now out of their own words we conclude: there shall be a time when as the
public service of God shall cease, there shall be desolation in the Churches and
temples of Christians: there shall be then no public intercourse with the
Church, but a private communicating in heart, Ergo there shall be a time, when
there shall be no outward visible Church notoriously and famously known: Ergo
our adversaries are in an error, and are condemned by their own mouth.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF THE notes and marks, whereby the true Church may be
discerned and known.
FIRST OF THE FALSE AND ERROneous notes of the Church.
Our adversaries do devise many notes, whereby their Church is discryed, as
Bellarmine reckons up* 15. in order, to many (certain) to be found in a good
Church: but there are six principal, which they do most stand upon:
antiquity, universality, succession, unity, the power of miracles, the gift
of prophecy. We must first touch these in order, and then come to the true and
infallible notes of the Church.

Of antiquity. Note. 1.
THe Papists make great bragges of the long continuance of their Church: yea
that they can show the descent of their Church from Adam. Rhemistes. 28. Sect.
5. But (alack) silly men they must come short of our Sauiuiour Christ's and
the Apostles time, by five or six hundred years, for the most of the opinions,
which they now hold. Let us examine their reasons.

In any great change of Religion (say they) the authors of the Sect, the time
when it began, the persons that oppugned it may be known: but no such thing
can be showed of our Church (say they) as we can show of yours, we can tell
them the year, the places, and ringleaders of their revolt, say our English
Rhemistes. annot. in 1. Johan. 2. Sect. 9. Bellarmin. lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 5.

We answer. First, no marvel if Papistrie herein do much differ from other
heresies: they, as the heresies of the Arrians, Pelagians, Donatistes, because
they were not long to continue, suddenly brake out, and suddenly again were
extinguished. But Papistrie, being the prop and pillar of Antichrists kingdom,
by whom the world must be deluded many years, was at the beginning to work
closely and secretly, not breaking out at once into open impiety and
blasphemy, but under pretense of holiness, to set a broach her deadly poison:
therefore S. Paul calls it a mystery of antiquity, which began even to
work in his days. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.

Secondly, we also answer, that all these things, the authors of their
sects, the time, the persons that withstood them, may manifestly be detected:
first concerning the time, we have a manifest Prophecy, Apocal. 20. that
Satan should be bound a thousand years, and afterward let loose: when no
doubt Antichrist should begin to show him self to the world. Concerning this
space of a thousand years, there are two probable opinions: some think they
are to begin immediately after our Savior Christ's time, and so counting a
thousand years, all which time Satan must be bound, then Antichrist should
begin to appear. Fox* page 426.
Thus John Wicliffe expounds it. Others say the thousand years ought to
begin after the three hundred years expired of persecution: for all that while
it is most like Satan was let loose, when he raged with open mouth like a Lion
against the Church and Saints of God: of this opinion was Walter Brute somewhat
after Wicliffes time: who by this means makes the Prophecy of Daniell of
1290. days, Fox. 480.
and that in the Apocalipse 12. of 1260. days, to agree with the thousand
years of Satan's binding: for taking every day for a year, we shall come
to.1290. years after Christ: when the thousand years must be expired,
beginning from the three hundred years of persecution. If we count the
thousand years from Christ, we shall come to the time of Hildebrand the
seventh, who was Pope of Rome, a thousand years after Christ and upward: by
whom the marriage of Ministers is thought first to have been forbidden: if we
begin after the ceasing of persecution, which continued three hundred years,
we shall fall into the year.1300. about the time of John Wicliffe, Fox. page
101.
when the great rabble of Monks and Friars began to swarm, and superstition
to increase.

But we will take a little pain briefly to touch the authors of many
superstitions in Popery, and of their erroneous and heretical opinions. Anno.
420. Zosimus Bishop of Rome did challenge a prerogative above other Churches,
that it might be lawful to make appeals from other Churches to that sea: and
to set the better color upon it, he falsely alleged a decree of the Nicene
Counsel, but there was no such thing found there: wherefore it was decreed in
the Council of Carthage at that time, that none should appeal over the seas
to Rome.

Bonifice the third, purchased of the wicked Emperor Phocas the title of
universal Bishop. Transubstantiation was first concluded against Berengarius
anno. 1062. under Leo the ninth, but not publicly enacted before anno. 1216.
under Innocentius the third. The Dominicke Friars brought in the same time,
Fox. Martyrol. page 1147.
and their Sect established by Innocentius the third. Auricular confession also
was brought in anno. 1215. under the same Pope.

Marriage first prohibited by Nicholas the second, Alexander the second,
Gregory the seventh, about the year 1070. The Communion in one kind forged
and invented, and decreed in the Council of Constance, not above two hundred
years ago. By these few examples it may appear that it is false which the
Jesuit says, that the authors of their sects and heresies ca^ not be showed.

Now we will briefly declare, what oppugners and gainsayers they have had in
all ages, since their grossest opinions began to be received: Such were
Bertramus and Bere^garius about pope Hildebrands time* that mightily impugned
the gross opinion of Tra^substantiatio^. Robertus Gallus 1291. Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, who was called malleus Romanoru^, the mallet or
hammar of the Romans anno. 1250. Franciscus Petrarcha 1350. Johannes de rupe
Scissa, who Prophesied against the Pope 1340. with many other, Fox. Protest.
which ceased not to cry out against the abominable vices and erroneous
opinions of the Church of Rome. Wherefore it is a great untruth, which the
Jesuit does so stiffly avouch that we can not set down the pedigree and descent
of their church and faith, and how it has continually been resisted.

3 Now whereas they say, that they can name the ringleaders of our sect: we
have none other masters and authors of our faith, then our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, by whose holy writings we refuse not to be tried: But you fly
from the light: you disgrace the Scriptures, making them imperfect, and
insufficient: this the true Disciples of Christ would not do, you are the
Disciples of Christ, as the Pharisees bragged, that they were the Disciples of
Moses: And as then the true church was not in those that sat in Moses chair,
though they could allege great antiquity, but in Christ and his Apostles: so
is not now the true Church to be discerned, by custom or number of years, but
by that truth, which was taught and preached by our blessed Savior, and his
Apostles.

Of Universality. Note. 2.
Our Church is universal, say they, both in respect of time, person, and
place, Ergo it is the true Church.

That it is universal, they first prove by the name of Catholic, which is,
say they, by Gods providence appropriat to them, which name they affirm
without ground to have been imposed by the Apostles upon true believers. Rhem.
in Act. cap. 11. Sect. 4.

We answer. First, the name of Christians is a more honorable title then the
name of Catholics: for it is manifest Act. 11.26. that this name was used in
the Apostles time, and by the Apostles them selves allowed: but it is not
certain that the name Catholic came from the Apostles. Again many heretics
challenged this name to be called Catholics, who did not so easily obtain to
be called Christians: which ancient and honorable name the Papists do despise,
for in Italy and at Rome it is used as a name of reproach, to signify a dolt
or a fool. Fulk. in Acts. 11.26.

2 We say that you do usurp this name, as the Donatistes in Augustines time
would be called Catholics: for what is the name of Catholic, without the
Catholic doctrine? They are the true Catholics, that profess the ancient
and Apostolic faith: to us therefore, be it known to you, this name of better
right appertains, then to you (o ye Papists) yet we have better arguments to
prove our Church by, then by sillables and titles: Quasi nos (says Augustine)
huius nominis testimonio nitamur ad demonstrandam Ecclesiam, Epist. 48.
and non promissis Dei. As though we (says he) do lean upon this name to
prove our Church by, and not rather upon the promises of God.

Secondly, they prove their universality, by the multitude of people, that
have received the Romish faith: and their Church (say they) has replenished
the greatest part of the world. They would prove this by the propagation of the
Church, in the Apostles time, in Tertulian, Irenaeus, Hierome, Augustine, yea
and afterward in Gregory's days: yea and now also besides many great countries
in Europe, they have of their church in India, America, and the unknown parts
of the world. Bellarmin. cap. 7. nota. 4.

We answer. First, the truth is not always to be measured by the judgment
or opinion of the multitude: follow not a multitude says the Scripture to do
evil: the greatest part is not the best: Christ calls his flock pusillum
gregem, a little flock, fear not little flock (says he). Secondly, you have
nothing to do with the Church, which was propagated in the Apostles time, nor
for the space of five or six hundred years after Christ: it was not your
Church, for the most of your heresies are more lately sprung up then so. And
you need not brag of your universality now: for the Turk (I trow) has a
larger dominion then the Pope, and Mahometisme is as largely spread as
Papistrie, and further to: And for Europe, I hope you need not make your
boast: the Pope had never less jurisdiction, then he has now, and I trust
every day, shall have less. But many (you say) in the new found countries,
have been converted to your religion. In deed, if you had had grace, such an
opportunity being offered as the Spaniards had, you might have won that simple
people to Christ. But you thirsted more for their gold, then for their souls
health: it is notoriously known to the world, what extreme cruelty has been
wrought upon that innocent people. Was that a Catholic part of the Spaniardes
to keep dogs of purpose, to werry and destroy the inhabitants, to use them
as horse and beasts, to plough, to carry, to dig? Thus by your cruelty,
there were out of one small Island called Hispaniola, which was well peopled and
inhabited, destroyed and rooted out in short time, two milions of men and
women, the story of Benzo an Italian is abroad to be seen of this matter: you
have none or few of your Popish Catholics in those countries, but of your own
brood, that have been sent thither, but enough of this.

3 We nothing doubt, but that our faith, the truth of the Gospel has been
long since known and published to the whole world.

Those two conditions, which the Jesuit puts in, to make the Church
universal, do help us very well: the first is, that it is not necessary,
that all cou^tryes wholly should profess the Christian faith: but it
suffiseth, if there be some of the church in every country: the second, it is
not requisite, that this universality of the Church should be all at one time,
but if it be done successiue, that is, in diverse ages, one country to be
joined to the Church after another, it is enough.

Now keeping these two conditions, we shall easily prove our Church to be
universal: for there are no countries in Europe, and few in the whole world,
wherein there are not some of our faith, namely that abhor worshipping of
Images, do only hope to be saved by faith in Christ without merit, and
believe in the rest, as we do. And again taking one age after another, we
shall easily make it good, that our faith at times has spread it self over
the whole world.

The third Note of Succession.
THey make great boast of the long and perpetual succession of their Popes
Bellarmin. cap. 8. Rhemist. annot. in Ephe. 4. ver. 13.

We answer. First, they can not show such an entier and perpetual succession,
without any interruptio^ or discontinuance for so many years: for sometime
there were two, sometime three Popes together, and this schism continued 29.
years, till the Council of Constance, where three Popes were deposed at once,
Benedict 13. the Spanish Pope: Gregory 12. the French Pope, and John 23. the
Italian Pope.

2 If succession be so sure a note of the Church, it is found also in other
Churches besides: as in Co^sta^tinople, where has been a perpetual
succession, as Nicephorus says, from S. Andrew the Apostle: in Antioch from S.
Peter: and in other Churches in Grecia. The Jesuit here is driven to his
shifts, and has nothing to say, but this: that the argument follows
negatiuely, that where there is no succession, there is no Church: not
affirmatively, that where any succession can be showed, there straightwayes it
should follow there is a true Church: so by the Jesuits own confession he has
made but a bad argument for the Church of Rome: we have a perpetual succession
of Popes from the Apostles time, Ergo we are the Church. It follows not: says
the Jesuit, we grant it. Why then a little before did he call it insolubile
argumentum, an insosoluble and unanswerable argument.

3 Thirdly we say, that a succession of persons in the same place, without
succession of doctrine, which they can not show, is nothing worth. A succession
of the Apostolic faith and doctrine proves a continuance of pastors and
teachers, and not contrariwise. We have the Apostolic faith, and therefore, we
doubt not but that there have been continually in the Church faithful
teachers, by whom that doctrine has been preserved and kept: though they were
not famous, nor carried a glorious show in the world. For that outward
succession is not necessary, neither so much to be stood upon. Augustine, when
he had alleged succession against heretics, concludes thus: Quanquam non
tantu^ nos de istis documentis praesumamus, Epist. 165.
qua^ de Scripturis sanctis: although (says he) we presume not so much upon
these docume^ts as of holy Scripture.

The fourth Note, of Unity.
Bellarm.

First of the unity of their church, and then of the unity of ours. Their
unity, they say, is partly seen in their obedience, and loving society and
fellowship, partly in their Religion and doctrine.

First for their concord and love one toward another: we will take some pains,
a little to decypher it. About the year of the Lord 900. there was pretty sport
amongst the Popes, nine of them one after another. Stephen the sixth abrogated
all his predecessor Formosus decrees: and not content with that, he took up
his body which was buried, and cut two fingers of his right hand off, and
commanded his body to be buried again. After him succeeded Pope Rhomanus,
Theodorus the second, John the tenth, who ratified and confirmed the doings of
Formosus. After them followed Pope Sergius, who disanulling all their acts,
took up again the body of Formosus, cut of his head, and commanded his body
to be thrown into Tiber the great river in Rome. Fox. page 146.
Was not here great amity and love think you, amongst the Popes?

Another notable example of their unity we have in Pope Vrbanus time the 6.
against whom stood up a contrary Pope in France named Clement: it is worth
the noting, what coil these two popes kept: between who^ many battles were
fought, many thousands slain. Pope Vrbane beheaded five Cardinals together
after long torments. Bishop Aquilonensis, because he did ride no faster, was
had in suspicion, and slain and cut in pieces by Vrbans soldiers, at his
commandment, Fox. page 434.
behold here I pray you the unity of these Catholics.

We will adioyne one other example, no longer since, then in king Henry the
eights time. The Duke of Bourbon being the leader of the Emperors army, laid
siege to Rome, and sacked it: the soldiers brake in upon the Pope, which was
Clement the seventh being at Mass, slew diverse of the Priests, and one
Cardinal called Sanctorum quatuor: they laid siege to the Castle of S. Angel,
so long till the Pope yielded him self. The soldiers daily that lay at the
siege, made iestes of the Pope: sometime they had one riding like the Pope with
a whore behind him, sometimes he blessed, sometime he cursed: sometime with one
voice they would call him Antichrist. See here is their Catholic obedience to
their chief Bishop. Fox. page 988.
Thus much concerning their unity and concord in life.

Let us likewise take a view of their unity in doctrine. We heard before how
Pope Stephen and Sergius abolished the decrees of Formosus: how then says the
Jesuit, that the decrees of Popes do consent together? The Council of Basile,
and Constance before that decreed, that the Pope should be subject to general
Councels: but this Canon was afterward reuersed, and now generally the Papists
hold the contrary, that the Pope is above Councels.

Let us see the consent of their writers: Bellarmin. lib. 1. de verbo. cap. 12.
maintains against Lyranus, Driedo, Genebrard, and others, that Judith was in
Manasses time. Against Alphonsus de Castro, that heretics are no members of
the Church. Lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 4. Against Johannes de turre cremata, that
faith is not necessary to make one a member of the Church. Lib. 3. de Eccles.
cap. 10. And every where the Jesuit takes great liberty to confute and
control other his fellow Papists: belike having found out some starting holes,
that they either knew not, or were ashamed to creep into, as the Jesuit does.

But (says he) we deny not but that we have dissentions, but they are not in
material points, but in such things as appertain not to faith. I marvel, he
blusheth not thus to say, him self knowing the contrary. Is it not a
substantial point and belonging to faith, to know which books are canonical
Scripture, which are not? But in this question they do much disagree. Caietanus
the Cardinal says, that we must acknowledge no Scripture, but that which was
either written, or approved by the Apostles. But Catharinus a Papist, does
reject that opinion. Hugo Cardinalis, Arias Montanus, do hold no books of the
old Testament to be canonical, which are written only in Greek: the Papists
now generally hold the contrary. Ex Whitacher. 1. contr. c. quaest. cap. 6.
Bellarmin says, that all those opinions, which the Church holds, as articles
or precepts of faith, were delivered by the Apostles: and that the Church must
not now seek for new revelations, but content her self, with the Apostolic
traditions and doctrine, de Scriptur. lib. 4. cap. 9. Out of the which words it
does necessarily follow, that the church is not now to found any new article of
faith: but this generally is denied by the Papists: and Stapleton an English
Papist, is not ashamed to say, that the Church, may add more books to the
canonical Scripture, by her absolute authority.

Further, to believe that the virgin Marie was without sin, yea conceived
without original sin, is now amongst the Papists received for an article
of faith: and therefore in Paris none are admitted to be Doctors of Divinity,
which do not first confirm this article by their oath. Yet this was a great
question between the Scotistes and Thomistes, and a great and hot contention
arose about this controversy anno. 1476. between the Dominicke Friars, who
affirmed that she was conceived in sin, and the Franciscanes, that held the
contrary. Fox. page 801.
But these Franciscanes had the upper hand, and four of the other order were
condemned and burned for it at Berne: and yet for all this our adversaries will
say still, that they vary not* in matters of faith. Thus we have seen, what
is to be thought of Popish unity.

Now to answer briefly to their false accusation, whereby they charge us with
manifold schisms and dissentions: yea Bellarmin is not ashamed to say, that an
hundred several sects are sprung amongst us. cap. 10. lib. 4. de Eccles.

1 We say with S. Paul: oportet haereses esse. 1. Cor. 11. there must be
heresies and divisions in the Church. And it is a sign we have the truth, when
the devil goes about by schisms and contentions to hinder the preaching
thereof. We answer to you, as Augustine did to the paganes. Non proferant
nobis quasi concordiam suam: hostem quippe, quem patimur, illi non patiuntur:
Let them not boast of their concord, and cast in our teeth the dissension of
Christians: the enemy assaulteth not them as he does us: Quid ibi luchri est,
quia litigant, vel damni si litigant: the devil shall get nothing if they
should disagree, nor lose any thing by their agreement: for he has sure hold
enough of them already, consenting all in Idolatry. But amongst Christians he
labors to hinder the truth by discord, because he can not otherwise withdraw
them from the true Religion. Hearken now (o ye Papists) if you consent
together, it is in evil: so long it pleases the devil well enough: he should
destroy his own kingdom in sowing dissension amongst you, for you fight for
him. He uses to cast fire brands amongst good Christians, to withstand by
this means the proceeding of the Gospel.

2 It is a great sclaunder, that there are so many divisions amongst us: an
hundred says the Jesuit, but he shall never prove ten. He might have
bethought him self of a full hundred of sects amongst his own darlings the
Monks and Friars, as M. Fox has faithfully gathered the number. page 260.

3 Those few schisms and dissentions, which we have (and yet to many, we must
needs confess) are not about points of faith, and articles of Religion: but
concerning some things belonging to discipline and Church government: which
matters we deny not, but have been somewhat to hotely and egerlie followed of
some amongst us: but God be thanked, this contention has not been pursued by
fire or death, as the Franciscanes did persecute the poor Dominickes: nor yet
to the pronouncing of each other heretics, as Eugenius your Pope was condemned
as an heretic in the Council of Basile.

The fifth Note of the power of working miracles.
THis they affirm both to be necessary in the Church, to have power to work

And hereupon they take occasion to extol the miracles of their Church:
beginning at the Apostles time, and so in every age they take upon them to
show, that their Church never wanted those that were endued with this power.
Bellar. cap. 14.

We answer. First, the gift of miracles does no more prove that to be the
true Church where they are wrought, then they to be holy men and elected of
God, that do them: The Magicians wrought many strange things in Egypt,
co^tending a great while with Moses: Antichrist shall come working with signs
and wonders. 2. Thessal. 2. Therefore this proves not a Church. But here they
have a double evasion: these were false miracles, wrought by the devil, as
those of the Magicians, or else but forged, and only to the eye, and in outward
appearance, as Antichrist is said to come with lying wonders. We replye. First,
they are called lying wonders, not that they are done in show only, and have
no such thing indeed, but because they are wrought to confirm lies, and
discredit the truth. Secondly, your miracles are very like to be such, both
wrought by the power of the devil, and some of them but iugling feats of
cousoners. Thirdly, yet a wicked man may have power to work miracles, not in
show, but verily and indeed, as to cast out devils, and to do it in the name
and power of Christ, and yet be none of Christ's disciples. Matthew. 7.22.

2 Concerning your miracles we answer, that they are either fables, and old
wives tales, and no credit to be given unto them, or else they are one of
those two sorts, whereof Augustine speaks: De vnitat. eccl. cap. 16.
Remoueantur ista vel mendacia fallacium hominum, vel portenta me^dacium
spirituum. Away with those miracles, which are either cousoning tricks of
deceitful men, or wonders of lying spirits.

First, Monkish fables are not a whit dainty with our Romish Catholics, their
Legendes are full of them: As that of Berinus, how being in the midst of the
sea, sailing into France, having forgotten somewhat at home, Fox page 122.
went back walking upon the sea, and came to them again having not one thread
of his garment wet. Many like tales are reported of Aldelmus Abbot of
Malmesburie, as how he caused an infant at Rome of nine days old to speak,
to clear Sergius the Pope, who was thought to be his father: how he drew along
a great piece of timber, that went to the making of the Church at Malmesburie.
Such good stuff also they have of John of Beuerley, of Egwine Abbot of
Euesham, who when he had locked his feet in fetters, and cast the key into the
sea, afterward a fish brought the key again into the ship where he was
sailing. Read M. Fox page 125. All these and a thousand more are but Monkish
fables and dreams, whatsoever the Jesuit makes of them.

Secondly, it is out of doubt, that some of them were well practiced with the
devil, and through his help could do much. We will begin with Dunstane, who
caused a Roode to speak, which was more strange, then that of Balaams ass:
for the ass had life, though she had no reason, but this image had neither:
Polidore Virgil thinks little better of Dunstane for this deed doing, but
that he was a sorcerer. Fox. page 158.

It is famous in histories, how Siluester the 2. was advanced to the Papacy
by the devil, and gave himself unto him, and how, having some remorse before
his death, he confessed the fact before the people, and willed that his body
should be drawn of wild horse when he was dead, Fox. page 167.
and there be buried where the horse left it of their own accord. How much
such diabolical practices are favored by the sea of Rome, may appear by this
one example, which we will now touch: In Pope Adrians days, not many years
ago, there was a most abominable thing practiced in Rome, even under the
Popes nose, and by his permission and sufferance. The city of Rome being at
that time grieuouslie scourged and punished of God with the pestilence, there
was one Demetrius a Grecian, who with the good liking of the whole city, to
appease the wrath of their gods, took a wild Bull, whom with magical
enchantments he made so tame, that he led him with a twine thread, Ex Paul.
Iouio tom. 2. lib. 21.
and so sacrificed him: And this being done, the sickness somewhat slaked. Call
ye this the Church of God, that suffers such heathenish and abominable
superstitions to be done in it? Or shall I take these men for Christians, that
do allow the idolatrous and devilish sacrifices of the heathen?

Thirdly, let us see what pretty fine iugling casts have been wrought by the
Papists to deceive the people. In King Henry's days, there was a monstrous
Idol called the Rood of grace, which was made so with wiers and ingins, that
one standing within could make every part of the Idol to move, the hands, the
eyes, the mouth: if a man brought but a small piece of silver, it would hang
down the lip; if it were a good piece, then should his jaws go merrily:
This abominable Idol by the Lord Cromwels means was broken down, and the
engines and parts thereof showed at Paul's Cross. Such a like thing was the
blood of Hales, which they made the people believe was some of Christ's blood,
but in the end it was found to be but the blood of a drake, and showed
likewise at Paul's Cross. Fox. page 1188. At Calis in the Sepulcher, it was
said, there were three hosts besprinkled with blood (as it was put in writing
under Bull and Pardon:) but the place being searched at King Henry's
commandment, they found three white counters sodred in the stone with the
top-bone of a sheep tail. page 1223. A thousand such forged devises the
Papists had, which they are not ashamed to maintain for strange and holy
miracles. By this that has been showed, it is evident (I hope) to the
indifferent reader, what small cause our adversaries have, to boast of their
miracles.

3 Now to add somewhat concerning the miracles of our Church. First, we truly
say, that our doctrine is not new nor strange, and therefore, they are not to
call for miracles at our hands. The miracles of Christ and his Apostles, are
also our miracles, seeing we profess the same doctrine, which was confirmed by
those miracles. Secondly, yet, the Lord be thanked, we are not destitute of
miracles, as Augustine says: Modo caro caeci non aperit oculos miraculo
domini, at cor caecum aperit oculos sermon domini. Now, says he, the blind
does not receive his bodily sight by the power of Christ, but the blind heart
is lightened and illuminate through the Gospel of Christ: Such miracles (the
Lord be blessed) we can show: sinners are converted, afflicted consciences are
comforted, the ignorant are instructed, many are called by the preaching of the
Gospel. Thirdly, if this will not content them, but they still cry with open
mouth, and say, where are your miracles? Behold, to stop their wide and
clamorous mouth, we will show them also such miracles, as they look for, like
to which they have none. Was not that a miracle, which Oecolampadius reports
to have been done at the Martyrdom of Master Hugh Spengler: who being cast
into the water and so drowned, presently all the water was colored with blood,
Ann. 1525.
he having received no wound nor hurt in his body before: at the which all the
people were greatly amazed?

But what think you of that strange sign which George Scherrer showed at his
death, who being beheaded, the body lay a pretty space upon the belly, till
one might have eaten an egg, and then turned it self upon the back, and
crossed the right hand over the left, and the right leg over the left: the
Magistrates seeing it, having condemned his body to be burned before, being
moved at the sight hereof, caused it to be buried. Fox ex Math. Illyrico.

It is worth the remembering, that is reported in the French stories of Petrus
Burgerius a blessed Martyr: who was cast into a filthy dungeon, where a thief
had lien the space of eight months, being almost eaten up with lice, and in
such misery, that he cursed his parents that bare him. This man through the
teaching and the prayers of the Martyr, felt such comfort in the Gospel, that
he became very patient in his affliction: and after his conversion this
strange thing was wrought upon him: that whereas before he was so full of
lice, Fox ex Ioh. Crispin. page 907.
that he might have plucked out twelve at once between two of his fingers, the
next day he had not one.

Now, because the Jesuit has such a spite at Luther (he is a great eye sore
to him) we will in a word or two declare what strange things were wrought by
Luther. It is credible reported of him, that a certain young man had bound
himself by obligation to the devil, sealed with his blood to give him his
soul, so he might have his wish and desire satisfied with money: In short time
he grew to great wealth: the matter being disclosed with much ado to Luther,
he calls the congregation together, and joins in prayer for this young man:
and as they prayed, the obligation was cast in at the window. Fox. page 864.
A notable and strange miracle, which is credibly reported of Luther.

He was a man fervent in prayer: one might have seen the tears falling from
his eyes as he prayed: And as he was earnest in prayer, so his prayers wanted
not effect, for as he himself confessed, he had obtained of God, that so long
as he lived, the Pope should not prevail in his country. And is not this also
a thing to be wondered at, that for all the Pope and Emperor joined together,
and bent their forces against this silly poor man; yet the Lord defended him
from the Lions teeth, and granted him to end his days in peace?

Thus it is apparent and manifest, that the Lord shows his miraculous power
many times in his Saints, to astonish the wicked: The great miracles which
have been declared in their holy martyrdomes, would fill a large volume: And by
the grace of God, hereafter we may have occasion in an other treatise of
purpose, more at large to publish them. But these arguments we do not chiefly
stand upon: Yet thus much was not amiss by the way to be put in, to requite
our adversaries withal, who do so greatly magnify and extol their
Antichristian Church, for their lying and feigned miracles.

The sixte Note of the gift of Prophesying.
Joel 2. I will power of my spirit upon all flesh. The second, that they have
had such prophets, they do infer upon a few forged examples, of Saint Barnard,
and S. Frauncis, a popish Saint, and the founder of the superstitious order of
the Franciscanes.

To the first we answer. 1. The prophecy of Joel was accomplished in the
Apostles time, Act. 2. as S. Peter expounds it, and therefore we need not
look further for the fulfilling of it. 2. The Church of the Jews wanted
Prophets for the space of 4. hundred years and more before the coming of
Christ: for we read of no Prophet after Malachy: and the Church complayneth of
this want, Psalm. 74. verse. 9. that they had Prophets no more: wherefore, the
Church of God after the coming of Christ, may better spare this extraordinary
function of prophesying, seeing both Christ is already come, who was the very
subject and matter of all the ancient prophecies: And we have also most
evident prophecies of the Apostles, Romans 11. concerning the calling of the
Jews, 2. These. 2. of Antichrist, in the Apocalipse of the general estate and
condition of the Church to the end of the world: Some of which are already
accomplished, some to be fulfilled in their season: In these prophecies we must
rest and content our selves, not looking for new revelations. 3. There have
been Prophets amongst the heathen, out of the Church of God: they also can
bring forth diverse old prophecies: so that if the issue lay in this point,
they might as well contend to be the Church of God. Justin. lib. 1.
Astiages dreamed that he saw a Vine growing out of his daughter, that
covered all Asia: which came to pass in Cyrus. Augustine reports a prophecy
of Hermes Trismegistus, De ciuit. dei lib. 8. cap. 26
how that all the Images and Idols of the heathen should be broken down
through all Egypt. The Indians were foretold of the Spaniards coming many a
year before their arrival in those places: Their Zemes, that is, their
devils, which they worshipped as Gods, told them, that there should come a
people with long beards, fierce and cruel, that at one stroke should strike
men off by the middle: And all these things fell out afterward to that nation
accordingly. Benzo. lib. 1. cap. ^.


But they will answer, that these were not true prophecies inspired of God, but
uncertain predictions of the devil. What will they say then to Balaam, that
prophesied of Christ? there shall come a star of Jacob (says he) Numb.
24.17, and in the same place he says, he heard the words of God.

The prophecies also of Sibill are wonderful: which many years before the
coming of Christ, prophesied of his incarnation, and of his passion, with the
circumstances thereof, as how he should be crowned with thorns, that they
should give him vinegar to drink, how the veil of the temple should be rent,
and darkness should cover the earth for three hours: and he himself should rise
the third day: yea she sets down the very name of the Messiah, Jesus Christ.
Aug. cont. Iudaeos. ca. 16. Tom. 6.
These prophecies came not of the devil, for these mysteries, without all
doubt were not known to the evil spirits: for they were not fully revealed to
the Angels themselves before the coming of Christ. Ephesians. 3.10. Wherefore we
conclude thus, that as the gift of prophesying is no sure sign that they are
members of the Church and elected of God, which are endued with it: as Christ
says, Math 7.22. that many which had prophesied in his name, in the day of
judgment should be refused: and Balaam is set forth as an example of a false
Prophet and wicked man: Ep. Jude. 11: so neither is this gift an infallible
mark of the Church of God, whersoeuer it is found.

To the second part, concerning this miraculous gift which our adversaries
pretend to have: we answer. 1. They are but fables which they bring: for if all that is reported of Saint Bernard in his life, of his miracles, and prophecies,
were true, neither S. Paul nor any of the Apostles were to be compared unto him
for number of miracles: such casting out of devils out of men, women and
children, healing of strange diseases, foretelling of things to come: the
Gospel almost has not stranger things of our Savior Christ.

As for Saint Francis, you may guess by this, what spirit he was of, that
prescribing to his followers, a certain strict order of living, as to wear no
girdle, to go barefoote, and such like, he called it regulam euangelicam, the
rule of the Gospel: belike making himself an other Christ, and so bringing in
another Gospel: for to all Christ's Disciples Christ's Gospel^ is sufficient. 2.
But if they have any prophecies of credit, which they can show, they are such,
as are reported, of Pope Siluester the 2. who had warrant from the devil; that
he should not die before he sung Mass in Jerusalem: and so it came to pass,
for having sung Mass in a chapel so called, he immediately dyed. Not much
unlike to this was that of king Henry the 4. who ended his life in a chamber at
Westminster called Jerusalem, as he had an old prophecy. Edward the 4. also
was told that his successors name should begin with G. which was the cause of
George the Duke of Clarence death, his own brother: but the devilish prophecy
notwithstanding took place, Fox. p. 717.
for Richard Duke of Gloucester was king after him. In like manner Valence the
Emperor had a blind prophecy, that one should reign after him, whose name
began with Theod. which made Theodorus to rebel against him: but so it came to
pass in deed, that Theodosius was Emperor after him. Such blind prophecies
we deny not but the popish Church has had many, which as you see, do cause
murder, sedition, and bloodshed: but other good prophecies coming of GOD, we
know them not to have any.

3. We deny not, but that there have lived some amongst them in their Church,
which in those days were counted Prophets and Prophetisses, as Hildegardis,
anno 1146. likewise Briget, Catherine Seuensis: whom Bellarmine reckons up
amongst others that wrought miracles. cap. 14. but concerning these we will
answer, as the Jesuit does for Sibilla a Prophetisse amongst the heathen:
that she prophesied as touching such matters as should fall out to the Church,
for a testimony of the faith of the Christians: And so to be counted herein a
Prophetisse of the Church rather than of the heathen. cap. 15. so we say, that
if those three abouenamed were Prophetisses, they were of our Church, and not
theirs: for they prophesied of the decay of their Church and raising up of
ours. Hildegardis first prophesied of the beginning of Friars, and of their
destruction, saying, that in the end, when their gifts and rewards ceased, they
should go about their houses like hungry and mad dogs, Fox. p. 261.
drawing in their necks like doves. Briget prophesied of the Church of Rome,
that it should be as a body condemned of a judge, to have the skin flayne
off, and the flesh to be cut in pieces: Catherine de Senis, speaks of a
reformation of the Church, and such a renouation of Pastors: that the only
remembrance thereof says she, m^keth my spirit to rejoice in the Lord. Fox.
p. 842.
All these things we see now accomplished: the sects of Friars in many places
put down: the Popish jurisdiction cast out; a notable reformation to be
wrought in the Church. Our adversaries (I think) have not to rejoice in these
prophecies: neither have any great cause to challenge them for their Prophets.
But I will help them a little, and bring to their remembrance a notable
Prophetisse of theirs in king Henry the 8. days, which was one Elizabeth
Barton, a Nun, commonly called, the holy maid of Kent, who being instructed by
the Friars, feigned, as though she had many revelations: she prophesied, that if
the king proceeded in his divorce, then in question between him and Q.
Catherine, that he should not be king one year, no not one month: But (GOD
be thanked) he lived almost twenty years after that, by whom many worthy
things were wrought for the good of Christ's Church. This prophetisse was
afterward justly met withal, and worthily suffered for her demerites, with all
her accomplices: amongst the which, Fisher B. of Rochester was one, Fox. p. 1055
who thereupon was imprisoned, and forfayted his goods to the King. If they
will brag of their Prophets, let not the holy maid of Kent be forgotten in
any wise.

4. Now lastly because they shall not outface us with a vain brag of Prophets:
I will show what prophesies the Gospel has been adorned withal. Was not
John Husse a Prophet, who thus said at his death: centum reuolutis annis deo
respondebitis: after an hundred years you shall give account of this your doing
unto God? Likewise Hierome of Prage, post centum annos vos omnes cito: I cite
you all to make answer after an hundred years. Which prophecy of theirs
took effect accordingly: for both these holy men suffered martyrdom about
anno 1416. and just an hundred years after, anno 1516. the Lord raised up
Luther, who indeed called the Pope and his doctrine to account.

Was not Sauonarola a Prophet, that said one should pass over the Alps like
Cyrus, who should destroy all Italy? and is it not so come to pass? for
neither Cyrus, nor whosoever else could have more laid wast the popish Italian
Church then the word of God has done, and the lively preaching of the Gospel.
Walter Brute prophesied that the temporalities should be taken from the Clergy
for the multitude of their sins: Fox. p. 500.
this Walter lived in king Richards days the second. Bilney that constant
martyr and faithful servant of God prophesied, that many Preachers should come
after him, which should preach the same faith that he had taught, and should
convert many from their errors. And many such examples we have of holy martyrs
and worthy Prophets: But we hereby do not prove our Church: Yet this I hope
has not been out of the way, to have answered a little to our adversaries
vain and untrue bragges.

Hitherto, we have touched the principal notes and marks whereby the Papists
do decipher out their Church unto us: Now it follows, that we declare the
right and certain signs of the true Church.

Of the true and infallible Notes of the Church of Christ.
THe outward tokens whereby the true visible Church is discerned, are not many
in number, as our adversaries do reckon up many: the Jesuit no less than 15.
supplying belike in number that which they want in weight. Neither in this
place do we speak of the universal Catholic invisible Church which is
believed and not seen, being an article of our faith: but of particular visible
Churches, which are discerned and known by these two essential marks, the
true preaching of the word, and right use of the sacraments: Some also do add
a third, namely, ecclesiastical discipline. Beza confess. de eccles. art: 7.
Hooper upon the Creed articul: 72. But this partly is comprehended in the 2.
former: for there cannot be hearing and preaching of the word, and the
frequenting of the sacraments, unless there be an exercise of Church
discipline: partly also we say that it is not so essential a note, as the other
are: for the absence of the other make a nullity of the Church: If the word or
sacraments in substance be corrupted, the Church also is defaced: but if there
be not an exact form of discipline, it does not straightway cease to be a
Church: Wherefore we conclude, that the true preaching of the word, and right
use of the sacraments, are the only necessary and essential notes of the
Church: Where these two are rightly used according to Gods word, there is a
right Church, as here in England God be blessed: Where they are falsely and
impurely handled, there is a false and corrupt Church, as among the Papists:
where they are not at all in use, there is no Church, as amongst the Turks,
Jews, and Infidels. First we will examine our adversaries arguments, and then
bring forth our own.

The Papists.
1. BEllarmine thus argues: the true notes of the Church ought to be proper
and particular, not common and general, as these are: for every sect of
heretics do challenge to themselves the right preaching of the word, and usage
of the sacraments. Ergo they are no true notes.

We answer. 1. It skilleth not how many do lay claim to those notes: the word
of God it self is a manifest judge, where pure doctrine is taught, and the
sacraments rightly kept according to the institution. It is no matter,
howsoever Papists and other heretics do make their bragges, the scriptures
themselves can soon decide this question. 2. I marvel they are not ashamed
to object, that our notes are common, seeing theirs are most common: for not
only assemblies of heretics, but even the heathen and Idolatrous Gentiles
might as well prove themselves to be the Church, by those popish notes, of
universality, for Idolatry had ouer-spread the whole world; of unity, they
all consented to persecute the Church of Christ; of antiquity, for the worship
of Idols continued above two thousand years: of succession, for the monarch of
the Assyrians endured 1300. years, their kings all this while one succeeding
another. They had also Prophets, and such as wrought miracles. Our adversaries
may be now ashamed to cast us in the teeth, that our notes are common, when as
theirs do well agree to the Synagogues of Satan, and assemblies of Infidels.

2. Says he, the note or the mark must be better known and more notorious,
then the thing marked or notified by it: so are not these: for we know not
which is the word of God, nor what books are canonical, and to be taken for
scripture, but by the Church.

We answer: the Jesuit still beggeth that which is in question: a foul fault
in a professed disputer: for have we not largely proved before 1. contr.
quaest. 4. that the Church depends upon the authority of the scripture, and
not contrariwise, and that there is no more certain and evident and undoubted
thing in the whole world, upon the which a man may be bold to build and
ground his faith, then upon the scriptures? This sure is a childish and
ridiculous argument, to take that as granted, which is most of all in
controversy.

3 The true notes (says he) are inseparable from the Church: it is never
without them. But many true Churches have wanted these: The Church of the
Corinthians was a true Church, and yet they believed not the resurrection. cap.
15. The Galathians were a true Church, and yet they held that Moses law was to
be observed together with the Gospel. And, the Corinthians likewise did not
sincerely observe the Sacraments. 1. Corinthians. 11. Ergo, they are no true signs.

We answer. First, this argument may with better right be returned upon their
own head: for many true Churches have wanted their marks: Christ and his
Apostles had neither succession from Aaron, nor universality, and yet they
made the true Church. The Church of the Jews after Malachies time had no
Prophets, nor miracles, for the space of 400. years before Christ, and yet
were they the true Church, and so of the rest of your notes, the Church of
Christ has many times wanted them. Secondly, It was not the whole Church of
Corinthus that doubted of the resurrection, but certain false Apostles that
labored to seduce others. 1. Corinthians. 15.34. Some of you (says the Apostle)
have not the knowledge of God: he says, not all. So likewise amongst the
Galathians, there were false teachers, that stood for the law of Moses:
Galath. 5.9. a little leaven does mar the whole lump. It was not therefore a
public doctrine in the Church, but secretly taught by false Apostles. Thirdly,
there may be some error in the Church, but being not fundamental, such an one
as destroys faith, it does not dissolve the Church: as there was some abuse
amongst the Corinthians in receiving the Sacrament: but the form and
institution and substance of the Sacrament was kept. Nay, yet to grant a
little more: though the error be dangerous and of great weight and moment,
and such an one, as being stifely maintained would destroy the faith and
Church too: yet if they have fallen into it rather of ignorance, then any other
cause, and do not continue in it, but do submit themselves to be reformed by
the word, it cease not for all that to be a Church. So the Corinthians
referred themselves wholly and their opinions to the judgment and
determination of the Apostle. Hitherto our adversaries have said nothing
against us: now we will say somewhat for our selves.

The Protestants.
1 FOr the sufficiency of these Notes, we would desire no better arguments,
then those which our adversaries alleged against us: for first our notes are
proper only to the Church, and cannot be found in any place, where the Church
of God is not. Secondly, they are most notorious marks, and a man by the
Scriptures may more easily know, what true doctrine is, and which are the
right Sacraments, then which is the true Church. Thirdly, these marks can not
be absent from the Church, but do always accompany it, and it is no longer a
true Church, then it has those marks.

2 We are able out of the Scriptures to prove these marks, which may stand in
stead of many reasons. John 10. my sheep hear my voice: Ephesians. 5. clensing it
by the washing of water through the word: Ergo, the Word and Sacraments are
true notes of the Church.

Bellarmine answers to the first place, that the hearing of the word, is not
a visible note of the Church, but a sign unto every man, whereby he may know
his election. We reply again: look which way a man is known to be a
member of the Church, by the same way the Church also it self is discerned: if
the hearing of the word do make one a sheep of Christ, then does it also show
which is the flock and fould of Christ: As I know my hand or foot to be a
part of my body, because it has life and motion of the body: even so the
body is discerned from a carkas, because it moves and lives.

To the second place he answers, very simply: that the Apostle there shows
not, which is the Church, but what good Christ has wrought for his Church. We
reply again: But the Church is best known by the benefits that Christ has
bestowed upon it, amongst the which the Word and the Sacraments are not the
least: Ergo, by these the Church is known, and in that place by the Apostle
described: And let the reader judge, whether that place of the Apostle, where
there is direct mention made of the word and sacraments, be not fitly applied
to our purpose, concerning the description of the Church.

3 Let Augustine speak: In scripturis didicimus Christum, in scripturis
didicimus ecclesiam: epistol. 166. In the scripture we do learn Christ, in
the scripture let us likewise learn the Church. His argument is this: Look
how Christ is known, so is his Church, but Christ is only known by his word:
Ergo, so is his Church.

The fourth question of the authority of the Church.
THe Papists affirm, that the authority of the Church consists in these
five points. First, in authorizing the scriptures, and defining, which are
Canonical. Secondly, in giving the sense of the scripture. Thirdly, in
determining matters besides scripture. Fourthly, in making laws and
constitutions for the Church. Fifthly, in exercising of discipline.

Concerning the two last, we do not greatly stand with them. We acknowledge
the Church has authority to make decrees and constitutions, but so, as the
Apostles did: Visum est nobis and spiritui sancto, It seemed good to us and the
holy Ghost: the Church must be directed by the wisdom of the spirit speaking
in the scriptures.

We also acknowledge the wholesome power of the Church in exercising of holy
discipline: but it must be done in the name and power of Christ. 1. Cor. 5.4.
not according to the will of men.

Concerning the two first: we have already showed, that neither the Church
does give authority to the word of God, but does take her authority from
the^: for the scriptures are of sufficient credit of themselves. 1. controu.
quaest. 4. Neither that the sense of scripture depends upon the
interpretation of the scripture, but that the word expounds it self: 1.
controu. quaest. 6.

There remains therefore only one point to be discussed of the authority of
the Church: namely in deciding of matters beside the scriptures: which are of
two sorts, either necessary appertayning to faith, or indifferent concerning
ceremonies: of both these in their order.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE CHVRCH has authority in matters of faith beside
the scriptures.
The Papists.
WE ought to take our faith and al necessary things of salvation at the hands
Rhemist. Act. 10. sect. 8. In points not decided by scripture we must ask
counsel of the Church. Praefat. sect. 25. The Church is the only pillar and
stay to lean unto in all doubts of doctrine, without the which there can be no
certainty nor security: we must therefore believe it and trust it in all
things. annot. 1. Timoth. cap. 3. sect. 9. Yea it has authority say they, to
make new Articles of faith: Rhemist. 1. Timot. 3.9.
as in the Council of Constance it was decreed to be necessary to salvation,
to believe the Pope to be head of the Church. In the Council of Basile it was
made an Article of the faith, to believe that the Council was above the Pope,
and therefore Pope Eugenius in not obeying the Council was adjudged to be an
heretic.

1 Upon these words in the Gospel. John. 15.27. the spirit shall testify of
me, and you shall bear witness also: they conclude thus: Ergo, the testimony
of the truth jointly consists in the holy Ghost and Prelates of the Church.
Rhemist. John. 15. sect. 8.

We answer. The witness of the spirit, and of the Apostles, is all one
witness: for the spirit first testifies the truth to the Apostles inwardly,
and the Apostles inspired by the spirit did witness it outwardly: so the
Pastors of the Church witnessing with the spirit, which is not now inspired by
revelation, but only found in the scriptures, are to be heard: but if the
spirit testify one thing in the word, and they testify another, there we must
leave them.

2 The Church erreth not: Ergo, we must hear her in all things. Rhem. 1.
Timoth. 3. sect. 9. We answer. First, the Church may err, if she follow not
the scriptures. Proved before. 2. controu. quaest. 2. Secondly, so long as the
Church hears Christ's voice, we are likewise to hear hers: and so long as she
is preserved from error, she will not swerve from Christ's precepts, neither
impose any thing upon her children, without the warrant of her spouse.

The Protestants.
THat the Church has no such power to ordain articles of faith, or impose
matters to be believed necessary to salvation not contained, or prescribed in
the holy scriptures: We prove it thus, and we are sure, that the true Church
of Christ will never challenge any such prerogative.

1. All truths and verities in the scriptures are not so necessary to
salvation, that the ignorance thereof should bring peril of damnation: Ergo
much less are any verities out of scripture of any such necessity: the first
is manifest: for to know the just chronology of time or space of years, from
the beginning of the world to Christ, is a verity in scripture, yet not
necessary: so to believe that Marie continued a virgin ever after the birth of
our Lord, was thought by Basile to be no necessary point to salvation, if we
did hold her to have been a virgin before: and many such other points there
are in scriptures, which a man may be ignorant of without peril of salvation,
Ergo much more may we be ignorant of unwritten verities, or rather Popish
fables.

2. The Church has no more authority then the Apostles, nor yet in all things
so much: But they had no power to make articles of faith: for Saint Paul
delivers that which he had received concerning the sacrament, he durst not
add unto it, as the Papists have been bold to do since, 1. Cor. 11. Ergo the
Church may explane and open articles of faith out of the scriptures, but not
make new.

3. We prove it by the confession of our adversaries. The fathers of Basile,
that concluded, it was an article of the Christian faith to believe the
superiority of the council, Fox. p. 677.
did gather it out of the saying of Christ, dic ecclesiae, and therefore
enforced it as an article. Whereby we gather, that they held, that the Church
could establish no article of faith without scripture. Bellarmine likewise
says, that the Church is not now governed by new revelations, but we ought
to be contented with those decrees, which we have received from the Apostles:
Cont. de scriptur. quaest. 6. c. 4
Ergo, as D. Whitakers does strongly conclude, the Church cannot coin new
articles of faith.

4. Lastly, we have before proved at large out of the word of God, that the
scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation: and therefore all
articles of faith must be derived from thence. 1. controu. quaest. 7. And so we
conclude with Augustine: Epistol. 49. quaest. 2.
Linguae sonos, quibus inter se homines sua seusa communice^t, pacto quoda^
societatis sibi instituere possunt: Quib. aute^ sacris diuinitati congruerent,
voluntatem dei sequuti sunt, qui recte sapuerunt: Quae omnino nunquam defuit ad
salutem iustitiae pietatique hominum. Men, says he, may devise among
themselves what language they will use to express their mind: But how to
serve God, wise men ever followed the will and commandment of GOD* which
never has failed men in all necessary matters concerning righteousness and
godliness. By this fathers sentence, the scriptures, which contain the will of
God, contain all necessary things. Ergo, we need not seek elsewhere.

AN APPENDIX OR MEMBER OF THIS part of the question, whether we are to believe
in the Church.
The Papists.
WE ought to believe and trust the Church in all things: yea to believe in the
Church. Rhemist. 1. Tim. 3. sect. 9. the scripture also uses this speech
annot. in 10. Romans sect. 41.

1. Exodus 14.31. they believed in God and Moses. Ergo. We answer, your own
vulgar text has it, crediderunt deo and Mosi seruo eius: they believed God and
his servant Moses: that is, having seen the great power of God in the
destruction of the Egyptians in the red sea, according to the word of Moses,
they gave credit unto Moses, which spoke unto them from God.

2. Philem. v. 5. Hearing of thy love and faith which thou have toward the Lord
Jesus and unto all the saints. See, say they, here is faith toward the saints.

We answer: there is no man, that is not peruersly disposed, but may easily
distinguish the Apostles words: to attribute faith to Jesus Christ, and love
to the saints: Which may appear by the altering of the preposition, as they
themselves read in their own translation, love and faith in Jesus Christ, and
toward the saints: so it must needs be thus understood, faith in Christ,
and love toward the saints: this therefore is but a sophistical cavil.

The Protestants.
THis word, Credo, believe, is taken three ways: for there is credere deo, to
believe God, that is to trust him in all things, credere deum, to believe God
to be, credere in deum, to believe in God, as our creator, Lord, and redeemer.
So we do credere ecclesiam, we believe there is one holy Catholic Church:
credere ecclesiae, we do also believe and give credence to the Church,
following the word of God: But we do not in any wise credere in ecclesiam,
believe in the Church.

1. We must not believe or put any confidence in a creature: the Church is but
a creature, Ergo: for to believe in God, is only proper to the Godhead: and
therefore, John 14.1. where Christ says, ye believe in God, believe also in
me: we do necessarylie out of these words infer, that Christ is God, because
we are commanded to believe in him.

2. Faith is of things that are absent, and not seen: but the Church is
present always upon earth, and always visible, as our adversaries hold: how
then can it be an object of our faith? We can not believe in that which is
visible and seen, for it is against the nature of faith.

3. Augustine says, sciendum est, quod ecclesiam credere, non tamen in
ecclesiam credere debemus, quia ecclesia non est deus sed domus dei: De te^pore
sermon. 131. We must know, that we are to believe there is a Church, not in the
Church, for the Church is not God, but only the house of God.

THE SECOND PART OF THE QVESTION concerning the ceremonies of the Church.
The Papists.
THey do hold that the Church of God may use and bless diverse elements
Rhemist. 1. tim. 4. sect. 12. and 13. Yea that the Church may borrow rites and
ceremonies of the Jews: ibid. sect. 18. Yea by the creatures thus blessed, or
rather coniured, they say, remission of sins is obtained, sect. 14.

2. Remission of sins was annexed to the oil wherewith the sick were
anointed, James 5. Ergo, remissions of sins may be applied by the like
consecrated elements, Rhemist. 1. Tim. 4. sect. 14.

We answer: First, it follows not, because the creature of oil was used in
the miraculous gift of healing, which ceremony was no longer to continue, than
that miraculous gift endured: it follows not, that other elements may be used
so now, there being not the like occasion, seeing all such myraculous gifts
are now ceased. Secondly, it was not the oil whereby their sins were
forgiven them, neither was it applied to that end, it was only a pledge unto
them of their bodily health: but the prayer of faith shall save the sick, says
the Apostle, v. 15. for God has promised to hear the faithful prayers of his
children both for themselves and others.

3. Saint Paul used imposition of hands, which was a ceremony of the law used
in consecrating of Priests. Ergo, it is lawful to borrowe ceremonies of the
Jews.

We answer: It follows not, because Christ and the Apostles by the spirit
of God retained some decent actions used in the law, therefore now the Church
at her liberty may take of the Jewish ceremonies: this is great presumption,
to think it is lawful for the Church to do whatsoever Christ and his
Apostles did. Fulk. 1. Tim. 4. sect. 18.

The Protestants.
ALthough there be great moderation to be used in the ceremonies of the
Church, and there is also some limitation for them: yet has the Church greater
liberty in the rites and ceremonies, which are appointed for order and
comeliness sake, then in the doctrine of faith and religion: The doctrine of
salvation is always the same, and cannot be changed, and touches the
conscience: But rites and ceremonies are external, and commanded for order
sake: and neither are they universal, the same in every Church, nor
perpetual, but are changed according to times, and as there is occasion.
Again, the precepts of Christianity are either directly expressed, or
necessarily concluded out of the scriptures: but external rites and
ceremonies are not particularly declared in the word: there are only certain
general rules set down, according to the which all ceremonies brought into
the Church, are to be examined: as for the Sacraments of the Church, they
cannot be altered, having a perpetual commandment from Christ: Therefore the
Church cannot appoint, what, how many ceremonies soever she shall think good,
but according to these four rules and conditions, which follow here in order.

1 All things ought to be done to the glory of God, even in civil actions,
much more in things appertayning to the service of God, 1. Cor. 10.31. Our
adversaries offend against this rule, applying and annexing remission of
sins, to their own inventions and superstitious ceremonies, as unto penance
and extreme unction, which they also make Sacraments: for this is greatly
derogatorie to Christ's institution, who has only appointed the hearing of his
word, and use of the Sacraments, for the begetting and increasing of faith, and
by this faith only is the death of Christ applied unto us for the remission of
sins.

2 All things ought to be done orderly and decently, 1. Cor. 14.40. Wherefore
al ridiculous, light and unprofitable ceremonies are to be abolished: such our
adversaries have many, as knocking, kneeling, creeping to the Cross, lighting
candles at noone day, turning over of beads, and many fantastical gestures
they have in their idolatrous Mass, as turning, returning, looking to the
East, to the West: crossing, lifting, quaffing, and showing the empty cup,
with many such toys.

3 All things ought to be done without offense, 1. Corinthians. 10.32. But to
whom, that has but a little feeling of religion, is not the abominable
sacrifice of the Mass offensive? What good conscience does it not grieve, that
the Priest should create his maker, as they say? should offer up the body of
Christ in sacrifice, and be an intercessor as it were for his mediator,
desiring God to accept the sacrifice of his sons body? As also to make it a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead? But of these matters we
shall have fitter occasion to entreat afterward, when we come to the several
controversies.

4 All things ought to be done to edifying, 1. Corinthians. 14. verse. 12. But the
popish ceremonies are so far from edifying, that by reason of their infinite
rabble and number, they are a clogge unto Christians, and more burdensome, then
were the observations of the Jews: They have hallowed fire, water, bread,
ashes, oil, wax, flowers, branches, clay, spittle, salt, incense, balm,
chalices, paxes, pixes, altars, corporals, superaltars, altarclothes, rings,
swords, and an infinite company besides: do these tend (think you) to the
edification of the mind? Nay, they do clean destroy and extinguish all
spiritual and internal motions, drawing the heart from the spiritual worship
of God, to external beggarly and ragged relics and ceremonies. Fulk. 1.
Timoth. 4. sect. 1. Beza. lib. confess. de eccles. articul. 18.19.20.

The fifth question, whether the Church of Rome be the true Church.
THis question has two parts. First, whether the Roman Church be the
Catholic Church or not. Secondly, whether the Church of Rome be a true visible
Church.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE ROMAN Church be the Catholic Church.
The Papists.
BEllarmine defining the Church, makes this one part of the definition, to be
Lib. 3. de eccles. cap. 2. And therefore they conclude, that they are out of
the Church and no better then heretics, that do not acknowledge the Pope to
be their chief Pastor. Canis. de praecept. eccles. cap. 9. So they make the
Roman faith, and Catholic, to be all one: Rhemist. annot. in 1. Romans sect. 5.

Their reasons are none other, then we have seen before, taken from
universality, antiquity, unity, unto the which we have already answered,
quaest. 3. of this controversy, Not. 1, 2, 3.

The Protestants.
WHile the Church of Rome continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, it was a
notable and famous visible Church, and a principal part and member of the
universal Catholic: but now since it is degenerate and fallen away from the
Apostolic faith, from being the house of God, to be a synagogue for
Antichrist, we take it not to be so much as a true visible Church. But never
was it to be counted the Catholic Church, as though all other Churches were
parts and members of it: but it self only was a part as others, and Catholic
too, while it continued in the right faith: but not Catholic as having
jurisdiction over the rest, and all to receive this name of her.

1 The universal Catholic Church is so called, because it conteyneth the
whole number of the elect and first borne of God, Heb. 12.23. Whereof many are
now saints in heaven, many living in the earth, many yet unborn. But all these
were not, neither are of the Roman faith: the holy men departed knew not of
these superstitious and prodigious vsages, which now do reign in the Church
of Rome: nay, many of them never heard in their life so much, as of the name of
Rome: Ergo.

2 It is called Catholic, and universal, because they that are to be saved,
must belong unto this company, and be of this Church, for without the Church
there is no salvation, for Christ only gave himself for his Church to
sanctify it and cleanse it. Ephesians. 5.25. But all that dye out of the faith of
the Roman Church, do not perish. Nay verily, we doubt not to say, but that all
which depart this life in the communion thereof without repentance, are barred
from salvation, and dye out of grace. We are in the right faith: neither will
we be our own judges, the scriptures shall judge us: Every spirit that
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. 1. John 4.2. We
believe aright in both the natures and all the offices of Christ: which you do
not, which do greatly deface his prophetical office, in not reuerencing his
word, but making it imperfect: his kingdom, in appointing him a Vicar and
Vicegerent upon earth, as though he of himself were not sufficient to govern:
his Priesthood, in setting up another sacrifice: Ergo, your spirit is not of
God.

3 The Catholic Church is so called, because it embraces the whole and only
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Ephesians. 2. verse. 20. But the Roman
Church receives many things contrary to scripture, and adds many things unto
it, as it shall appear throughout this whole discourse. Ergo.

4 The Catholic Church has the name, because it is dispersed over the whole
earth. Acts 1. verse. 8. But so was never the Roman faith, which is now
professed, as we have showed before. Quaest. 3. de Eccles. Not. 2. Ergo, ex
Amand. Polan.

THE SECOND PART: THE CHVRCH OF Rome is not a true visible Church.
The Papists.
THeir arguments are as we have heard. Quaest. 3. of the notes of the Church,
Not. 4.5.6. We need not, nor must not for breuities sake repeat the same
things often.

Protestants.
WE deny utterly that they are a true visible Church of Christ, but an
Antichristian Church, and an assembly of heretics, and enemies to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ.

1 That cannot be a true Church, where the word of God is not truly preached,
nor the Sacraments rightly administered according to Christ's institution: So are
they not in the Popes Church: For the word is not sincerely taught, but they
have added many inventions of their own, and do preach contrary Doctrines to
the Scripture: the Sacraments also they have not kept, for first they have
augmented the number: they have made five more, of confirmation, orders,
penance, Matrimony, extreme unction: beside, the Sacraments of Christ they
have corrupted. In baptism, beside water, they use spittle, salt, oil
Chrisme, contrary to the institution: and they lay such a necessity upon this
Sacrament, that al, which die without it, say they, are damned. In the Lords
Supper, they have turned the Sacrament to a sacrifice, made an Idol of bread,
changed the Communion into private masses, taken the cup from the lay people,
and many other abominations are committed by them. Ergo, neither having the
word, nor Sacraments according to the institution, they are no true Church.

2 They which are enemies to the true Church, and do persecute the members
thereof, are no true visible Church: they cannot be of that Church, which they
persecute; as Bellarmine says of Paul: how could he be of that Church, which
he with all his force oppressed? de eccles. lib. 3. cap. 7. But they persecute
the Saints of God, and are most cruel toward them, as their consciences bear
them record. Ergo.

3 The habitation of Antichrist cannot be the Church of Christ, so is theirs:
the Pope himself is Antichrist: for who else but he sits in the temple,
being an enemy to Christ. 2. These. 2. Where have you a city in the world
built upon seven hills but Rome? Apocalypse. 17.9. But of this matter we shall
of purpose entreat afterward. Ergo. they are not a true visible Church.

THE THIRD CONTROVERSY CONCERNING COVNCELS.
A Council is nothing else but an assembly and gathering together of the people
of God, about the affairs and business of the Church: and they are of two
sorts, either universal in the name of the whole Church; or particular, which
are either National, when the learned of a whole Realm are called together; or
Prouincial, when as the Churches of one Province do assemble into one place to
consult of Religion.

There may be two especial occasions of Councels: the one for resisting and
rooting out of heresies; as the Apostles and elders met together, Act. 15.
against those which would have imposed the Jewish ceremonies upon the
believing Gentiles. So the Council of Nice was celebrated the year of the
Lord 327. to confound the heresy of Arrius, who denied Christ, as he was God,
to be equal to his Father. In the Council of Constantinople, Anno 383. or
there about, the heresy of Macedonius was condemned, which denied the holy
Ghost to be God: In the Ephesine Council the first, Nestorius heresy was
overthrown, which affirmed Christ to have two persons. Anno 434. The Council
of Chalcedon was collected Anno 454. about the heresy of Eutiches, which held
that there was in Christ but one nature after his incarnation, so confounding
his humanity and divinity together.

The other cause of the calling of Councels, is, to provide and establish
wholesome Laws, decrees and constitutions, for the government of the Church: so
the Apostles called the brethren together, Act. 6. to take order for the poor.
And in the Council of Nice an uniform order was established for the
celebration of Easter, which before had much troubled the Church.

The questions between us and the Papists, concerning Councels are these,
First, whether general Councels be absolutely necessary. Secondly, by whom
they ought to be called. Thirdly, of what persons they ought to consist.
Fourthly, who should be the president of the Council. Fifthly, concerning the
authority of them. Sixthly, whether they may err or not. Seauenthly, whether
they are above the Pope. Eighthly, of the conditions to be observed in general
Councels: of these in order.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERNING the necessity of Councels.
The assertion of the Papists.
THey seem in words to affirm, that General Councels are not absolutely
Bellarmine de council. lib. 1. cap. 11. And yet this is to be marvelled at, that
they should so much stand for Councels, seeing they might use a far more
compendious way, in referring all to the determination of the Pope, whom they
boldly, but very fondly affirm, that he cannot err.

Although they seem not to lay a necessity upon General Councels, yet in
truth they do contrary: for they allow no Councels at all, without the Popes
consent and authority, neither think it lawful for any Nation or Province,
to make within themselves any innovation or change of Religion. So in the
assembly at Zuricke. Anno 1523. For the reformation of Religion, Faber took
exception against that meeting, affirming that it was no convenient place, nor
fit time for the discussing of such matter, but rather the cognition and
tractation thereof belonged to a general Council. Sleid. lib. 3.

And further they hold, that what has been decreed in a Council, cannot be
dissolved but by the like Council, as if the Council of Trent were to be
disanulled, it must be done by the like Synod. Bellarmine de council. lib. 3.
ca. 21. Which Council they affirm to have been general, and therefore another
general Council must by their opinion necessarily be expected, before it can be
revoked.

The confession of the Protestants.
WE do hold that general Councels are an wholesome means for the repressing
and reforming, both of errors in Religion, and corruption in manners: and that
true general Councels ought to be much desired, and conveniently expected:
that is, such a Council, where every man frank and free may utter his mind
without fear: an holy Council, where every man may go about to set up
godliness, not to oppress the truth. Such a Council King Henry the eight of
worthy memory in his protestation for the Church of England, for not coming
to the Council of the Pope, truly affirms, that he desired, and craved
nothing so often of God: but because there is no hope of any such Council, seeing
the Pope would be the chief doer in it, and it is too unreasonable, that the
same man should be both a party, and a judge: we doubt not, but that it is
lawful by the word of God, for every Prince, Duke, Lord, within his own
seignorie, without any further delay, or expectation, by the advice and
Counsel of the learned and godly of the land, according to Gods Law, to
reform their Church.

First, because all delay in matters of the Church are dangerous, and
inconveniences are at the first hand to be met withal, as we see Act. 6. and
Act. 15. immediately, when any question did arise, the Apostles assembled
together. In the Council of Basile, where it was decreed, that the Pope was
subject to the Councels, Panormitane a stiff champion on the Popes side, would
have the decree stayed till the return of the Princes Ambassadors: But
Arelatensis that worthy Cardinal stepped up, and showed what danger there
might be in a small delay, by the example of Hannibal, who deferring his going
but one day to Rome, was driven clean out of Italy, having been very like to
have taken the city, if he had used the opportunity. But without all
controversy, matters of faith ought not to be delayed: which could not be
avoided, if a general Council should always be waited for.

Secondly, a Prince has the like authority in his dominion, as the householder
has in his house. But every man ought to reform his house, without any
further delay, aduisement or consultation, as Joshua says, I and my house will
serve the Lord, 24. verse. 15. Wherefore the Prince may and ought to perform
the like in his country.

Lastly, we find by experience, that the Lord has blessed such reformations,
which have been made by Princes in their own territories: as that in Zuricke
anno. 1523. at Berne, 1528. and the most happy reformation of our Church of
England* begun by King Henry the 8. increased by that most virtuous Prince
King Edward the 6. and prosperously continued and established by our gracious
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth.

I will add the testimony of Augustine: who answering to the Pelagians, which
objected that they were condemned by certain single Bishops in their own
Diocese, without a Synod, he says thus, Ac si congregatione synodi opus
erat, vt aperta pernicies damnaretur, quasi nulla haeresis aliquando, nisi
synodi congregatione damnata sit, etc. cont. 2. Epistol. Pelag. lib. 4. cap.
12. As though, says he, a Synod or Council were always necessary to
condemn a known heresy: Nay, we find that more heresies without
comparison, have been in the same places condemned, where they first sprang,
without any such necessity, more so, then otherwise.

THE SECOND QVESTION, BY WHOSE AVthoritie Councels ought to be called.
The Papists.
THey do generally hold, that general Councels ought only to be called and
appointed by the Popes authority, or his assignment: their goodly reasons

1 Councels ought to be congregate in the name of Christ, that is, by him that
has authority from Christ so to congregate them: see here is a goodly
exposition, to assemble in the name of Christ, is to assemble by the authority
of the Pope: so belike where Christ says, wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, etc. Christ will not be present with them,
unless we send up to Rome for license, that two or three may come together.

2 General Councels should be appointed by them, that have general authority
to command men to come to the Council: but this authority over the whole
Church never any Emperor had, in such ample manner, as the Pope has: Ergo.
Answer: first, it is a great untruth, that the Popes spiritual jurisdiction
which he falsely challenges, was at any time greater then the Emperors
dominion: for Constantine ruled over both the West and East Churches: but the
Churches of Greece were never, nor are not to this day subject to the sea of
Rome. For Pope Eugenius would have dissolved the Council of Basile under this
pretense, because the Greeks, which should come unto the Council for the
uniting of their Church, would not pass the Alps: but this uniting never went
forward, Anno. 1431. Again, if the commandment of one Emperor or Potentate
be not large enough to appoint a general Council, as in these days it is
not, it may be done by the consent and agreement of Princes.

The Protestants.
WE hold it as a fond and ridiculous assertion, that general Councels should
be ruled at the Popes beck, but that this authority is due, and has been of
old unto Christian Princes and Magistrates, and the Pope in so doing does but
usurp upon their right.

1 That the Pope has not absolute authority, to call, remove, dissolve, or
establish Councels, it is proved out of scripture: for Act. 6.2. the twelve
Apostles, and not Peter only, whose successor the Pope does falsely challenge
to be, called the multitude together about the election of Deacons.

2 The Councels in times past were sommoned by the Emperors, which our
adversaries themselves cannot deny, as the Nicene first, by Constantine the
great: Constantinopolitane. 1. by Theodosius the elder. Ephesin. 1. by
Theodosius the younger: Chalcedonens. by Martianus. But, say our adversaries,
these Councels were not appointed without the consent of the Bishops of Rome. I
marvel they are not ashamed so to say: for when Theodosius called the
Council of Chalcedon, Leo then Bishop of Rome, neither liked the time, for he
would have had it deferred, nor the place, being desirous to have it in Italy:
yet he was content to obey the Emperors commandment, and sent his Agents to
the Council, there to appear for him: Epist. 41.47.48. ad Martianum: This was
alleged by Tonstal and Stokeslie two archpapists in their Epistle to
Cardinal Poole.

3 It is a good reason which was alleged in the Council of Basile, that if
Popes only should call Councels, there should be no means left to withstand a
wicked and vicious Pope. Who would think (say they) that the Bishop of Rome
would congregate a Council, for his own correction, or deposition?

4 The Pope has no more authority, nor, by their leave, nothing like as Peter
had: but he challenged not this dignity amongst the Apostles, to summon
Councels. We read of four only Councels of the Apostles, say the fathers of
Basile (for this also is their argument) the first was for the choosing of
Matthias. Act. 1. congregate at the commandment of Christ, who enjoined them
not to depart from Jerusalem. The second. Act. 6. congregate by the twelve, not
Peter only, 4. Councels called by the Apostles.
for the election of Deacons. The third, which was holden as touching the
taking away of circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law, was gathered
together by a general inspiration, Act. 15.6. The fourth, wherein certain
things contained in the law are permitted, seems to be gathered by James.
Act. 21.18. Upon these reasons the Council thus concludes: that if the Pope
would resist, and have no Council congregate, yet if the greater part of the
Church do judge it necessary to have a Council, the Council may be
congregate, whether the Pope will or not. Ex Aenea Syluio, Fox. page 676. Col.
2.

5 Augustine says: Catholicos Episcopos and partis Donati iussu imperatoris
disputando inter se contulisse. Breuicul. collation. lib. 1. cap. 1. That the
Catholic Bishops and the Donatists, did meet together to dispute at the
commandment of the Emperor: There were in that Council, which was at
Carthage, of the Catholic Bishops 286. and of the Donatists 279.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF WHAT PERSONS the Council ought to consist.
The Papists.
WHereas there are four sorts of men usually present at Councels, the Princes
determining voice: Priests and other learned may dispute and have a
consultatiue voice: Princes are there to defend the Council, and see order
kept: other of the Laity may be there as officers and ministers, as Scribes
and Notaries: but the suffrages and voices must only be given by Bishops.
Eckius. loc. de council. Bellarm. de council. lib. 1. cap. 15. Let us see some of
their reasons.

First, to teach and to feed is proper for the Pastors only, and to establish
and decree in Council, is nothing else but to feed and teach: Ergo, Pastors
only must rule in Council: which none are but Bishops: Soli Episcopi pastores
sunt (says the Jesuit) neque laici neque ecclesiastici quicunque: Only
Bishops are pastors, and none other of the Clergy besides, and to them only,
he says, that is to be applied, Act. 20. Take heed to your selves, and the
flock, over the which God has made you overseers.

I answer. First, what an absurd saying is this and void of sense, that the
Bishop is the only pastor of his Diocese, and that every Minister is not
pastor in his own parish? Nay, if the Jesuit would speak truth, he shall
find that popish Bishops are neither Pastors nor Doctors, for the most of them
neither feed, nor teach: And they be not ashamed to profess it, Ann. 1540. or
thereabout, Thomas Forret Martyr, being found fault withal by the Bishop of
Dunkelden in Scotland, because he preached so often, exhorted the Bishop again,
and wished that he did preach. The Bishop answered: nay, nay, let that be, we
are not ordained to preach: and in further talk the blind blockish Bishop
bewrayed his own ignorance, I thank God (says he) that I never knew what
the old and new Testament was. Thereupon rose a common proverb in Scotland,
you are like the Bishop of Dunkelden, that knew neither the old nor new law.
Fox. Martyrol. page 1266.

With this blind saying of the popish Bishop, our country men of Rhemes also
do agree, which doubt not to say, that many which have no gift to preach, yet
for their wisdom and government, are not unmeet to be Pastors and Bishops.
Annot. in 1. Timoth. 5. sect. 13.

2 I answer, the Jesuit bewrays his ignorance, in making no difference
between communis, and propria politia ecclesiae: the common and special
policy and office of the Church: for there are proper offices and duties,
some of Pastors, some of governors, some of other Ministers: but this office
to be performed in general Councels, is not proper to Pastors, but common to
the whole Church: whereupon we deny, that it is Proprium pastorum munus,
suffragia far in concilijs: It is not the proper duty of Pastors, to give
voices and make decrees in Councels.

3 By the Jesuits argument, the fathers of Basile do conclude clean
contrary out of that place, 4. Ephesians. That because Christ instituted not only
Apostles and Prophets, but pastors and teachers for the work of the Ministry,
who doubts (say they) but that the governance also of the Church is committed
unto others together with the Apostles? And hence they infer, because the
work of the Ministry is laid upon the rest of the Clergy, that therefore
they ought not to be excluded from Councels.

Secondly, Panormitane in the Council of Basile thus reasons for Bishops:
that they were the pillars and keys of heaven, and therefore had only
deciding voices: Unto him answered at that time the wise and courageous
Cardinal Arelatensis, showing Augustines judgment upon those words (I will
give thee the keys of heaven) that the judicial power was given not only to
Peter, but also to the other Apostles, and to the whole Church, the Bishops,
the Priests. Whereupon he infers, that if the Priests have a judicial power
in the Church, they also ought to have a determining voice in Councels.

Thirdly, Lodouicus the Prothonotarie in the same Council thus argued: Albeit
(says he) Christ chose twelve Apostles and 70. Disciples, notwithstanding in
the setting forth of the Creed, only the Apostles were present, thereby
giving example, that matters of faith did pertain only to the Apostles, and
so consequently to Bishops. To him Arelatensis made this answer: First, it
followed not, because the Apostles only are named, that they therefore only
were present at the setting forth of the Creed: for we see that Princes bear
the name and commendation of many actions, which are done notwithstanding by
their helpers. 2. Lodouicus cannot be ignorant (says he) that there be some
articles in the Creed, which were not put to by the Apostles, but afterward by
general Councels: as that part, wherein mention is made of the holy Ghost,
which the Council of Lions did add: Thus much out of the Council of Basile.

The Protestants confession.
Our opinion grounded upon truth and scripture is this: that, not only
Bishops, but all other pastors admitted to the Council, and the learned and
discreet amongst the Lay men, ought to have concluding voices in Council: and
that rather the discussing and consulting of matters pertayneth to the learned
Divines, the deciding to all, then contrariwise.

First, that inferior pastors are to be joined with Bishops and Prelates, it
was amply proved in the Council of Basile, of the which I have so often made
mention, as noble Arelatensis reasons thus: The dignities of the fathers is
not to be respected but the truth: neither will I prefer a lie of any
Bishop, be he never so rich, before a verity or a truth of a poor Priest:
this is his first reason, that the truth ought to be received at any man's
mouth be he never so simple: and therefore Priests as well as Bishops are to
be admitted to the Council.

2 He declares the ancient practice of the Church: In the Council of Nice,
where there were assembled 322. Bishops, Athanasius being then only a Priest,
withstood the Arrians, and infringed their arguments: In the Synod of
Chalcedon, there were present six hundred Priests, which name is common both
to Bishops and Priests. When Paul Bishop of Antioch preached that Christ was
a man of common nature: the Council assembled against him at Antioch, where
the said Paul was condemned, neither was there any man, which did more
confound the said Paul, then one Malchion Priest of Antioch, which taught
Rhetoric there.

Concerning the second part, that lay men also with Priests ought to be
admitted: first we have testimony out of the word of God for it. Tit. 3.13.
for this cause Zenas the lawyer is joined as fellow in commission with Apollos.
But we have a more evident place. Act. 15.22. It seemed good to the Apostles
and Elders with the whole Church: here we see that not only the Elders but the
whole multitude, were admitted into consultation with the Apostles. To this
place our adversaries do thus answer: Lodouicus the Prothonotarie, first
thus rashly and fondly gave his verdicte in the Council of Basile, that there
was no argument to be gathered of the Acts of the Apostles, whose examples were
more to be maruayled at, then to be followed: A blasphemy of a Papist.
But to this Arelatensis replied, that he would stay himself most upon the
Apostles doings: for what, says he, is more comely for us to follow, then the
doctrine and customs of the primitive Church? And Aeneas Siluius reports
(who writes of the acts of that Council) that all men impugned this saying
of Lodouicus, that the Apostles were not to be followed, as a blasphemy.

Wherefore the Jesuit has found out another answer: he says that none but
the Apostles gave sentence, the rest only gave consent, and inward liking and
approbation: this cavil Arelatensis met withal long before the Jesuit was
borne, in the forenamed Council. Neither this word, says he, It seemed
good, signifies in this place consultation, but decision, and determination:
And so it does indeed: for seeing there is one word applied to them all,
(...), placuit, it seemed good to the Apostles, Elders and the whole multitude,
why should it not be taken in the one and self same sense, and after the same
manner understood of them all?

2. Seeing the Council does represent the whole Church, there ought to be
present and to give sentence of all sorts and callings of men: and the tather,
because the matter of faith and religion is a common cause, and as well
appertains to laymen as to Bishops, it behooves them also to be present:
And further it were more reasonable, that princes and temporal Magistrates
should bind their subjects to their laws, without their consent, then that
ecclesiastical persons should lay yokes upon Christians against their wills,
for civil matters are more indifferent and left to our choice, then spiritual
are: Yet we see there are no laws enacted in our Realm but by the high court
of Parliament, where always some are appointed for the commons, even the whole
nether house, without whose consent no act can pass. So it were very
reasonable, that no law should be laid upon the Church, without the general
consent thereof.

3. Lastly, Augustines judgment we heard before alleged by Arelatensis, that
seeing the judicial power of the keys is committed to the whole Church, to
Bishops, to Priests, they all ought to be entertained in general Councels.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, WHO OUGHT to be the president and chief moderator in
Councels.
The Papists.


1. The Pope is the chief pastor of the universal Church, for unto Peter
only it was said, pasce oues meas, feed my sheep, and he is called and
saluted in Councels by the name of father: and all other both Princes and
Bishops are sheep in respect of him.

We answer, first, in the Jesuits argument, there is petitio principij, a
foul fault in a good Logician, though it be none in a Sophister, still to
beg that which is in question: for yet he has not proved that the Pope is
the universal pastor. 2. That place, feed my sheep, proves it not:
Augustine says, redditur negationi trinae trina confessio, ne minus amori
lingua seruiat, quam timori. in Johan. tract. 123. he recompenceth a threefold
denial, with a threefold confession, lest that his tongue should be less
serviceable to love, then it was to fear: so then, by this fathers judgment,
it was no privilege to Peter to be thrice admonished, but he is thereby put
in mind of his thrice denial of Christ. Again, I marvel the Jesuit can so
soon forget himself: for in the 15. chapter before, he proved by these words
(feed my sheep) that Bishops only were pastors, and he can now turn the
words to serve only for the Pope. 3. What great matter is it for the Pope to
be called father, seeing he is not ignorant that all Bishops assembled in
Council and other learned, are called by that name. Nay, it is no rare matter
for other Bishops to be saluted by the name of Pope: as Prosper writing to
Augustine, twice in one Epistle calls him, beatissimum Papam, most blessed
Pope, Tom. 7.4. Princes and Bishops to the Pope are sheep, says the Jesuit.
1. For Bishops, though he had a jurisdiction over all, which will stick in his
teeth to prove, yet shall they be no more his sheep, then Priests are to
Bishops, and Bishops to their Metropolitanes, who cannot be said to be their
sheep, though they have some preeminence over them: for Augustines rule must
stand, nemo se nostrum episcopum episcoporum constituit. De baptism. 2.2. No
man is a Bishop of Bishops, nor shepherd of shepherds. Secondly, for Princes
he has nothing to do with any but those in his own Bishopric, and as they
are his sheep one way, as they are taught of him, so he and his Cardinals are
the Magistrates sheep another way, and in respect of the civil government he
is their shepherd: And both he and they, prince and priest are sheep-fellows,
under Jesus Christ the chief shepherd: as Augustine says, tanquam vobis
pastores sumus, sed sub illo pastore vobiscum oues sumus, in Psalm. 126. we are
shepherds to you, but both you and I are sheep under that great shepherd.

The Protestants.
WE do truly affirm, that the Sovereign Majesty of the Emperor and chief
Magistrate, or his legate, if he either be present himself, or send, ought to
be president of the Council: Or else in their absence, one to be chosen and
elected by the Council for that function, as Cardinal Arelatensis was chosen in
the Council of Basile by the fathers to be moderator.

First, that it belongs to the Prince, to have this prerogative, it is hence
proved, because he is the chief judge in all matters and causes, both civil
and eccesiasticall: And it appears by the ancient practice of the godly
kings in Israel and Judah. David gathered a Council together, when he brought
the Arc to Jerusalem. 1. Chronicl. 15.3. where he was the chief doer, and
director; for he appointed the Levites their courses, and set forth a certain
form of thanksgiving to be used. 1. Chronicl. 16.4.7. Hezekiah assembled a
Council. 2. Chronicl. 30.2. where it was decreed, that the passover should be
solemnly kept: and the posts were sent forth with the kings writ or
commission. In Josiah his reign there was a great assembly at Jerusalem, of
the Princes, the people, priests and Levites, and al from the greatest to the
smallest: where the king him self was president and chief agent, reading the
law before the people. 2. Chronicl. 34.30.31.

Secondly, we find that the Emperors themselves have been present at
Councels: As in the Nicene, Constantine the great was present: in the Council
of Chalcedon, Martianus: in the Constantinopolitane 3. Constantinus the
Emperor: in the Constantinopl. 4. Basilius the Emperor was present. Is it to
be thought that these noble Emperors, were at the Councels as inferiors or
underlings? or had they not the chief places? then sure they were presidents:
for in the Council the chief place belongs to the president. They might
appoint a speaker or prolocutor for them, as in the parliament house, though
the prince be present, yet the Lord Chancellor speaks: but the chief power
and Sovereignty in the Council, was in the Emperors.

Thirdly, not to heap up many reasons in so plain a cause: I will allege
one example most manifest out of Augustine: who writes that in that great
Council at Carthage where the matter was discussed between the Catholics and
the Donatists, there being present more then 500. Bishops of both sides,
Marcellinus was appointed to be moderator of that disputation: who diverse times
puts in his sentence in the disputation, and last of all, bidding both parts
to go aside, he writes the sentence definitive, and concludes against the
Donatists, approving the acts of the Catholic Bishops. haec August. breuicul.
collation.

THE FIFTE QVESTION WHETHER Councels may err or not.
The Papists.
Basile concluded, who is it, say they, that will prefer a sinful man before
an undefiled Church? But Bellarmine more the Popes friend then so, holds,
that even general Councels may err, unless they follow the instructions and
directions of the Pope: Yea that it is not sufficient for the pope to call a
Council, and send his Legate thither, but he must write continually for
advertisement from his master before any thing be concluded: and therefore
they doubt not to say, that the Council of Basile erred, though it had the
consent of the Popes Legate, in defining, that the Council is above the Pope,
because he had no such direction from the Pope, Bellarmine de council. lib. 2.
cap. 11.

Nay the Jesuit goes further, that particular Councels being approved by the
Pope cannot err. cap. 5. So they hold that the holy fathers of the cruel
Inquisition cannot err: Yea Panormitane was not ashamed to say openly in the
Council of Basile, that he would prefer the judgment of the Cardinals of Rome
before all the world. This then is the Jesuits opinion, that no Councels by
the pope confirmed can err: and that a particular Council having his
allowance, is to be preferred before a general without. Let us see some of
their reasons.

1. They abuse certain places of scripture for their purpose: as that Act. 15.
It seemed good to us, and the holy Ghost: I am with you to the end of the
world: He that hears you, hears me. Bellarmine cap. 2. Rhemist. in Act.
15.8.10. so then thus they argue, Councels are never without the spirit of
God, therefore can they not err. A silly argument, as though the spirit of
God were at their commandment, or were tied to places or persons: They must
first perform the condition, before they can challenge the promise: that is, to
follow the rule of Gods word, and obediently to submit themselves thereunto,
then will God vouchsafe to be present: The Gospel says, that wheresoever two
or three are gathered together in my name, I will be present even in the midst
of them: Here promise is made not to thousands or hundreds, but to two or
three: and therefore by this place an assembly of few persons may as well be
exempted from error, as Councels: but there is a condition, In nomine meo, in
my name, and then follows, in medio illorum, in the midst of them: if then
they are not met in the Lords name, they cannot look for the presence of
Christ. I pray you where was the holy Ghost present in that Council at Rome
under John. 23. when there appeared a great Oule, which stared and out faced
the pope, who blushing at the matter, and fuming, rose up and departed? At the
sight of which Owl they whispered one in another ear, that the spirit
appeared in the likeness of an Owl: and after that, in an other session the
same Owl appeared, and could not be driven away, until by throwing bats and
cudgels at her, she fell down dead before them. ex Nichol. Clemang. In the
beginning of the Council of Consta^ce after the accustomed hymn song, veni
sancte spiritus, a bil was set up with these words, alijs rebus occupati nunc
adesse non possumus, We are now otherwise occupied, we cannot be present with
you. We see now how sure the Papists are of the holy Ghost in their popish
Councels.

The Protestants.
WE doubt not to say, that Councels have erred, and may err, presuming any
thing besides the warrant of Gods word, and that neither universal or
particular Councels are privileged, much less any one man, no nor the Pope,
not to err in matters of faith, otherwise, then following the truth of the
Scriptures, for in so doing, they are sure, not to be deceived.

1. We have also examples in the scripture of Councels that erred, as that
assembly in Achabs days of 400. Prophets, who were al deceived: the Jesuit
thus answers, that it was an assembly of prophets, not of priests: as though
priests were more piuiledged from error, than Prophets. And these, say they,
were false Prophets, not Prophets of the Lord: We grant so, and this withal,
that wheresoever the Lords Prophets, and pastors, and ministers assemble, that
there they will hear the Lords voice: which the Pope in his Councels does not.
But he still supposes, that the Pope and his ministers are Christ's Disciples:
which is an unreasonable supposition, seeing we hold him to be Antichrist, and
that the Jesuit knows.

Such a Council was that of the Jews, John 9. where all they were
excommunicate that confessed Christ, and Mark. 14* Christ himself was by the
Council condemned: It cannot be denied, that this Council erred. Let us hear
the papists goodly answers: some say, that the Council erred in a matter of
fact, de facto, non de iure, not in a case of right, as whether Christ should
be put to death: as though in condemning him, they denied not that he was the
Messiah: other, that they erred in their own opinion, not in the sentence
given, for Christ indeed was guilty of death, say they, because he did bear
our sins: the Jesuit finds not much fault with this answer, and yet it is
an open blasphemy, as is that also of the papists, that the Jews had sinned
mortally, if they had not put Christ to death. Some of them say, the Council
erred not in that which was done, but in the manner of judgment, because it was
tumultuous and disorderly, Popish blasphemies.
and done by suborning of false witnesses: and this says the Jesuit, is
probabilis responsio, a probable answer says he, being most impious and
blasphemous. But he dare not rest in this answer, but finds out a fourth of
his own, that the chief priests and Councels of the Jews could not err
before the coming of Christ, but after he was come, they might. A blind
popish answer* for does not Christ every where impugn the traditions and
decrees of the Elders, as Mark. 7. which our Savior should not have done
belike, seeing the Elders before his coming could not err: or will they say,
that those traditions were right and good before, and afterward erroneous? I
know not else, what they should say.

3. We see by experience that many councels have erred: we let pas those which
the Jesuit himself confesses to have erred, as the third Counsel of Antioch,
where Athanasius was condemned, and the Arrian heresy approved: the Council
of Arimine, where the same heresy was furthered: the fourth Ephesine approving
Eutiches heresy: These Councels, though they were general, the papists
confess to have erred, and they have a trick to shift it off, but a silly one
God knows. They were not approved by the Pope, say they: As though all
verity and knowledge in the whole earth were locked up in the Popes breast.

But we will bring an instance of such Councels as the Pope allowed, and yet
by the papists own confession erred. In the Council of Naeo-Caesarea,
confirmed by Leo 4. in the 7. canon: second marriage is forbidden. In the
Council Toletan. 1. the 17. canon: it is thus written, that one may be admitted
to the communion, though he have a concubine, modo non sit vxoratus, so he be
not wiued: the Jesuits poor shift is this, that a concubine is here
understood for a wife without a dowry, and further says, that Agar was
Abraham's wife, and not his concubine, against the scripture: for Abraham should
have done evil in sending of her away as he did, if she were his wife, and the
scripture calls Sara by the name only of Abraham's wife, the other by the
name of a bond woman, Genesis 21.8.12.

In the sixth Synod confirmed by Adrian the 1. canon. 72. the marriages between
Catholics and heretics are adjudged to be void. In the second Council of
Nice, act. 5. it was concluded, that Angels and men's souls are bodily and
circumscriptible.

In the Council of Rome under Pope Stephan the 7. all the acts of Formosus his
predecessor were revoked: And in the Council of Rauenna under John. 9. Pope,
Formosus acts were established, and Stephans decrees abrogate.

Lastly, in the Council of Constance, they are excommunicate, that receive the
sacrament in both kinds: the Council of Basile on the contrary side permits
and gives leave to the Bohemians to use both kinds. One of these Councels,
must needs err, and both of them were confirmed by the Popes: the Council of
Constance by Martin the 5. the Council of Basile by Foelix 5. By this induction
of many particulars we infer and conclude, that Councels even approved by the
Pope, may and have erred,

4. Lastly, Augustines opinion is this, that prouincial Councels ought to give
place to general: Et ipsa plenaria priora posteriorib. emendari, and the former
general Councels must be amended by the latter. The Rhemists have found out
this shift, that in matters indifferent, which are to be changed, according to
time and place, Councels may be altered, Act. 15. sect. 8. But to that it is
answered, that the word emendare, signifies not only a change, but a
correcting of that which is amiss. And that clause of Augustines must be put
in, why Councels must be amended: si a veritate deuiatum fit, if they swerve
from the truth, de baptism. lib 2. cap. 3. Wherefore we conclude, that Councels
may err.

THE SIXTH QVESTION CONCERNING THE AVthority of general Councels, whether they
may absolutely determine without scripture, and necessarily bind all men to
the obedience of their Canons.
The Papists.
IN words they would seem to magnify the scripture above Councels: for
Bellarmine lib. 2. de con. cap. 12. Here is a goodly gloss, but nothing to the
purpose: for in that they say the Church has absolute authority to declare
and pronounce which is the word, (which indeed it has not without testimony
and warrant of the word it self) by this means it comes about, that much is
taken for the word of GOD which is not: and so the Church does not only
declare the word, but makes that the word which is not.

First, beside the Apocrypha, which they make part of the word, as we have
showed before, they hold that their traditions are also the word of God.
Bellarmine cap. 12. Secondly Gratian is so bold to affirm that the decretall
Epistles of the Popes are to be counted amongst the Canonical scriptures, did.
19. can. in canonicis, and that the Canons of Councels are of the same
authority, did. 20. can. decretales. And Greg. 1. epist. 24. says, he does
reverence the 4. general Councels, as the four Evangelists. Thirdly, they
shamefully affirm, that whatsoever the pastors and priests do teach in the
unity of the Church, is the word of God, Rhemens. 1. These. 2. v. 12.

First then they conclude, that Councels are not bound to determine according
to the scriptures, but as judges may determine of their own authority.
Secondly, that al men are bound of necessity to receive the decrees of
Councels, without any further trial or examination. They reason thus; out of
the scripture.

1. Deuteronomy. 17.12. He that harkeneth not unto the priest, that man shall die. But
mark I pray you, what goes before, v. 11. according to the law which they shall
teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, shall
thou do: see then, here is no absolute judicial power given to the priest but
according to the law of God.

2. The example of the Apostles Act. 15. is as fo^dly alleged, where it was
decreed (says the Jesuit) that ye Gentiles should not be burdened with
ceremonies, which says he, was not determined by the scriptures but by the
absolute suffrages of the Apostles. Again, their decrees were absolutely
imposed upon the Churches, without any further examination of the Disciples.
Ergo, we are now also absolutely bound to obey all decrees of Councels, Bellar.
de council. 1.18.

We answer: first, it is false, that this matter was determined without
scripture: for James alleges scripture: and Peter thus reasons, we believe
through the grace of God to be saved as well as they v. 11. therefore what need
this yoke of ceremonies? 2. Though there had been no scripture, who sees not
that the spirit of God so ruled the Apostles, that their writings and holy
actions should serve for scripture unto the ages following? Thirdly, the
Disciples needed not to examine their decrees, knowing that they were governed
by the spirit, as they themselves write: It seemed good to us and the holy
Ghost: yet we see the brethren of Bereae searched the scripture for the truth
of those things which the Apostles preached, Act. 17.11. When they can prove
such a plenarie power and fulness of the spirit in their pastors and Councels,
as was in the Apostles, we will also believe them.

The Protestants.
WE do firmly believe that neither the Church nor Councels have any such
absolute power to determine without the holy scriptures, either beside or
against them, or to bind other men to obey such decrees: Neither that the true
Church of God dare or will arrogate such power unto it self: But that Councels
are ordained for the discussing and deciding of doubtful matters, according to
the scriptures, and word written.

1. If the Apostles preachings might be examined according to scripture, much
more the acts of all other Bishops and pastors. But that was lawful in the
Disciples of Berea, Act. 17.11. which are commended for it: therefore called
noble, courageous Christians, because of this their promptnes, and diligence in
searching out of the truth. Ergo.

2. All things necessary to salvation to be believed, are articles of our
faith: but al such articles must be grounded upon the word of God, therefore
nothing can be imposed as necessary to salvation without the word of God.
Wherefore it is a blasphemous saying of the papists, that the Church may make
new articles of faith, Rhemens. annot. in 1. Tim. 3. sect. 9. and Eckius
maintained the same point against Luther, in the disputation at Lipsia, and
brought forth a new article of faith, agreed of in the Council of Constance,
that it is de necessitate salutis, of the necessity of salvation, Martyrol.
Fox. p. 848.
to believe that the Pope is the head of the Church. The fathers of Basile more
modest then so, concluding that it was an article of faith to believe that
Councels were above the Pope, do use this reason: those things, say they,
which we allege for the superiority of general Councels are gathered out of
the sayings of our Savior Christ. Martyrol. Fox. p. 677.
Ergo, we are al bound to obey them. Therefore we conclude, that the word of
God only written is the rule of faith, and al things necessary to be believed,
Romans 10.10. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word. Councels are to
explane and declare articles of faith, not to establish new.

3 Lastly we will hear Augustine speak, Nec tu debes Ariminense, neque ego
Nicaenu^ tanqua^ praeiudicaturus proferre concilium, scripturarum
authoritatibus, etc. Neither must I allege the Nicen Council, nor you the
Arimine, I am neither bound to the one, nor you to the other, let the matter be
tried by Scripture, cont. Maximu. Arrianum lib. 3. cap. 14. By this fathers
sentence therefore, no man is bound of necessity to be tied to Councels, but
the Scripture only is absolutely to be believed.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, WHETHER Councels be above the Pope or not.
The Papists.
THis is a matter yet not fully determined amongst the Papists. Neither are
Constance and Basile, it was fully concluded: that the Council is above the
Pope: Gerson of Paris, that was also present in the Council of Constance, and
a great dooer against John Hus, stiffly maintains the authority of Councels
above the Pope. Other Papists more favorable to their new God amight, say, that
the Pope is by right above the Council, but he may (if he will) submit himself
to the Council. But now comes in the stout Jesuit, and says with the rest
of the schoolmen, that the Pope has such a sovereignty above the Council,
that he cannot be subject to their sentence, though he would. Bellar. de
council. lib. 2.14. Yet he is in a mammering with himself, for says he, in
periculo schismatis, when there is a schism, and it is not known who is the
true Pope, in such a case the Council is above the Pope: Let us examine some
of his best reasons.

1 Now comes in a great blasphemy. All the names, says the Jesuit, that
are given to Christ in the Scriptures, as head of the Church, are ascribed to
the Pope, as he is called fidelis dispensator. Luc. 12. a faithful steward in
the Lords house, pastor gregis, John 10. the shepherd of the flock, Caput
corporis ecclesiae. Ephesians. 4. the head of his body the Church, vir seu
sponsus, Ephesians. 5. the husband or spouse of the Church: all these titles, says
he, are due to the Pope, Ergo, he is above the Church, and so consequently
above general Councels. Bellar. de council. lib. 2.17.

O Lord what great blasphemy is here, to appropriate the titles of Christ, to
a mortal man: But go to Bellarmine, and the rest of that pack, fill up the
measure of iniquity of your forefathers: say with Pope Athanasius, that the
people of the world are the parts of his body: with Cornelius the Bishop in
the Council of Trent, the Pope being the light came into the world, and men
loved darkness rather then light: with Pope Calixtus in the Council of Rhemes,
who, when he saw the Council would not consent to excommunicate the Emperor,
impiously cried out, that they had forsaken him, as Christ was left of his
Disciples: with Innocentius the third, that all things in Heaven and earth, and
under the earth do bow the knee unto him: with Otho no Pope, but a Cardinal,
that sitting amongst his Bishops, blasphemously applied to himself the vision
of Ezechiel cap. 1. resembling the Bishops to the sower faced beasts, himself
unto God that approached to the Prophet in the midst. Even thus with the like
spirit of blasphemy, do the Jesuits cry out, that the Pope is the chief
shepherd, steward, husband, and head of the Church upon earth.

But we will leave to charge them so deeply with blasphemy, which
notwithstanding they cannot avoid: Let us hear, what the fathers of Basile
say to this point. Bellarmine says, the Pope is the husband: but they reason
clean contrary: the Church (say they) is the spouse of Christ: the Pope, make
the best of him you can, is but a Vicar: but no man does so ordain a Vicar,
that he makes his spouse subject unto him, but that the spouse is always
thought to be of more authority then the Vicar, for so much as she is one body
with her husband, but the Vicar is not so: thus have they to the full answered
the Jesuit, ex Aenea Syluio. Better arguments they have none for the Popes
prerogative, then we have seen.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope is by right, and ought to be subject to general Councels, and
that they have authority to judge, examine, suspend, punish, and depose him,
if there be just cause, it is proved thus. This matter was pithilie disputed
upon by the Fathers of Basile, some of whose reasons, it shall be sufficient
here to follow.

1 They prove this conclusion out of Scripture. First, whereas Panormitane had
said, that the Pope was Lord of the Church, unto him Segouius answered, that
it was the most honorable title of the Bishop of Rome, to be called the
servant of the servants of God: and Peter, says he, forbids pastors to
behave themselves as Lords over the Clergy, 1. Pet. 5. And if Christ the son
of God, came not to be ministered unto, but to minister and serve, how then can
his Vicar have any dominion? So was Panormitane answered.

Again, the Divines thus argued: Christ says to Peter, dic Ecclesiae, Peter
is sent to the Church or Council: Ergo the verity does remit the Bishop of
Rome to the Council. But to this the Jesuit says, that Peter was not yet
entered into his office to be chief Bishop, but was as a private person. So
then belike, this rule of our Savior Christ, dic Ecclesiae, tell it to the
Church, did but bind Peter, till Christ were ascended, and he received his
Vicar-dome.

This cauillous answer the Fathers of Basile wisely foresaw, and prevented it,
for they show how Peter was subject to Councels even after the ascension, as
Act. 11. Peter is rebuked (say they) by the congregation, because he went to
Cornelius an heathen man, as if it had not been lawful for him to attempt any
great matter without the knowledge of the congregation: but that seems to
make more for the purpose, Galath. 2. where Paul rebuked Peter to his face,
because contrary to the decree of the Council of the Apostles, he did cogere
gentes Iudaizare, he would constrain the Gentiles to do like the Jews.
Ergo, Peter was subject unto the Council, ex Aenea Syluio.

Other reasons many were alleged by the Fathers of Basile. First the Bishop of
Burgen: As in every well ordered Kingdom, the whole realm should be of more
authority then the King, so the Church ought to be of more authority then the
Pope, though he were Prince thereof.

The Divines brought these arguments: the Church is the mother of the
faithful, and so of the Pope, if he be a faithful man: the Pope is then the
Churches son, as both Anacletus and Calixtus Bishops of Rome confessed. Ergo
how much the son is inferior to his mother, so much is the Church superior
to the Pope. Secondly, the Pope is inferior to Angels, he is not greater then
John Baptist, of whom it is said, that the least in the Kingdom of God is
greater then he: but the Angels do reverently accord unto the doctrine of the
Church. Ephesians. 3.10. Ergo the Pope is bound to do the same, who is less then
the Angels. These Fathers thought none so absurd to deny the Pope to be
inferior to Angels, and therefore labor not to prove it. Yet Antoninus an
old Papist says, Non minor honor datur Papae, quam Angelis, there is no less
honor due to the Pope then to the Angels. Nay another says (I think it be
Pope Paschalis) Datur Episcopis, quod ne Angelis, vt Christi corpus crearent:
it is granted to Bishops, which is not given to the Angels, to create the
body of Christ. But the Fathers of Basile thought not these men worthy the
answer, no more do we, and so let the^ pass. Thirdly, the Pope (say they)
being the Vicar of the Church, for he is more truly so called, then the Vicar
of Christ* he may be deposed of the Church: for a Lord may put out his Vicar at
his pleasure. Ergo the Pope is under Councels.

4 If the Councels might not ouerrule the Pope, there were no remedy left to
resist a wicked Pope: Shall we suffer all things, say they, to run into ruin
and decay with him? for it is not like, that he would congregate a Council
against himself. To this the Jesuit answers, that there is no remedy left,
but to pray to God in such a case; who will either confound or convert such a
Pope. Here is goodly divinity: we know that Antichrist shall at length be
destroyed at the coming of Christ: but if he should be let alone in the mean
while, and not be bridled, he might do much hurt, as he has done too much
already. Yet the Jesuit confesses, that a wicked Pope may be resisted by
force and arms: and why not, I pray you, as well by peaceable means? these
sayings are contrary. Bellarm. cap. 19.

So then this is Popish divinity, that be the Pope never so wicked, do he
never so much harm, he is not to be controuled of any mortal man. Such
doultish school points maintained especially by begging friars, the fathers of
Basile complained of: As that they should say, that no man ought to judge the
high and principal seat, that it cannot be judged, either by Emperor,
Clergy, King or people. Other affirm, that the Lord has reserved to himself
the depositions of the chief Bishop: Others, yet more mad, are not ashamed to
affirm, that the Bishop of Rome, though he carry souls in never so great
number to hell, yet is he not subject to any correction, or rebuke. For all
these strange and blasphemous positions, the fathers concluded, as ye have
heard, that the Pope ought to obey general Councels.

4 Lastly, I will adioyne the judgment of Augustine, who writing in his 162.
Epistle concerning the Donatists, whose cause was heard and determined by the
Emperors appointment at Rome before Miltiades then Bishop there, and other
Bishops assistants: and yet for all this the Donatists would not be quiet:
Thus he says, Putemus, illos iudices, qui Romae iudicauerunt, non bonos
iudices fuisse: Restabat adhuc plenarium Concilium, etc. Put case (says he)
that the Bishop of Rome and the rest, judged corruptly: there remained yet
another remedy: A general Council might have been called, where the judges
and the cause might further have been tried, and examined, and their judgment,
if there were cause, reuersed. Whereby it appears, say the fathers of Basile,
that not only the sentence of the Pope alone, but also the Pope with his
Bishops joined with him, might be made frustrate by a Council. Here the
Jesuit paltreth and says, that a matter determined by the Pope in a
particular Council may be called again in question by the Pope in a general
Council. First what need that, seeing that a particular Council having the
Popes authority, as the Jesuit confesses, cannot err? Again, Augustine
says, vbi cum ipsis iudicibus causa possit agitari: In the which general
Council the cause and the former judges, of the which Miltiades was one, may
be tried and examined, so that the Pope himself might be adjudged by the
Council, and not the cause only. Upon the Premises we truly and justly
conclude, that the Pope is and of right ought to be subject to general
Councels.

THE EIGHT QVESTION, OF THE CONditions and quality of general Councels.
The Papists.
THeir unreasonable and unequal conditions, are these and such like, as
follow.

1 That the Pope only should have authority to summon, call, proroge,
dissolve and confirm Councels, and he only to be the judge, president and
moderator in Councels, or some at his appointment.

2 They will have none to give voices but Bishops, and such as are bound by
oath of allegiance to the Pope.

3 That the Council is not bound to determine according to Scripture, but to
follow their traditions, and former decrees of Councels.

4 That no Council is in force without the Popes assent, yea the Pope himself
(say they) by his sole authotitie may abrogate and disanull the canons and
decrees of Councels.

These and such other conditions the Papists require in their Councels: So they
will be sure, that nothing shall be concluded against them.

The Protestants.
Our conditions, which we would have observed and kept, in general Counsels,
are these, most just and reasonable:

1 That the Pope, which is a party, should be no judge: for it is unreasonable,
that the same man should be both a party and a judge: and therefore he ought
not to meddle with calling and appoynting Councels, with ruling, or moderating
them, seeing it is like, he would work for his own advantage.

2 That such a time and place be appointed, as when and where the Churches of
Christendom may most safely and conveniently meet together: not at such a
time, as Paulus the third, called a Council, when all Princes in Christendom
were occupied in great affairs: nor such a place, as he the^ appointed at
Mantua in Italy, whither Princes could not come without peril of journey and
danger of life, being penned in by the Popes garrisons. Thus Pope, or Bishop
Leo, (for then there were no Popes) writ to Martianus the Emperor, to have the
Council removed from Calchis to Italy, but he prevailed not. So Pope
Eugenius would have dissolved the Council at Basile, and brought it under his
own nose.

3 We would have it a free Council, where every man might fully utter his
mind, and that there should be a safe conduct granted to al to come and go:
which the Pope for all his fair promises is unwilling to do, as it was flatly
denied to Hierome of Prage in the Council of Constance: to whom it was
answered, that he should have safe conduct to come, but none to go. Neither if
they should give a safe conduct, were they to be trusted, for it cannot be
forgotten, to their perpetual infamy, that they brake the Emperor Sigismunds
safe conduct granted to John Husse in the Council of Constance, saying, that
faith was not to be kept with Heretics.

4 That the matter should not be left wholly to Bishops and Prelates, but that
the learned of the Clergy and Laity besides, should give voices, seeing the
cause of religion is common, and concerns all. But most of all, that nothing
be carried with violence or popularitie, against the Scriptures, but every
matter determined according to the truth thereof.

Such a Council we refuse not, nay we much desire, which is the true
general Council: that is not general, where all men cannot speak; no
freedom nor liberty granted for men to utter the truth, where all things
are partially handled, and are swayed by one man's authority. Wherefore the
Rhemists slander us in saying we rail upon general Councels. annot. in Act.
15.10. and that we refuse them. 2. Galath. 2. Whether we or they are enemies
to true, general, free, holy, indifferent Councels let all men judge.

THE FOVRTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING THE BISHOP OF ROME, COMMONLY
CALLED THE POPE.
THis great and weighty controversy contains ten several questions.

1 Whether the regiment of the Church be Monarchical.

2 Whether Peter were the Prince of the Apostles, and by our Savior Christ
made head of the Church.

3 Whether Peter were at Rome, and dyed Bishop there.

4 Whether the Bishop of Rome be the true successor of Peter.

5 Concerning the primacie of the Bishop of Rome: six parts of the question.
First, whether he have authority over other Bishops. Secondly, whether
appeals are to be made to Rome. Thirdly, whether the Pope be subject to the
judgment of any. Fourthly, whether he may be deposed. Fifthly, what primacy he
has over other Churches. Sixthly, of his titles and names.

6 Whether the Bishop of Rome may err, and likewise whether the Church of Rome
be subject to error.

7 Of the spiritual jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome: two parts. First,
whether he can make laws to bind the conscience. Secondly, whether other
Bishops do receive their jurisdiction from him.

8 Of the Popes temporal jurisdiction: two parts. First, whether he have
authority above Kings and princes* Secondly, whether he be a temporal prince.

9 Of the prerogatives of the Pope.

10 Concerning Antichrist: nine parts. First, whether Antichrist shall be some
one singular man. Secondly, of the time of his coming. Thirdly, of his name.
Fourthly, of his nation and kindred. Fifthly, where his place and seat shall be.
Sixthly, of his doctrine and manners. Seventhly, of his miracles. Eighthly, of
his kingdom and wars. Ninthly, whether the Pope be the very Antichrist: of
these in their order.

THE FIRST QVESTION, WHETHER THE Regiment of the Church be Monarchical.
tribuni plebis, the officers for the people had the chief authority. Now of
all these in commonwealth matters, the first kind is the best and safest, the
Monarchical or princely government. The question now is, whether the same
form ought to be retained in Church-gouernement: and in this question
certain things are to be observed: First, that we have not to deal in this
place with that part of Ecclesiastical regiment, wherein the prince has
interest, as in ordayning Ecclesiastical Laws, and seeing to the execution
thereof: but the question is only of that regiment Ecclesiastical, which is
proper to the governors of the Church, which consists in the ministry of
the word and Sacraments, in ordaining and electing of Church-ministers, in the
dispensing of the keys of the Church, in the Ecclesiastical censures and
discipline, and such like: whether in the Church there ought to be one chief
Bishop, from whom all other receive this power in the premises. Secondly, the
question is not of the spiritual government of Christ, who is the chief
Monarch and King of his Church, but of the outward and external regiment upon
earth. Thirdly, we speak not of the state of any particular Church, either
national, provincial, or oppidall, but of the general state of the Church:
whether over all Churches there ought to be one chief Bishop. These things
premised, we come now to the question.

The Papists.
THat there ought to be one chief Monarch and high Bishop over all the
Church, in all Ecclesiastical matters, for the deciding of controversies,
preserving the unity of the Church, from whom all other Ecclesiastical
Ministers do receive their power and authority, they thus would prove.

1 The militant Church is in all things answerable and correspondent to the
triumphant company in Heaven: as Heb. 8.5. Moses was bid to make all things
according to the pattern showed in the Mount. But in heaven there is beside God
himself, a Monarch and chief commander of the Angels, even Michael the
Archangel, Revel. 12.7. Michael and his Angels fought. Ergo, it ought to be so
upon earth.

We answer. First, the Church upon earth, neither is, nor can be altogether
like to the celestial congregation: for there is no temple, Revel. 21.22.
There shall enter no unclean thing: and many such like differences there are:
We are bid to follow them in holiness and obedience, so far we must imitate
the Angels, as in the Lords prayer 3. Petit. As for imitation and conformity
in other things, we have no such commandment: we are promised hereafter to be
like them, but that is not yet. Neither does that place prove any such thing,
Heb. 8. For how follows it, Moses was showed a pattern to make the Tabernacle
by, Ergo the Church has a pattern of her government from Heaven? When they
can show any such pattern revealed in the word, (for their dreams and
fantasies we will not believe) for the Church, as Moses had for the Tabernacle,
then they shall say somewhat.

2 It is a vain controversy so to descant of the Angels, as to appoint them a
Captain and commander, and to make nine orders or bands of them, as our
Rhemist. annot 1. Ephesians. verse. 21. These are but their dreams, they have not a
word in Scripture for it. And concerning Michael, they are much deceived, for
in that place Apocal. 12.7. Christ is called Michael: Michael and his Angels
fought against the Dragon. And who I pray you is the chief Captain of the
Church against the devil and his host but Christ? And so is it expounded
verse 10. Now is salvation in Heaven, and the strength and Kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ: Here he is called Christ, who before is Michael.
In other places also, Michael is understood to be Christ, as Dan. 10.21. there
is none that holds with me but Michael your Prince: here Michael is the
prince of the Church, and not of the Angels. And that Michael is not the prince
of the Angels, as our adversaries mean, taking Michael for an Angel, it is
proved out of the 13. verse. Michael one of the chief princes: the Angels are
all called princes, and not one to be prince above them.

Likewise the nature and signification of the word Michael agrees hereunto:
Tremel.
for it is compounded of three hebrew particles, as much as to say, one that is
equal unto GOD: which name in that sense cannot be given unto any creature.

Further, Epistle Iud. 9. there is mention made of Michael the Archangell, who
strove against the devil, and said, the Lord rebuke thee Satan: where the
Apostle alludeth, to that place of Zacher. 3.2. where the very same words are
found: but there the prophet calls him Jehovah, that spoke those words, and
here the Apostle calls him Michael: so that in this place it must needs be
understood for Christ.

But to conclude, we deny not, but that Michael may be the name of some
glorious Angel: but out of these places it cannot be proved. And again, we
will not stand with them, but that there may be degrees of excellency amongst
the Angels, as there shall be amongst the Saints: but that any one has any
such sovereign and commanding authority over the rest, it is a curious and
presumptuous surmise.

2 The Church of the old Testament was a figure of the Church under the New:
but they had a high Priest above the rest. Ergo, there ought to be now.

We answer, First, we grant the high Priest was a figure, but neither of
Peter nor Pope, but only of Christ: for in two things did the high Priest
resemble Christ, in offering of sacrifice (so has Christ offered up himself.
Heb. 7.27.) and in entering into the sanctuary to make atonement for the
people: so Christ is entered into the Heavens, to appear in sight for us before
God, as the apostle says. Heb. 9.24. I trow in neither of these the high
priest could be a type either of Peter or Pope.

2 Neither does it follow, because there was an high priest in one country,
therefore there ought to be one over the Churches in all countries: as the
Jesuit frames an other argument by a comparison: because a bishop is over his
diocese, a Metropolitan over his province, there may be as well a Pope over
the whole Church: For by the same reason, because a Lord may be the chief in
his seignorie, a Duke in his province, a Prince in his Kingdom, therefore
there ought to be an Emperor over all the world: or as Master Calvin says,
because one field is committed to one Husbandman to dress and to till,
therefore the whole World may: which were a thing impossible.

The Protestants.
THat there ought not to be any one chief Bishop, Pope or prelate, to exercise
jurisdiction over the whole Church, we do thus make it good.

1 We acknowledge no head of the Church but Christ, neither does the Scripture
attribute this title of Majesty over the whole Church, but only to Christ. If
the Pope or any else be the head, the Church is his body, Iuel ans. to the
Apol. page. 657.
which Bellarmine is a shamed to grant yet. Pope Athanasius doubted not to
call populos mundi, parts corporis sui, the people of the World the parts of
his body.

Again, if he be the head, he must do the duty of an head, which is, to
knit and join the parts together, and to give effectual power to every part.
Ephesians. 4.16. Where the Apostle alludeth to the government of man's body: in
the which the parts receive a double benefit from the head, the knitting and
joining together by sinews, which come from the head, and sense and motion
also given to every part from the head: but it were blasphemy to think this
of the Pope, that he gives any influence to the Church. If they answer, he is
but a ministerial head, Christ is the principal. We say again, that although
these things are principally wrought by the principal head, yet they must be
done instrumentally or Ministerially by the Ministerial head: or else it is
but a rotten head: such an one as the Wolf found in a caruers shop (as you
know the fable is) a goodly head, says he, but without wit or brain. If
Christ perform all the duty of the head himself, then is there no other
head: if the Pope do somewhat, that belongs to the head, tell us, what is
it? If he will be an head, and do nothing, surely he must needs be a
brainelesse and witless head.

2 It is a dangerous and impossible thing to have the charge of all Churches
committed to one man: GOD alone is sufficient to bear that burden. Saint
Paul says, who is sufficient for these things? No pastor or minister, that is
but set over one flock or parish, is sufficient to preach the word: much
less is any one man sufficient to govern the whole Church.

Bellarmine answers first: Saint Paul says of himself, that he had the
care of all Churches. 2. Corinthians. 11.28. We reply again, first, then belike
Saint Paul was universal pastor and not Peter. Secondly, we must consider
that the Apostles were sent to all the world: their calling was not limited:
when they had planted the Gospel in one place, they did take care also for
other places: but now there is no such Apostolical calling. Thirdly, Paul did
not bear this burden alone, but the Apostles and Evangelists were his
coadiutors and fellow-helpers.

Secondly, says he, why may not the care of the whole Church be committed to
one man, as well as the government almost of the whole world was appointed by
God to Nabuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Augustus; seeing the government of the Church is
easier then the civil and politic regiment?

We reply. First, we never read of any that had dominion over the whole
world, as the Pope chalengeth to have over the whole Church, which is dispersed
throughout the world. Secondly, these great and large Monarchs are said to
have been given of God, Dan. 2.37. Not that this large dominion and usurpation
over other countries so much pleased God: for the people of God the Israelites
in their most flourishing estate never had such sovereignty over other
countries, but by voluntary subjection, as in Solomon's days, 1. King. 4.21.
the Kings round about brought presents unto him: But because the Lord turned
and used this their large and mighty dominion to the good of his Church: for
Cyrus was a defender of the Church, against all that bare evil will thereat:
and the large Empire of the Romans served very commodiously for the propagation
of the Gospel. Thirdly, the Jesuit shows his skill, when he says, that the
regiment of the Church is easier, then the government of the commonwealth:
Whereas there is no greater and waightier burden upon earth, then is the
charge of souls. It seems the Pope takes his ease, finding the care of the
Church to be so easy and pleasant a thing: in deed as he uses it, it is no
great matter: for he preaches not, but gives himself to ease and idleness
and all princely pleasures. But England has found by experience, and so did
that worthy and famous Prince King Henry the eight, that there was never
matter so hardly compassed, as was the reformation of the Church, and the
suppression of idolatry and superstition in this land. Augustine says, Nemo
nostrum se episcopum episcoporum constituit, aut quasi tyrannico terrore ad
obseque^di necessitatem collegas suos adigit. de Baptis. 2.2. None of us does
count himself a Bishop over other Bishops, or takes upon him after a
commanding manner, as tyrants use, to enforce his fellows to obey. Ergo by
his judgment all Bishops are of like and equal authority.

THE SECOND QVESTION, WHETHER PETER were the chief, and Prince of the
Apostles, and assigned by Christ to be head of the Church.
The Papists.
THis our adversaries do stiffelie maintain, that he was not only head of the
Bellarmi. lib. 1. de pontif. cap. 11. And the Rhemists doubt not to call him
the chief and Prince of the Apostles. 1. Corinthians. 9. ver. 5.

1 We will omit many of their weighty arguments, as out of these and such
like places: I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith should not fail:
cast forth thy net into the deep, I will make thee a Fisher of men: Peter
paid toll for Christ and himself: Peter drew the net to the land full of
great fish: Peter only drew out his sword in the defense of Christ. Ergo Peter
was the Prince of the Apostles and head of the Church. ex council. Basilien Fox.
page 673.

Such other goodly arguments our Rhemists do make: Peter did excommunicate
Ananias and Sapphira: he healed the sick by his shadow. Ergo he was the head
of the Church. Annot. 5. Acts se. 5.8. Again, Peter's person was guarded with
four quaternions of Soldiers, Act. 12.4. the Church prayed for him. Ibid.
sect. 4. Paul names Cephas, 1. Cor. 9.5. Ergo he was chief of the Apostles.
Are not here goodly arguments think you? To these reasons I need make no
other answer, then that, which our learned country man does in his
Annotations. You must, says he, bring better arguments or else children will
laugh you to scorn. Fulk. Annot. Act. 5. sect. 5. Let us see therefore if they
have any better arguments.

2 They take that to be a maine invincible place for them, Matthew. 16.18. Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. Ergo the Church is
built upon Peter.

To make this argument the more strong, they set under it diverse props: First,
why did Christ give Peter this name more then to any other of the Apostles, to
call him Peter, of Petra a Rock, but to show that he was appointed to be the
foundation of the Church? Bellarmine cap. 17. We answer, Christ hereby
signified, that Peter should be a principal pillar of his Church, as the rest
of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2. He changed also the names of some other Apostles,
as James and John were called Boanerges, the sons of thunder, Mark. 3.
Therefore this was no such preeminence to Peter, neither is it true that Peter
was almost called by no other name, for he is often in the Gospel after this
called by his old name Simon, Mat. 16.17. and 17, 25. Fulk. Annot. in Ioh. 1.
sec. 7. Secondly, again (says Bellarmine) the text is aedificabo, I will
build my Church: but if Christ be here taken for the rock, his Church was
built already, for many believed in him. But Peter was not made the foundation
of his Church, till afterward after his resurrection, and therefore he says,
I will build.

We answer. First, it is a corrupt gloss, to say the Church of Christ was
not builded, till after the resurrection: for seeing that many believed before
in Christ, and made a Church, either they must grant, that the Church was
without a foundation, or else, that the foundation was changed from Christ to
Peter. Secondly, it is taken therefore for the enlarging and increasing of the
Church of GOD. It follows not, because Christ says, I will build, and his
Church was begun to be built already, that therefore another kind of
building must be excogitate: no more then, because Christ gave his spirit to
the Apostles Matthew. 10.1. and again John 20.22. and yet bids them stay at
Jerusalem till they should receive the holy Ghost Acts. 1.7. that therefore
they should look for another holy Ghost, or as though they had not received
the holy Ghost before. But as the sending of the holy Ghost is meant, for the
increase and more plentiful measure thereof, so is the building of the Church
here taken for the increase of the building.

Tract vlt in Iohann.
We yet further answer with Augustine: super hanc petram, quam confessus es,
aedificabo ecclesiam: upon this rock, which thou have confessed, will I build
my Church: so that in this place is meant not Peter to be the rock, but
either Christ, whom he confessed, or his says: whereby he confessed him,
which comes all to one effect. There is no great difference, whether we say,
the Church is builded upon Christ, or faith is the foundation of the Church,
for faith is an apprehension of Christ: but of the person of Peter it can no
more be understood then of the rest of the Apostles, who in some sense are
called the foundation of the Church, namely in respect of their holy Apostolic
doctrine upon the which the Church is built. Ephesians. 2.20.

Bellarmine and the Jesuits deny not, but here is relation also to the faith
of Peter, but faith considered in his person. We answer: if they mean Peter's
particular faith, which was a proper adiunct to himself, the universal Church
cannot be built upon that faith, seeing when Peter dyed, his faith also, as a
proper accident to his person, ceased: if they understand that general faith,
whereby Peter in the name of all the rest made this confession: then they all
are as well made pillars and foundations of the Church, as he, because it was
their general confession. Fulk. annot. in 16. Matthew. sect. 8.

3 Another place, which our adversaries mightily urge, are those words which
follow verse 19. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in Heaven: Ergo: Peter had
especial jurisdiction given him more then any of the rest. Bellarmine cap. 12.

We answer. First, as Peter confessed in the name of all the rest, so this
power is given him not only for the rest (as the Rhemists falsely charge us,
that we make Peter a proctor for others) but together with the rest: Peter's
person must be excluded: for immediately after he deserved for a certain slip
of his person to be called Satan: it were an unfit match, the same person at
the same time to be honored with the glorious title of the rock of Christ, and
to sustain so great a rebuke as to be called Satan. Secondly, here is no
more promised to Peter then unto all the rest of the Apostles: Matthew. 18.18.
They likewise have authority given them to bind and loose, and it is
performed to them all alike. John 20.23.

2 By the keys here cannot be understood that large jurisdiction which the
Papists dream of, as not only the authority and chair of doctrine,
judgment, knoweledge, discretion between true and false doctrine, all which
we grant together with Peter to have been given to all the Apostles besides.
But say they, hereby is signified the height of government, the power of
making laws, of calling Councels and confirming them, of ordeyning Bishops and
Pastors, finally to dispense the goods of the Church spiritual and temporal:
all this is added without ground, neither had either Peter or any of the
Apostles this ample authority, no nor the Bishops of Rome for many hundred
years after Christ. For this plenarie power of the keys, when they signify,
a sovereign and chief, and surpassing power, are so only given unto Christ,
and to no mortal creature: He is said to have the keye of David, who opens
and no man shuts, who shuts, and no man opens. Apocalip. 3.7. Fulk.
Annot. 16. Matthew. sect. 13.

Lastly, I will oppose the judgment of the Fathers of the Church, who allege
out of Augustine, that Peter received the keys for the whole Church, and out
of Ambrose, that when Christ said to Peter, pasce oues, the blessed Apostle
took not charge of them alone, says he, but together with us, and we together
with him. Fax. page 675.

4 Other arguments they allege for the primacie and preeminence of Peter, as
Matthew 10. He is named in the first place. Bellarmine cap. 18. We answer,
this might be, because Peter was the most ancient in years, or one of the
first that was called. But howsoever it was, it is no great matter: for this
order is not alwaie kept, as Galath. 2. Paul names James first; James, Cephas,
John, says he, verse 9. the Jesuits best shift is here to deny the text,
saying; it should be read, Cephas, James John: unless James be named first,
because he was Bishop of Jerusalem: Mark I pray you, Ergo at Jerusalem Peter
was not before James, but next unto him, therefore not prince of the Apostles.
Bellarm. cap. 18.

Again, say they, Peter stands up in the election of Matthias. Acts 1.
preaches the first Sermon, Acts 2. Acts. 15. Peter speaks first. We answer
to the first: We deny not a primacie of order to have been in Peter: but it
follows not, that he which speaks first, or gives the first voice, should
be the head and commander of the rest to the second: we also grant that
Peter in zeal, promptnes and forwardnes, was not behind any of the Apostles,
but even with the first: for in him was that saying of Christ verified upon
the woman. She loved much, because much was forgiven her, Luk 7: So was it
with Peter, to whom Christ forgave much, and therefore he loved much. To the
third we answer, that by the Jesuits own confession, James, who was (as
they say) Bishop of Jerusalem, had the primacie there: how then can they now
give it to Peter?

The Protestants.
THat Peter had no such jurisdiction over the Apostles, as to be called the
head and Prince of them: but that to them all indifferently were the keys
committed, and did all faithfully execute their Apostleship without any
subjection of each to other, but joined the right hands of fellowship together:
we thus confirm it out of the holy Scripture, and necessary arguments derived
out of the same.

1 Ephesians. 2.20. Apocalips. 21.14. The Church is said to be built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Ergo no primacie of power amongst the
Apostles, they all founded the Church.

Bellarmine confesses that in respect of their doctrine, there was no
difference between Peter and the rest, Bellarm. cap. 11.
for they all were first planters of Churches, they all preached the Gospel by
revelation: But in respect of government, they were not equal: they had
chief authority committed to them as Apostles and Ambassadors of Christ: But
Peter, as ordinary pastor.

We answer. First, by his own confession the Apostles had chief authority
as Apostles, but there was no higher authority or power then of the
Apostleship: but as they were Apostles they were equal (says the Jesuit:)
Ergo there could be no superiority, for the calling of the Apostles was the
highest in the Church.

2 To preach the Gospel, and to have jurisdiction of government, do both
belong to the power of the keys: but the keys were equally committed to all:
Ergo they had all equal power both to preach and to govern. That they all had
the power of the keys equally granted unto them, we have proved before out
of Matthew. 18.18.

2 Bellarmine himself confesses, that James was Bishop and ordinary pastor
at Jerusalem, and says with Anselme and Thomas Aquinas, that therefore he is
named first by Saint Paul, Gal. 2. Bellarm. cap. 19. Therefore at Jerusalem
Peter was to give primacie to the ordinary pastor there.

If they answer, that Rome was then the chief city, and therefore Peter
being Bishop of Rome was to have the preeminence: To this we reply: that
Jerusalem was rather to be preferred in respect of place, which was chosen by
the Lord himself, to be the chief city of his Church: But Rome through the
tyranny and usurpation of the Romans over other countries was advanced to that
dignity, not by the election of God.

But Bellarmine answers, that Peter was Bishop of the whole Church, and so of
Jerusalem too. We answer, he now says less for Peter, then if he called
him, as he was, the Apostle of the whole world: for it was more to be an
Apostle tha^ a Bishop. Diverse were called in the Apostles times, episcopi,
overseers, or Bishops, that were not Apostles, as the pastors of Ephesus, Act.
20.28. Wherefore now he has said just nothing: in seeking to advance Peter,
he has disgraced him, in pulling him down from his high Apostleship, to the
chair of a Bishop.

3 Peter had no superiority over Paul, for they joined right hands of
fellowship: and this allotment was made between them, that Paul should be
the chief of the Gentiles, and Peter of the circumcision, Galath. 2.9. Ergo.

Bellarmine answers. First, they were joined as fellow-laborers in the
preaching of the Gospel: but Peter might for all this be greater in the
office and power of governing. We answer: yea, but the text says, that Paul
only was not appointed to preach to the Gentiles, but he had the chief
Apostleship. Now to the Apostleship belongs, not only the function of
preaching, but the whole use of the keys, and power of jurisdiction. Ergo: in
all respects Saint Paul over the Gentiles had the chief Apostleship.

But let any man say, that this was a humane compact amongst themselves, and
Paul had his lotte at Peter's assignement: the text shows, that the Lord
himself had made this distribution. For when they saw, says Saint Paul, that
the Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed to me, verse 7. So then the
Apostles did but confirm by their consent, that distribution, which they saw
the Lord himself had appointed.

Further says the Jesuit, the division was not so made, but that it was
lawful for Peter also to preach to the Gentiles. We answer: we grant it,
and for Paul to preach to the Jews, yet that distinction remained still,
that Peter was chief of the circumcision, Paul of the uncircumcision.

Again says he: but Peter had the more excellent lotte, for Christ himself
first preached to the Jews. We answer, we deny not, but that he had the
first lotte in order: for to the Jews was the Gospel first offered: but Paul
had the larger and more glorious lotte: the Church of the Jews, now decaying,
and the Gentiles beginning to be planted in their room. But howsoever it was,
it cannot be denied, but that Paul was chief toward the Gentiles: And
therefore the Church of Rome might with better right have derived their
authority from S. Paul, then from Peter: Both of them they cannot make patrons
of their See: seeing by their own rules the Pope cannot be successor to them
both.

Further, out of the same place, Galath. 2.11. an other thing comes to be
observed: that Peter was rebuked of Paul, and in such sort, that it appears
there was no great inequality between them* for he does it to his face openly,
before all men, and at Antioch, in Peter's own Bishopric, as they say, can it
be now thought that Paul was any thing inferior to Peter?

Cap. 15.
Bellarmine and the Jesuits answer, that the Pope may be rebuked of an
inferior, and ought to take it patiently, if it be done in zeal and love.
Answer: First, we do not simply thus conclude, because Paul reprehended
Peter, therefore he was not his superior, but because of the manner, as we
showed: it was done in such sort, so plainly, so openly, without any
submission or craving of pardon, that there can appear no inequality at all
between them. Secondly, although they seem here to grant, that the Pope may
be rebuked, yet is it otherwise in their Canon law, which says, that though
the Pope do lead innumerable souls to hell, no mortal man may presume to
reprove his faults, part. 1. distin. 4. cap. Si Papa. Fulk. Annot. in Gala.
2. sect. 8.

4 Lastly, what reason was there, why Christ should give the supremacy to
Peter over the rest? Christ was no acceptor of persons: if he had been, John
should have been preferred, whom he loved most. If deserts be weighed, I think
Peter deserved no more then the rest of his fellows: Nay I think the wisdom
of the Spirit, foreseeing the questions that should afterward arise in the
Church about Peter, has so disposed, that this Apostles infirmities both in
number more and weight greater then any of the rest, should be evidently set
forth in Scripture. We will briefly run them over, not to derogate from the
blessed memory of so excellent an Apostle; but a little to stay and bridle the
preposterous zeal of our adversaries, who do ascribe more unto him, then ever
he would have challenged to himself.

To let pass the smaller slippes and scapes of this Apostle, as his rashness
in aduenturing beyond his strength, to walk upon the Sea, Matthew. 14.
Secondly, his unadvised speech in the Mountain, Math. 17. let us make three
Tabernacles: thirdly, his ignorance, Matthew. 19. In saying to Christ, how often
shall I forgive my brother? till seven times? Fourthlie, his impatiencie, as in
drawing out his sword and cutting off Malchus ear. Fifthlie, his
timorousness in flying from Christ at his apprehension. Sixtlie, his
curiosity, John 21. In asking concerning John, what shall this man do? To let
pass these as common infirmities: There are four great faults, which Peter
fell into, much amplified, and stood upon by the fathers.

1 He de^orted our Savior from his passion with these words: Master favor thy
self, Math. 16. and was therefore called Satan, an adversary to the death of
Christ, and so to the redemption of man. Augustine charge him with great
forgetfulness, having made so notable a confession of Christ before, and notes
him for some sparks of distrust and infidelity. Ille Petrus, qui iam eum
confessus fuerat filium dei, timuit, ne sicut filius hominis moreretur, in
Psalm. 138. The same Peter (says he) which a little before had confessed him to
be the Son of God, feared lest he should dye and perish as a man.

2 In promising rashly not to deny Christ, yea unto death, whereas Christ had
foretold him of his fall before, Augustine notes great presumption: Petrus ex
egregio praesumptore creber negator effectus. Epist. 120. cap. 14. Peter of a
great presumer, is become a desperate denyer.

3 The third great sin was committed by Peter in denying of Christ, and that
thrice, yea with an oath, at the instance of a maiden, and in a very short
while, before the cock crewe twice, Mark. 14.72. The Jesuit answers, that
this was no hinderance to Peter's primacie, but a furtherance and a confirmation
of it. But whether it were a let to his primacie or not, let all men judge,
seeing it had been sufficient to have hindered his salvation and destroyed his
faith, without the great mercy of God.

Let us hear Augustines judgment of Peter's fall. Some man may excuse Peter,
and say, that he did nothing, but as Christ forewarned him. What then (says
he) if Peter therefore did not amiss, because his fall was foretold by Christ:
Recte etiam fecit Judas, qui tradidit dominum, quia and hoc praedixerat
dominus: Exposit. in Psalm. 140.
then Judas did well too (says he) in betraying of Christ, for this also
Christ showed before? But some again may say: he denied not Christ, for he
said he knew not the man: Quasi vero (says he) qui hominem Christum negat,
Tractat. in Iohann. 66.
non Christum neget: as though he that denies the man Christ, does not flatly
deny Christ. Christ also takes away all doubts (says he) when he thus said
to Peter, the cock shall not crow till thou have denied me thrice: he says
not, till thou have denied the man, but me. Again, Ipse potius redarguit
defensores suos: Peter himself does confute his maintayners and defenders:
Agnouit plane peccatum suum infirmitas Petri: Peter's own conscience gave him,
that he had sinned, for he went out and wept bitterly. But if by this means
his primacie was confirmed, he had occasion to rejoice, and not to weep: Yea
he wept bitterly, his sin was very great: how then dare one of your sect say
with a blasphemous mouth, Petrus non fidem Christi, sed Christum salua fide
negauit: Copus. vide Iuell. p. 665 defens. apol.
Peter denied not the faith of Christ, but his faith remaining safe and sound
he denied Christ? The ancient writers durst not so extenuate Peter's fall, no
nor Peter himself, that wept full sore, as these men presume to do.

4 The last fault noted in Peter was that, for the which he is reproved of Paul
Act. 2. Tush (says Bellarmine) it was a very small and light offense. Yea, was
it so small a fault to constrayne the Gentiles to do like the Jews? for this
was the point, as S. Paul writes, Galath. 2.14. And Augustine says, Petrus
non obiurgatus a Paulo fuit, quod seruabat consuetudinem Iudaeorum, in qua
natus and educatus fuit, sed quod eam gentibus imponere volebat. Exposit. ad
Galat. Peter was not rebuked of Paul, because he kept the custom of the
Jews, wherein he was brought up, but because he would lay it upon the
Gentiles. Was this leuissimum peccatum, a small transgression? S. Paul should
greatly have been to blame, for rebuking Peter openly, and so plainly for so
small an offense, and should have done against his own rule, Galath. 6.1. But
Peter did it of a good mind (says Bellarmine. Bellarm. cap. 28.
) Yea did? then he was worthy to be excused, not worthy of blame, as S. Paul
writes. He might also do it ignorantly and unwittingly (says he.) How can
that be? seeing he was one that made the decree, Act. 15: That no yoke should
be laid upon the Gentiles: other then there expressed, and now contrary to
that decree, he constrayneth the Gentiles, Iudaizare, to play the Jews. These
things do not hang together.

I will now conclude out of Augustine, as he alleges out of Cyprian: Nec
Petrus, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione disceptaret, postmodum vindicauit
sibi aliquid insolenter, vt diceret se primatum tenere, De baptis. 2.2.
Howsoever it was, Peter, when Paul reasoned thus with him, did not stand upon
his pantofles, and challenge any primacie to himself. But it is very like, if
there had been any such primacie in Peter of power and jurisdiction, (a
primacie of order we grant, as Cyprian in that place calls Peter, primum,
the first) that this sharp reprehension of Paul should either have been
spared, or else not done in that vehement manner.

THE THIRD QVESTION, CONCERNING Peter his being at Rome.
THis question has two parts: first, whether Peter were at all at Rome or not.

Secondly, whether he were Bishop of Rome.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER PETER were at Rome.


1 Out of that place of S. Peter 1.5.13. the Church that is at Babylon saluteth
you: Babylon here (say they) is taken for Rome, from whence Peter wrote his
Epistle, Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 2. de pontif. Rhemens. argum. in 1. Epist. Petri.

We answer: First, it is a silly argument for them hereby to prove Peter's
being at Rome: for thus much they have gained by it, that Rome is Babylon, and
so the seat of Antichrist, Revel. 18. Secondly, there were two Babylons, one
in Syria, the other in Egypt, from either of which S. Peter might dare his
epistle and it is most like that he would keep the common and known name of
the place, that it might be out of doubt what Church he meant: as for the name
of Babylon, to be ascribed to Rome, though it were so mystically, yet was it
not so called: for why might not Paul as well have written his Epistle to the
Romans under that name, the Church of Babylon, as Peter wrote from thence?

2 Again, they allege that story, how Peter overcame Simon Magus at Rome,
when he would have taken his flight into the air, having made himself wings,
and by the prayer of Peter was brought down again and brake his legs, and
so dyed: whereupon Nero being offended with Peter, would have apprehended him:
who being counseled by the Church, would have fled from Rome: but meeting
Christ at one of the gates, and saying unto him, whether go thou Lord? And
he answered, I come again to be crucified: Peter upon those words returned
back again, and was crucified for the testimony of Jesus. Bellarm. cap. 2.3.

We answer: First, we deny not that Peter was at Rome, but show only the
insufficiency of their arguments: and again, we move such doubts, as by them
are yet unanswered, as afterward shall be showed. Secondly, concerning this
story of the victory over Simon Magus, they that doubt of Peter's being at
Rome, may also doubt of this, neither of them being necessary to be believed
as articles of faith, but probable and coniecturall, as matters of story. For
some part of the story is denied by Augustine, as how Peter fasted upon the
Saturday, Epistol. 86.
the combat between him and Simon Magus, following upon the Lords day after,
and thereupon rose the custom of the Saturday fast among the Romans: Est
quidem (says he) haec opinio plurimorum, quamuis eam perhibeant esse falsam
plerique Romani. This is (says he) a probable opinion of many, (concerning
Peter's fast) yet the Romans themselves think it to be false.

3 That concerning Christ's apparition to Peter, seems to be most unlike of
all: and sauoureth somewhat of the Popish Legends. Like unto this are the tales
of S. Christopher, how he carried Christ, and how S. Gregory had him for one of
his ghests at his table of hospitality: such visions and apparitions of Christ
are contrary to the scriptures, which say, that the heavens must conteyne him
till his coming again. Bellarmine answers: first, by this means, we do
compedes Christo inijcere, we fetter Christ in heaven. We answer, belike then
heaven is a prison, with the Jesuit: God send all that are his such a prison
at the length. Again, Christ is no otherwise concluded and shut up in heaven,
then as it pleases himself, and as he has appointed so to be.

2 He obiecteth: that Christ appeared near unto the earth to Paul. We
answer: First, there is no such thing proved out of the text, but rather the
contrary, that the voice was heard from heaven; not near the earth, but
above, Act. 22.6. Secondly, Paul heard a voice only, he saw no man, neither
he nor the company with him, Act. 9.7, 8. But only a great light they saw
shining from heaven, Act. 22.6, 9. Therefore out of this place they cannot
prove any such real apparition of Christ.

3 Peter dyed at Rome, his sepulcher is to be seen there to this day: Ergo, he
was at Rome. Bellarm. cap. 3.

We answer: First, it follows not, if Peter were buried at Rome, that
therefore he dyed there: for the translation of the bones and bodies of Martyrs
is no unusual thing in your Church: As it follows not, because John Baptists
head, as you say, is to be seen at S. Siluesters at Rome, that therefore he
dyed there; so neither does it follow of S. Peter.

2 Again, how shall we believe you, that it is S. Peter's Sepulcher, which is
showed at Rome; seeing you have made so many mockeries already, making the
world believe, that Peter's body is sometime in one place, sometime in an
other? Half his body (you say) is at S. Peter's in Rome, half at S. Paul's,
his head at S. John Laterane, his nether iawe with the beard at Poicters in
France, many of his bones at Trieirs, at Geneua part of his brain. You see
that we may as well doubt whether Peter's body be at Rome, as in any of these
places. And such as you see, are our adversaries arguments for Peter's being at
Rome.

The Protestants.
COncerning Peter's being at Rome: First, we do not utterly deny it, but
only affirm that he could not come thither so soon as in the second year of
Claudius, and sit there so long, namely, five and twenty years, as they hold.
Secondly, it may be granted, that he was there, as a matter of story, not an
article of faith. Thirdly, we have certain doubts and arguments, about some
circumstances of his being there, which our adversaries are not able to answer.

1 There is great disagreeing amongst the writers, concerning the time of
Peter's coming to Rome: Orosius says he came thither in the beginning of
Claudius reign: Hierome says, the 2. year of his reign: other say, the
fourth year: other, the thirteenth year: Damasus would have him come thither
in Nero his reign. This dissension of writers shows that the matter may be
justly doubted of, Fulk. in Romans 16. sect. 4.

Bellarmine and the Jesuits answer: No more do all agree concerning the time
when the world was created, nor for the story of Christ's life, in what time
every thing was done when he suffered, and such like: yet it follows not,
that those things were not true, because there is some diversity about the
time, Rhemist. 1. Pet. 5.13.

We reply: First, most of these things concerning the chronology of
scripture, though it be not necessary to salvation, yet by diligent search may
be found in scripture. Secondly, if they can show any scripture for Peter's
being at Rome, as we have for the other stories, we will believe it, though the
time perfectly be not known: but seeing the scripture makes no mention at all
of his being there, and the time is uncertain, we may worthily doubt of it,
much less are bound necessarily to believe it.

2 The story of Peter's coming to Rome in the second year of Claudius, his
abiding at Rome five and twenty years, his death and martyrdom in the 14.
year of Nero, and the 37. year after Christ's ascension: we prove out of the
scriptures to be false. For Peter was at Jerusalem and in those quarters round
about till 18. years after Christ: for Paul saw him there 3. years after his
calling, and again 14. years after that, Galath. 2. there is 17. years, and
one year was past before Paul's conversion: in all 18. years: add unto these
the 25. years of Peter's being at Rome, that makes 43. years: and so Peter
should suffer in Vespasianus reign, and not in the time of Nero.

Bellarmine and the Jesuits answer: that Peter was at Rome seven years
before the Council held at Jerusalem, Act. 15. which was in the 18. year after
Christ: and that being expelled the city by Claudius with the rest of the
Jews, he returned to Jerusalem, and there spoke with Paul, and after that went
to Rome again and there ended his life.

This answer we show to be very insufficient. First, Act. 15.2. it appears
that there was, as it were, a standing and set council of the Apostles at
Jerusalem, of the which Peter was one: for the Church thought good to send up
to the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem. Secondly, till the 18.
year when this Council was held, it seems that Peter had labored only or
especially amongst the Jews, of whom there were then but few at Rome: for,
says the Apostle, he that was mighty in Peter in the Apostleship over the
circumcision, was also mighty in me, Gal. 2.8. Therefore Peter was not known
to have labored until this time in the circumcision. Thirdly, afterward it is
more like he went to Antiochia then to Rome: for after this, Paul rebuked Peter
at Antioch, Gal. 2. Fourthly, these are but bare conjectures of our
adversaries, and crafty evasion without scripture: but seeing we appose them
out of scripture, it is great reason, they should likewise answer us out of
scripture.

3 We have diverse other obections also out of the scriptures: as first, that if
Peter were at Rome, it is not like that Paul would leave him out in his
salutation in the end of his Epistle, Ro^. 16. sent to the brethren. Our
adversaries answer but very simply, that at that time, when S. Paul wrote his
Epistle, either Peter was not at Rome, or else Paul might write some especial
letters to him by himself, and this Epistle enclosed in them: such goodly
conjectures they have. But I pray you what needed S. Paul to have written unto
the Romans, if S. Peter so faithful and vigilant a Pastor, were continually
amongst them?

Other places also of scripture we have: as Philipp. 2.20. speaking of Timothy
he says, I have none like minded to him that will faithfully care for your
matters Coloss. 4.11. These only are my workfellowes, 2. Timoth. 4.11. only
Luke is with me: Ergo, Peter all this while was not at Rome, for Paul would not
have left him out of the number of his fellowe-helpers: at the lest he would
not have commended Timothy, though he were a worthy young man, before him. That
which Bellarmine answers, is just nothing: that S. Paul speaks in those
places only of his domestical helpers, which did minister unto him: When S.
Paul speaks plainly of his fellow laborers: these only are my workfellowes
to the kingdom of God, Coloss. 4.11.

An other argument does arise out of S. Paul's words, 2. Timoth. 4.16. At my
first answering no man assisted me: Ergo, it is like that Peter was not then at
Rome, for he would not have forsaken Paul. Bellarmine answers: that he
speaks only of such favorers as he had in Caesar's court, that they would
not make suit for him to the Emperor. But this is a weak solution. First, it
appears by that which follows, that they left him without help in his open
Apology or defense: they did not assist me (says he) but the Lord assisted
me: that is, gave me strength to defend my cause: so that the word, assisting,
must be taken in the same sense before, that they failed him in that, wherein
God assisted him, that is, in speaking boldly in the defense of the truth.
Secondly, it is proved by the diverse success that he had at his first and
second answering: at the first all left him, but at the next many were
emboldened through his bonds: what to do? more frankly to speak the word,
Philipp. 1.14. Ergo, at the first they forsook him, because they were afraid
to speak the word.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER PETER were Bishop of Rome.
Peter was Bishop of Rome, there enthronised, and sat in the Bishoplike chair
many years, and after left it to his successors.

1 The Roman faith was first planted by Peter, for he first preached to the
Gentiles, Act. 15.7. Ergo, he was the first Bishop.

Answer: First, that Peter first preached to the Gentiles, it is contrary to
the story of the Acts: for Paul was converted before Peter saw the vision
from heaven, Act. 10. before which time Peter made a great question, whether it
were lawful to preach to the Gentiles. But Paul immediately after his
conversion preached to the Gentiles, Galath. 2. therefore before Peter. Neither
is there any thing to the contrary, Act. 15.7. the Gentiles believed by S.
Peter's mouth, as he says, but not first. Secondly, that Peter first preached
not at Rome, it is thus gathered: because it is not like that the Christian
faith being spread far abroad, could be kept from Rome the space of 12.
years, for so long it was by their account, before Peter came to Rome. Again,
there were diverse that dwelled at Rome, which heard the Apostles speak diverse
tongues, Act. 2. being strangers then and soiourners at Jerusalem: and Romans
16.7. he makes mention of Andronicus and Iunia, which were in Christ before
him: By these it is most like that the Christian faith was first sowed at Rome.
Thirdly, it is more like that Paul preached at Rome before Peter: for when he
came to Rome, he called the Jews together, who said unto him, that they had
heard nothing concerning him by letters or from the brethren out of Judea, Act.
28.22. But if Peter had been there, Paul no doubt should have been known at
the least by name: The Jews also say unto him, we will hear of thee what
thou think: and some of them were persuaded by Paul, some believed not. It
seems by this place that the Jews in Rome had not heard of the Gospel
before. But if Peter had been amongst them, who had an especial charge of the
circumcision, he would have had the greatest care of the Jews to win them to
Christ. Fourthly, though Peter had first preached to the Romans, it would not
follow, that therefore he was Bishop there: for Paul first founded the Church
of Ephesus, yet they say John was first Bishop there: wherefore they should
gain nothing by this argument, if it were true, but that Peter was the first
preacher, and conuerter of the Romans to the faith.

The Protestants.
IF we take the name of Bishop generally for that office which has the
public cure and charge of souls: in that sense we deny not but Peter and
the rest of the Apostles may be called Episcopi, Bishops, as Christ is called
the shepherd and Bishop of our souls, 1. Pet. 2.23. But taking it strictly
for a Bishop of this or that place, which is called Episcopus intitulatus, a
Bishop entitled, we deny that either Peter or Paul were Bishops, Fox. page
15.

1 Paul was Apostolus Gentium, the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter of the
circumcision; therefore it is more like that Paul was chief Pastor of the
Romans, because they were of the Gentiles, and part of his charge: and unless
they can prove that Paul resigned over his lot unto Peter, that he also should
be the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, as he was of the Jews; Peter should
have intruded himself into Paul's charge, not in preaching to the Gentiles,
(for both Paul might preach to the Jews, and Peter to the Gentiles) but in
taking upon him to be the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, which was given
before to S. Paul.

2 The Rhemists themselves grant, that the Church of Rome was founded both by
Peter and Paul, annot. in 2. Gal. sect. 6. B. Tunstal a strong champion of
theirs, but varying from them in this opinion, showed in a letter of his to
Cardinal Poole, how in times past, both Peter and Paul* were counted Patrones
of the Church of Rome, and principes apostolorum, the chief of the Apostles.
Eusebius says, that Clement was the third Bishop after Peter and Paul:
Alexander succeeded in the fifth place after Peter and Paul: If therefore the
Bishops of Rome challenge any preeminence of authority from Peter, they may
do it as well from Paul: for they both founded that Church, preached there,
and both there suffered, Fox, page 1066.

3 No Apostles were Bishops* for they were diverse offices, Ephesians. 4.11. he gave
some to be Apostles, some to be Pastors and Doctors: Ergo, they were diverse
offices, and the same were not Apostles and Pastors or Bishops, for both are
all one. The offices were much different: Apostles were immediately called of
God, Bishops and Pastors were ordained by the Apostles, the Apostles calling
was general over the whole world, the Pastors were obliged to their dioces and
parishes and particular Churches: the office of the Apostles was
extraordinary, and but for a time; the calling of Pastors was to endure ever
in the Church. Wherefore it can in no wise be that the Apostles were Bishops of
any certain places. Irenaeus says, that Fundata ecclesia beati apostoli Lino
officiu^ episcopatus iniungunt: the Church of Rome once founded, the holy
Apostles laid the charge of the Bishopric upon Linus. Whereby it appears,
that they only retained their Apostleship enjoined them of Christ, Tunstal. ex
Fox. page 1066. It had therefore been contrary to the commandment of Christ:
who said, Ite in vniuersum mundum, go into all the world: if they should have
left their calling, and bound themselves to any peculiar Church: Ergo, we
conclude that neither Peter nor Paul were Bishops of Rome.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, WHETHER THE Bishop of Rome be the true successor of S.
Peter.
The Papists.
Rome being lineally descended by succession from Peter, they have the same
primacie, apostolic authority and jurisdiction over the whole Church, which
Peter had, Bellar. lib. 2. de pont. c. 12.

They are very barren and scant of arguments in this place to maintain and
uphold this succession by, and in the end the Jesuit runs to tradition: and
at the length he thus concludes; that it is not, de iure diuino, it is not
necessary by the law of God, that the Roman Bishop should be Peter's
successor: but it depends only upon the ordinance of Peter, Bellarm. cap. 12.
and is proved by tradition, not diduced out of scripture. That it was
necessary for Peter to have a successor, they say, it is proved out of
scripture: which we also grant, that all faithful Pastors and Ministers are
the Apostles successors, though they have not their plenarie and Apostolic
power: but that the Pope ought to be and is his successor, it stands upon
tradition.

We see then the grounds of their opinion: scripture they have none but blind
tradition: unless therefore they could bring better stuff for the Papal
succession, we will not spend any time in confuting nothing.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope or Bishop of Rome neither can, is, or ought to be S. Peter's
successor, in his high and Apostolic authority, primacie, and jurisdiction
over the whole Church, which Peter himself never had: thus we declare it.

1 The Pope, though he were Peter's successor, yet can he not receive that
from him, which he never had: but Peter had never any such primacie of power,
as we have showed before, Quaest. 1.2. Ergo, he is not here in his successor.

2 That primacie which Peter had, could not be conveyed to any other: namely,
his primacie of confession, which he first of all the Apostles did utter
concerning Christ, proceeding from faith, did adhere so to his person, that it
could not be derived to any successor of his: for Peter's faith was a proper
adiunct to himself, Argument. Tonstalli, Fox. page 1066.

Again, how can he have the Apostolic authority being not an Apostle: But an
Apostle he is not: for Christ only made Apostles, the Apostles did not ordain
other Apostles, Argum. Nili.

3 He succeeds not Peter rightly in place: for seeing Peter sat at Antioch:
why may not that Church challenge succession, as well as Rome? Why might not
also other Churches have Apostolic succession, as Alexandria from Peter and
Mark, Herusalem from James, Constantinople from Andrew?

Further, they have no certain succession from Peter: Tertullian makes
Clement the next successor to Peter. Optatus first names Linus, then Clement:
Irenaeus, after Peter, places Linus, and Cletus, and Clement in the fourth:
What certainty therefore can they have of so uncertain succession? Fulk.
annot. in Romans 16. sect. 4.

4 It skilleth not who comes in the place and room of the Apostles: They
that will be their true successors, must follow their example, and walk in
their steps, teaching their doctrine and embracing their holy virtues.
Wherefore the Pope is not Peter's right successor, swaruing both from his
doctrine and example. Non sanctorum filij sunt, qui tenent loca sanctorum, sed
qui exercent opera eoru^. They are not the children of the Saints, which
occupy the same places, but they which do their works, Lambert. Fox page
1120.
So Bernard writing to Eugenius charge him, that in respect of his pomp and
pride, he did rather succeed Constantine, then Peter, Iohann. Huss. page 610.

5 All good Bishops and Pastors are as well the Apostles successors, as the
Pope, nay rather then he, being a wicked man, John. Huss. articul. 4. Fox. page
590. Lambert. page 1120. Nay, they have greater and more excellent titles* then
to be called the Apostles successors: for those that walk in obedience unto
Gods commandments, our Savior calls them, his sisters, kinsfolks and
brethren, Math. 12.50. Ergo, the Pope is not the right successor of Peter.

Lastly, of this matter Augustine thus writes: Cathedra tibi quid fecit
ecclesiae Romanae, in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua hodie Anastasius sedet:
Cont. Petil. lib. 2. ca. ^1.
vel ecclesiae Hyerosolymitanae, in qua Iacobus sedit, and in qua hodie
Johannes sedet. What has the Sea of Rome done unto thee, wherein sometime
Peter sat, and where Anastasius now sits? or what has the Church or chair
of Jerusalem committed, where sometime James sat, and John now sits? In
those words Augustine ascribes as much to the succession of other Apostolical
Churches, as he does to the succession of the Bishops of Rome. Cap. de precept.
eccles. artic. 9. B.
And therefore Canisius craftily leaves out the one half of the sentence,
concerning the Church of Jerusalem: Neither is it true, which our adversaries
say, that Peter's Sea remains still at Rome, when all other Apostolical Sees
are gone: for even to this day the Sea of Antioch stands and has a Patriark:
likewise the Sea of Alexandria. The Sea of Constantinople never wanted
successors to this day: nor the Church of Ephesus: In India and Aethiopia,
there has been always a succession in those Churches planted by the Apostles,
and is at this day, Fulk. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 7. Wherefore they have no cause to
brag of their succession, which is found in other places, as well as at Rome.

THE FIFTH QVESTION CONCERNING THE primacie of the Sea of Rome.
THis question has diverse parts, which must be handled in their order. First,
whether the Bishop of Rome have authority over other Bishops. Secondly, whether
appeals ought to be made to Rome from other countries. Thirdly, whether the
Pope be subject to the judgment of any. Fourthly, whether he may be deposed.
Fifthly, what primacie he has over other Churches, and how it began. Sixthly, of
the titles and names given to the Bishops of Rome.

THE FIRST PART WHETHER THE BISHOP of Rome has authority over other Bishops.
The Papists.


The Jesuits principal and only argument is drawn from certain examples: how
the Bishops of Rome have in times past, constituted, deposed, and restored some
Bishops in the Greek Church, as in the patriarchal Seas of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch: Ergo, he has power over all Bishops.

We answer: First, It was not done by the absolute authority of the Roman
Bishops, any such constitution, or deposition, though perhaps their consent
and allowance were required, as Leo writes thus to Martianus the Emperor,
about the ordayning of Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople: Satis sit, quod
vestrae pietatis auxilio and mei fauoris assensu episcopatum tantae vrbis
obtinuit: It is sufficient, Epistol. 54.
that by your godly help and my favorable assent, he has obtained so famous
a Bishopric. Whether was greater now, the help and furtherance of the Emperor,
or the base assent of Leo? Secondly, we deny not but that the Pope sometimes,
what by sufferance of others, what by his own intrusion, has usurped this
power over other Bishops: by this ought not to make a law: that which is once
or twice done by a false title, cannot prove the iustnes of the title.
Thirdly, that the Bishop of Rome has no such authority, it appears by this,
that he does not, neither of many years has constituted or ordained the
patriarks of the Greek Church: they came not up to Rome nor yet sent thither
for their palls as other Archbishops here in the West parts have done, and
paid full dearly for them, being made slaves to the beast of Rome.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope neither has, nor yet ought to have any such authority over
other Bishops: but that every one in his own precinct, and jurisdiction has
the chief charge: It is thus proved.

1. Peter was not chief, neither did exercise jurisdiction over the twelve:
Ergo, neither the Pope ought to do over other Bishops. The antecedent or first
part is thus confirmed. The heavenly Jerusalem, which is the Church of God, is
described Apocal. 21. not with one foundation only of Peter, but with 12.
foundations after the number of the Apostles: argument. Tunstalli. To this
purpose also he alleges in saying out of Hierome contra Iouinian. Fox. p.
106^
All the Apostles received the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and upon them
all indifferently and equally, is the strength of the Church grounded and
established. Fox. p. 1066.

2. Till the year of the Lord 340. there was no respect had to the Church of
Rome, but every Church was ruled by their own government: afterward followed
the Council of Nice, wherein was decreed, that the whole Church should be
divided into four circuites or precincts: over the which there were four
Metropolitanes or patriarchs set: first the Bishop of Rome: next the Bishop of
Alexandria: the third was the Bishop of Antioch: the fourth the Bishop of
Jerusalem: and not long after came in the Bishop of Constantinople in the room
of the B. of Antioch. All these had equal authority in their provinces, and
one was not to deal within another charge: Ergo, the Bishop of Rome had not
then the jurisdiction over the whole Church, argument. Nili. plura Fox. p. 9.

3. We will adioyne the testimony of the fathers of Basile, which were all of
the Popish sect: what have the Bishops been in our days say they, but only
shadows? might they not have been called shepherds without sheep? what had
they more then their Miters and their staff, when they could determine nothing
over their subjects? Verily in the primitive Church, the Bishops had the
greatest power and authority: but now it was come to that point, Fox. p. ^79.
col. 1.
that they exceeded the common sort of priests only in their habit and
revenues. What plainer testimony can we have, then from the papists
themselves?

Augustine also agrees to their sentence: habet omnis episcopus, says he, De
baptis. lib. 2. cap. 2.
pro lice^tia libertatis and potestatis suae arbitrium propriu^, tanquam
iudicari ab alio no^ possit, quomodo nec ipse potest alium iudicare, sed
expectemus vniuersi iudiciu^ domini nostri Jesus Christi: Every Bishop is
privileged by his own authority to follow his own judgment, neither is
subject to the judgment of other Bishops, as he is not to judge them, but they
all must be referred to the judgment of Christ: See then in this place
Augustine sets Bishops in the highest room in the Church, and says, they
have no judge above them but Christ.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING Appeals to be made to Rome.
The Papists.
SVch, say they, is the preemine^t authority of the Bishop of Rome, that
appeals

1. One cause of these appeals, was both for that, they which were justly
condemned of other Churches, found greater liberty and favor at Rome, as
Apiarius did, who being condemned in the 6. Aphricane Council for his
detestable conditions, found favor with Zosimus Bishop of Rome, who wrote for
him to the Council to be received again. No maruayle then, if licentious
fellows, hoping to find more favor at Rome, did appeal thither: As also the
ambition of the Bishops of Rome did somewhat help forward this matter, who
were as ready to receive such appeals, as others were to make them.

2. Bishop Tunstal does answer very fully to this point, that, although
appeals were made to Rome, yet was it not for any jurisdiction that the Sea
had: but this was the cause, partly for that there were many deuisions and
parts taking in the Oriental Churches, as also because many were infected with
heresies, from the which the West and Occide^tal Churches were more free, they
were content to refer the cause many times to the Bishop of Rome, as being a
more indifferent judge, and not like to be partial, being no party in the
cause. Neither was their (...) to the Bishop of Rome singularly, but to the
whole congregation of the Bishops of Italy and France, or of the whole West,
as it appears by the epistles of Basile. Tunstal. apud Fox. 1067.

The Protestants.
That appeals ought not to be made to Rome, but that all matters and
controversies may best be ended and determined at home, where they do arise:
It is thus confirmed.

1. This matter was notably handled, anno 420. in the sixth Council of Carthage,
where Augustine was present, with Prosper and Orosius: To this Council Pope
Zozimus sent his Legate with certain requests, of the which this was one, that
it might be lawful for Bishops and priests to appeal from the sentence of
their Metropolitanes, and also of the Council to Rome: alleging for him self
a decree of the Nicene Council. The Council of Carthage sent forthwith to the
patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria, for a copy of the
Counsel of Nice, wherein no such Canon was found, that appeals should be made
to Rome: but the contrary: for in the sixth Canon of that Council, it was found
how all matters, and all persons ecclesiastical, both Bishops and others were
committed to their Metropolitanes: upon this decree the Council of Carthage
drew out certain reasons why appeals should not be made to Rome. First, it is
not otherwise to be thought, but that the grace of God is as ready at hand in
one province as in another. Secondly, there is no need to seek any outlandish
help: for the party grieved may appeal to a provincial or general Council.
Thirdly, it were not equal nor right to appeal from the Council to the Bishop
of Rome: for it is not like, that God will inspire his truth unto the Bishop,
and deny it to a multitude congregated in his name.

Fourthly, no foreign or outlandish judgment can be so upright or just:
because the witnesses cannot be present, being hindered by infirmity of sex,
age, sickness, by whom the truth should be discussed.

Upon these reasons the Council concluded, that neither any appeals should be
made to Rome: neither that Legates should be sent from Rome for deciding of
matters: And this answer they made to Zozimus first, to Bonifacius and
Celestinus, that in short time one succeeded another. And for all the B. of
Rome his absolution, Apiarius was again called coram, and brought to confess
his fault. Fox. p. 10. col. 2.

Now out of the Acts of this Council, and their reasons alleged we conclude,
that it is not fit, convenient nor reasonable, that appeals should be made to
Rome.

The Jesuit answers, that appeals were forbidden to be made by priests to
Rome, not by Bishops. This is but a vain shift, for the reasons of the Council
are general against all appeals: And Apiarius, that appealed to Rome, was a
priest, and no Bishop.

2. We can bring the decrees of a latter Council, then this of Carthage: for
in the Council of Basile it was decreed, that no actions or controversies
should be brought from other countries to be pleaded at Rome* which were more
then four days journey distant from the said court of Rome, a few principal
matters only excepted, apud Fox. p. 697.

3. This also is flatly contrary to the rule of the Apostle, that appellations
should be made out of the Church a far off. Is it so, says he, that there is
not a wise man amongst you, no not one that can judge amongst his brethren? 1.
Cor. 6.5. Ergo, every Church has wise men sufficient in it, whereby their
controversies may be ended.

4. Augustine also thus writes concerning this matter, Miltiades Episcopus
Romanus, non sibi vsurpauit iudicium de causa Ceciliani, sed rogatus imperator
iudices misit Episcopos, qui cum eo sederent, epist. 162. Miltiades Bishop of
Rome did not usurp or take upon himself to judge the cause of Cecilian, but
the Emperor being requested, sent other bishops, that should sit and determine
the cause together with him. Out of these words first we note, that it had
been usurpation and presumption for the Bishop of Rome to have taken upon him
the judgment of this matter, not belonging unto him, unless the Emperor had
committed it. Secondly, that Miltiades did not suffer other Bishops to sit
with him, as Bellarmine imagines: but, he could not otherwise choice, for they
were joined in commission by the Emperor, to be judges as well as he. Thus we
see what small show or color of title the Pope has, to hear or receive
appeals from other countries.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER THE Pope be subject to the judgment of any.
The Papists.
Bellarmin. cap. 26. Nay, he should do injury unto GOD, to submit himself
to the judgment of any, Iacobat. ex Tilhemann. de pontif. romans err. 34.

Beside certain blind canons and constitutions, and a few examples grounded
upon the insolent practices of Popes, they have no other arguments either out
of scripture, or drawn from reason, to confirm this their hideous and
monstrous opinion withal.

Bellarmine reasons thus: the Prince is not to be judged by the
commonwealth: but is greater then his kingdom: the Pope is the prince of the
Church: Ergo

We answer: First, concerning the Princes high and Sovereign authority we
will not now dispute: we make it not infinite, the word of God must be a rule
and square both of civil and ecclesiastical judgment. Secondly, It is
sufficient for us here to answer, that the Jesuit has said nothing: for this
which he assumeth for a reason, is the greatest matter in question between us:
and so great an untruth he has uttered, that he is constrained to leave
scripture, and seek help elsewhere. But he shall never, by any good reason,
or sufficient authority prove, that the Pope has any such Princedome in the
Church, as he would bear us in hand.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope as well as other ecclesiastical persons, ought to be, and is by
right subject to the judgment and authority of the Emperor, King, Prince, or
other supreme magistrate, and may also by general Councels be corrected and
censured, thus it is proved.

1. Peter was judged of Paul, Galat. 2. and of him justly reproved: Ergo, the
doings of the Pope may be judged and censured.

Bellarmine answers, that it was not iudicialis censurae, but fraterna
correptio, it was no judicial censure, but a brotherly reprehension.

We reply: First, public censure and reprehension is a part of
ecclesiastical judgment and discipline, therefore Peter being publicly
rebuked, was thereby judged also of Paul. Secondly, the question is not only
concerning public and open judgment, but whether it be lawful to call the
Popes doings into question, and whether his decrees are absolutely to be
received without any sca^ning or discussing, or making any doubt thereof: for
this we hold, that it is the duty of all Christians to examine and try the
truth of all things, which they are to receive and believe, though they sit
not formally and iudicially, as in consistories: to judge their spiritual
pastors: so the Beraeans judged of the Apostles doctrine: so may the Popes
decrees be examined and judged. Thirdly, the Jesuit grants that the Pope may
be rebuked and brotherly reproved, but the Extrauagant denies it: non est, qui
audeat dicere, domine curfacis sic? none dare say unto him, sir why do thou
so? Fulk. 2. Gal. 2. sect. 8.


2. Every soul must be subject to the higher powers, Ergo, the Pope, Romans
13.1. Bellarm. answers, that the Apostle here speaks of all superiors both
spiritual and temporal, and therefore it cannot be concluded, that the Pope
ought to obey, but he must be obeyed, because he is also a spiritual power.

We reply: Saint Paul in this place speaks only of the civil Magistrate.
First he calls them (...), Princes, which is not meant of ecclesiastical or
Church governors, nor so taken in any place of scripture. Secondly, they are
said to bear the sword. Thirdly, tribute is paid to them: those things agree
not to ecclesiastical governors: so the Jesuit is answered.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER THE Pope may be deposed from his papacy.
The Papists.
SOme of them hold that the Pope ought not, neither can be deposed for
heresy; Pighius the Jesuit confesses this to be a probable opinion: but
himself defends it not: he confesses also the opinion of Caietanus, that
the Pope may be deposed for manifest and apparent heresy. Bellarmines opinion
is this: that the pope can not be deposed for any cause but heresy: and not
for all heresy, but that which is manifest and apparent: Neither is he then
deposed by any act of the Church, but is of himself deposed, and cease any
more to be pope: so the Church may afterward punish him, but he is then no
Pope, for as soon as he is become an heretic, his popedom in the very Act
is gone from him, Bellarmin. cap. 30.

He reasons thus: A manifest heretic is not so much as a member of the
Church, much less can he be pope, who they say is the head of the Church, and
therefore in such a case the pope is deposed without any sentence: and if
afterward the Church proceed against him, they do not judge the Pope* for he
had lost his papacy before.

We answer: First, if a manifest heretic be actually deposed, it is by the
secret judgment and sentence of God: for by no other authority can he be
deposed as they hold: but before God manifest heresy, and close and secret
heresy is all one: therefore the Pope is also actually deposed for secret
heresy, and not only for manifest: and so some of the papists think, as
Iohann. de Turre veniata. Secondly, what call you manifest heresy? or how is
he known to be a manifest heretic? Can he be an heretic before he be
convinced? shall judgment pass against him uncondemned? A murderer is a dead
man by law, yet he lives till judgment pass upon him: so is the Pope
being an heretic, yet Pope, till he be iudicially proceeded against; as a
murderer dead by right is in act yet living, till by law he is deprived of his
life. An heretic, says Saint Paul, after two or three admonitions avoid: that
is, says the Jesuit, he is now excommunicate before the sentence of the
judge. Be it so, but he must first be admonished, and if he still continue
obstinate, then he is a manifest heretic: so before the Pope can be known to
be a manifest heretic, he must be found obstinate, he cannot be obstinate,
unless he refuse to be admonished, if he be admonished, then is he judged.
Thirdly, an heretic cease not to be a priest, (as they speak) no not after
heresy is known, for manifest heretics may baptize. The Donatists in
Augustines time were manifest heretics, and yet the Church did not baptize
again after them: If a manifest heretic cease not to be a priest, neither
cease he to be Pope; there is like reason of both: for if an heretic,
because he is not a member of the Church, can not be a Pope, neither also can
he retain the priesthood.

Lastly, who sees not what bare and frivolous shifts those are? one says, the
Church may judge the Pope, Caietan.
not as he is Pope, but in respect of his person: an other says, that they may
judge the man which was Pope, but he is then no Pope, because his heresy
took from him the papacy. Why masters what iugling is here? is the Pope one
thing and the Popes person an other? By the same reason you may say, that the
Pope neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor dies, and so make a god
of him, because it is the popes person that does all this, and not the Pope.

And by this shift you make no difference between an heretic Bishop, o^
heretic priest, and heretic Pope: for by the same reason, none of them all
shall be subject to the judgment of the Church: for we may say, that a
manifest heretic, whether Bishop or priest, has lost by that very act of
falling into heresy, his priesthood and Bishopric, and then is neither Bishop
nor priest. And so you may conclude altogether: that neither Pope, Bishop nor
piest can be deposed from heresy.

The Protestants.
WE doubt not to say, that the Pope both lawfully has been deprived sometime by
the Emperor, sometime by general Councels, not only for hesie, but for other
notable crimes, and may still be proceeded against by the same right, as well
as any other Bishop or Prelate.

1 Diverse examples we are able to bring forth, how the Pope has been deposed
for other crimes, beside heresy. Pope John the 13. was deposed in a general
Council by the consent of Otho the Emperor, for other matter beside heresy:
as that he ordained Deacons in a stable, that he committed incest with two of
his sisters, that playing at dice, he called to the devil for help, that he
defloured virgins, that he lay with Stephana his fathers concubine, likewise
with Ramera and Anna, and her Niece: for these beastly parts and such like, he
was deposed: there was no heresy objected against him. And think you not he
was worthily vnpoped? yet the Papists think no: for they admit no cause of
deprivation but heresy. This deuillish Pope, through the harlots of Rome (for
he was well beloved of them) recovered his Popedom again; but at the length
the Lord himself displaced him: for in the tenth year of his Popedom, being
found without the city with an other man's wife, he was so wounded of her
husband, that within eight days after he dyed, Fox. page 159.

Boniface the 7. took Pope John the 15. who was made Pope a little before, and
he expelled, yet recovering the Papacy by force, he took him, put out his
eyes, and threw him in prison where he was famished: Likewise was John the 18.
served by Gregory the 5. his eyes were thrust out first, Fox. p. 160.
and he afterward slain. I marvel how our Catholics can excuse these
furious outrages of their ghostly fathers of Rome!

In the Council of Brixia, Gregory the 7. was deposed, not for heresy, but
for other abominable vices: as maintayning of perjury and murders: for
following Diuinations and Dreams, Sorcerie and Necromancie, Fox. p. 181. Pope
John the 23. deposed in the Council of Constance: Eugenius in the Council at
Basile: yet neither of them for heresy. And yet our adversaries would still
make us believe, that Popes cannot be deposed for any crime but heresy.

2 We can have no better argument, then from our adversaries themselves. It is
a sport to see what diverse opinions they hold, and do run as it were in a
maze, not knowing which way to get out. Pighius thinks, that the Pope cannot
possibly fall into heresy, and therefore for no cause may be deposed: Some
other think that the Pope for secret and close heresy is actually deposed of
GOD, and may also be deposed and judged of the Church: thus holds Iohann. de
turre cremat. Caietanus is of opinion, that for manifest and open heresy the
Pope is both already by right deposed, and may also actually be deposed of the
Church: But Bellarmine confuteth all these. There is a fourth opinion most
gross: that the Pope neither for secret nor open heresy, is either already
of right deposed, or may be actually deprived of the Church. Lastly comes in
the nice and dainty Jesuit with his quirkes and quiddities, who says, that
the Pope in case of manifest heresy, cease to be Pope, and is even now
deposed: and if after the Church proceed against him, they judge not the Pope,
for now he is no Pope: Which opinion how absurd it is, I have declared before.

THE FIFTH PART CONCERNING THE Original and beginning of the primacie of Rome.
The Papists.
THey do boldly affirm without any ground, that the primacie of that See
Romani pontificis ecclesiasticum principatum, authore Christo, principium
accepisse: that the princely dignity of the Bishop of Rome, acknowledges no
other author or beginner thereof, but Christ, Bellarm. cap. 7. lib. 2.

1 They would build the primacie of the Roman Church upon certain places of
scripture: as Math. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. Luke 22. I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith should not fail.
John 21. Christ said to Peter, feed my sheep: Ergo, Peter and Peter's
successors have their primacie from Christ, Bellarm.

To these places Tunstal and Stokeslie two Popish Bishops, yet in this point
holding the truth, did properly make answer in their Epistle sent to Cardinal
Poole.

To the first: They affirm out of the ancient expositors, that it is meant of
the faith which was then first confessed by the mouth of Peter, and not of
Peter's person. Further, confirming out of S. Paul, that neither Peter, nor no
creature beside, could be the foundation of the Church: for no other
foundation can any man lay (says the Apostle) besides that which is laid,
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.

To the second they answer: that Christ speaks only of the fall of Peter,
which he knew in his godly prescience, giving an inkling unto him, that
after his fall he should be converted and strengthen his brethren: for if it
were meant also of Peter's successors, they must first fail in faith, and after
confirm their brethren.

To the third: The whole flock of Christ was not committed to Peter to feed:
for he himself testifies the contrary, exhorting all Pastors to feed the
flock of Christ, ^. Pet. 5.
which was given them in charge by Christ, as it follows in that place: when
the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive the incorruptible Crown
of eternal glory: He calls not himself the chief shepherd, but only
Christ. It is evident therefore (say they) that your 3. scriptures meant nothing
less, then such a primacie over all, Fox. page 1067.

2 There can be no time assigned since Christ (say they) when this primacie
should begin, nor no author named that brought it in: Ergo, it must needs be
attributed to Christ, he must of necessity be found the author thereof.

We answer: the time may be assigned, the authors named, when, and by whom
this pretensed and usurped authority was brought in, as even now we will
show.

The Protestants.
THat the usurped jurisdiction of Rome took not the beginning from Christ, nor
his Apostles, neither was heard of for many years after: we thus are able to
prove it.

1 Before the Nicene Council, which first divided the regiment of the Church
into four Patriarchal seats: Rome had small or no preeminence. So Aeneas
Syluius witnesses, who afterward was Pope of Rome, and called Pius the 2. Ante
Nicenum concilium sibi quisque viuebat, and ad Romanam ecclesiam paruus
habebatur respectus, Epist. 301. Before the Nicene Council, every Bishop lived
to himself, there was no great respect had to the Church of Rome. What more
evident testimony can we have then of a Pope himself? Yet the Jesuit says,
that it is false in part, which he writes. He is somewhat mannerly, in making
him but half a liar: yet I wonder that he will confess any untruth at all in
his ghostly fathers words, Bellarm. cap. 17. lib. 2.

Secondly, in the Council of Nice there was no primacie of power given to Rome
over the whole Church: but the other Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, were privileged in like manner in their confines, as the Bishop of
Rome was in his: They had all equal authority given them in their own
provinces: Sic Tonstall. Stokesli. ad Poolum.

Thirdly, afterward there was a certain primacie of order granted unto the
Patriarch of Rome above other Patriarchs; as to have the first place, to sit
first, to give his sentence first. One cause hereof was, for that Rome was then
the Imperial and chief city in all the world: this reason was rendered in
the Council of Chalcedon. Can. 28. An other cause thereof, Fox. page 9.
was the ample privileges and immunities, which the Emperors endued it
withal, as Constantine the great: and Gratianus the Emperor made a law, that
all men should reteyne that religion, which Damasus of Rome, and Peter Bishop
of Alexandria did hold.

A third cause was, the unquiet estate of the Greek Church, who often
voluntarily referred their matters to the Bishop of Rome, as being less
partial and a more indifferent Judge, they themselves being divided and rent
into sects. And hereupon, and other like causes it came about, Fox. p. 18.
that the Bishop of Rome a little stepped above his fellow Patriarchs, but yet
had no such preeminent authority, as to command them.

Fourthly, the Pope of Rome being thus tickled with vain glory, because they
were reverenced of other Churches, many matters were committed unto them, and
their consent required unto the decrees of Councels, when they were absent.
Hereupon they labored every day more and more to advance that See, taking
every small occasion that might help forward their ambicious desire, till
Anno. 606. or somewhat after, Boniface the 3. obtained of wicked Phocas the
Emperor (who murdered his master the Emperor Mauritius and his children, to
come to the Empire, and was after slain himself of Heraclius that succeeded
him) of him, I say, Boniface for himself and his successors obtained, to be
called universal Bishops over the whole Church: Fox. p. 120.
and the Sea of Rome to have the preeminence above all other Churches in the
world.

Afterward in Pope Zachary his time, the proud and insolent jurisdiction of
Rome was established by Pipinus King of France, who aspired to the Crown, and
obtained it by the said Popes means, first deposing Childericus the rightful
King, and dispensing with the oath, which the French men had made before to
Childericus, Calum. Institut. 4. cap. 7. sect. 17.

Thus then it sufficiently appears, that the primacie of Rome, which it now
unjustly challenges over other Churches, is not of any such antiquity, as
they would bear the world in hand, neither that it had the beginning from
Christ: but both the time when, and the authors by whom it began, may be
easily assigned.

2 We need no better argument, to prove that the primacie of Rome has not
his original from Christ, then the Jesuits own confession. First, he says,
that it does not depend of Christ's institution, but, ex Petri facto, of Peter's
fact, that the Bishop of Rome should be rather Peter's successor, then the
Bishop of Antioch, or any other: It is not, iure diuino, says he, by Gods
law: neither is it, ex prima institutione pontificatus, quae in Euangelio
legitur, of the first institution whereof we read in the Gospel. And again,
Romanum pontificem succedere Petro, non habetur express in scripturis: It is
not expressly set down in scripture, that the Bishop of Rome should succeed
Peter: but it is grounded only upon the tradition of Peter. Nay, he says
further, that Peter needed not to have chosen any particular place for
succession, and he might as well have chosen Antioch as Rome: Ergo, neither is
the succession of Rome grounded upon scripture, neither any commandment of
Christ: for then Peter could not have had free choice to appoint his successor
where he would himself, as the Jesuit says, if he had had any especial
direction or commandment from Christ. So then, mark I pray you, they cannot
prove out of scripture, that the Bishop of Rome ought to succeed Peter in the
chief Bishopric, but only that Peter had the chief Bishopric committed
to him and his successors in general, whosoever they should appoint: Ergo, the
Bishops of Rome by their own confession, can allege no scripture,
institution, or commandment of Christ, for the primacie of the Church to be
annexed to the Sea of Rome: and yet against their knowledge they will allege
scripture to color the matter withal, Bellarm. lib. 2. de pontif. ca. 17.

3 Augustine says: Secundum honorum vocabula, quae iam ecclesiae vsus
obtinuit, episcopatus presbyterio mayor est. The office of a Bishop is above
the office of a Priest, according to the names of honor, which the Church by
custom has obtained. If then the difference of those two offices, both named
in scripture, did arise rather and spring of the custom of the Church, which
thought it good to distinguish them for avoiding of schism, and is not
grounded upon the authority of scripture: much less can the Pope (whose
neither name, nor office is expressed in scripture) fetch from thence any show
of proof, for his usurped primacie.

THE SIXTH PART OF THIS QVESTION, CONCERning the proud names and vain glorious
titles of the Pope.
The Papists.
BEllarmine sets down to the number of fifteen glorious names which Rome,
whereby his primacie over other Bishops is notoriously known: but the
principal are these: He is called the Pope and chief Father, the prince of
Priests, or high Bishop, the Vicar of Christ, the head of the Church, the
Prelate of the Apostolic See, universal Bishop. These six names or titles
they do appropriate to the Sea of Rome, Bellarm. de Roman. pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 31.

The Protestants.
WE will show by Gods grace, that these six several titles and names
aforesaid, are either such, as ought not in their sense to be attributed to any
Bishop, nor any mortal man* or else were common in ancient times as well to
other Bishops, as to him of Rome.

1 For the first name of Pope, it is derived from the Greek word (...), which
in the Syracusane language, is as much as, Father: which name was indifferently
given to other Bishops, which were famous in the Church for their virtue and
learning: As Cypriane, Epiphanius, Athanasius, were called Papae, Popes: Fox.
page 8.
Augustine saluteth Aurelius President of the 6. Council of Carthage, by the
name of Pope, Epistol. 77.

Likewise, those two epithetes of the Pope, as to be called, Beatissim. and
sanctissim. pater: most holy and blessed father, were used in the style of
other Bisshops: Prosper, in his Epistle to Augustine, twice calls him Dominum
beatissimum papam, Lord, most blessed Pope, Tom. 7. Hierome calls Epiphanius,
Beatum papam, blessed Pope, Ad Eustach. Fabiol.

Augustine writing to Petrus the Presbyter, or Priest, being no Bishop, yet
thus saluteth him: Ad sanctitatem tuam scripsit, he has written to your
holiness. De origin anim. 2.1. De origin anim. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Nay, in his book dedicated to Renatus a lay man, neither Priest nor Bishop,
thus he writes, Hinc angor, quod sanctitati tuae* minus quam vellem cognitus
sum: This grieueth me, that I am not so well known to your holiness as I
desire. If then these titles of holiness and blessedness were not only given
to Bishops, but Priests also, yea unto lay men of virtuous and holy life; what
color or show of reason can our adversaries have, to make them proper to the
Bishop of Rome?

2 The second name is prince of Priests, or high and chief Bishop: which
title, if it be taken for a chief power, dominion, and sovereignty, is proper
only to Christ the chief shepherd, 1. Pet. 5.4. and cannot in that sense
agree to any man. If it be used only as a title of excellency and
commendation, so was it in times past ascribed to other excellent and famous
Bishops, as Ruffinus lib. 2. cap. 26. calls Athanasius, Pontificem maximum,
chief Bishop: yea it was in common given to all Bishops: as Anacletus Bishop
of Rome in his second Epistle writes thus: Summi sacerdotes, id est, Episcopi,
a deo iudicandi sunt: The high Priests, that is, Bishops (says he) are to be
judged of God. If it be taken further for the excellency of the ministry of
the Gospel, and the worthy calling of Christians, in this sense the title of
summum sacerdotium, of the high Priesthood, is attributed to all ministers
Ecclesiastical, both Bishops and others: Fox page 12 Col. 1.
so Fabianus Bishop of Rome uses this name. Yea, the holy Apostle calls all
the people of God (...), a princely, royal, or chief priesthood: Ergo, the
Bishop of Rome has no especial or proper interest in this name.

3 The third name is, to be called the Vicar of Christ upon earth. Where we
are to understand, that in respect of the spiritual regiment and kingdom of
Christ, he needs no Vicegerent upon earth: for, I am with you (says he) to
the end of the world: he himself is always present in power, and needs not in
that respect, that any man should supply his room. Petrus scriba martyr. Fox.
page 906. If we do take it for a word of office and public administration, so
the Magistrate may be called the Vicar of Christ, in governing the people
according to the word of God: In which sense Eleutherius Bishop of Rome,
writing to Lucius King of the Britains, calls him the Vicar of Christ, and
therefore in his own kingdom had power out of the word of God to establish
laws, Fox. p. 107.
for the government of the people. So all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers in
ancient time were called the Vicars of Christ, in preaching, praying, binding
and loosing in the name and power of Christ. Quaest. ex ^uoque 127.
So Augustine says, or whose work else it is, that, Omnis antistes est Christi
vicarius: Every pastor and prelate (and not the Pope only) is the Vicar of
Christ. And this is confessed by our Rhemists, annot. in 2. Cor. 5.18. that the
Bishops and priests of the Church are for Christ, and as his ministers, Quaes^.
106
that is, his Vicars. Nay, Augustine makes yet a more general use of this
word: he says, that, Homo imperium Dei habens, quasi vicarius eius est: That
man by creation being made Lord of the creatures, does therein represent God,
and is as his Vicar upon earth. So then, all ministers are the Vicars of
Christ; the civil Magistrate likewise, in some good sense, may be so called:
yea in respect of the creatures, man generally is upon earth in Gods stead:
Ergo, this name cannot be appropriate to the Pope of Rome.

4 It is also too huge a name for the Pope or any mortal man to bear, to be
called the head of the universal Church: this is a name only due unto Christ,
neither do the scriptures acknowledge any other head, but him, Ephesians.
1.22.4.15. But (say they) we do not make the Pope such an head, as Christ is,
but only a ministerial head over the militant Church upon earth.

We answer: First, Ergo, the Pope by your own confession is not head of the
universal Church, whereof the triumphant Church in heaven is a part. Secondly,
the Rhemists confess that the Church in no sense can be called the body of
the Pope: Ergo, the Pope cannot be any ways the head of the universal Church,
Annot. in 1. Ephesians. 22. Thirdly, the Fathers of Basile used this argument: The
head of the body being dead, the whole body also dies; but the whole Church
does not perish with the Pope: Ergo, he is not properly the head of the Church,
Fox page 675.

If it shall be further objected, that the Bishop of Rome has been called in
times past, caput Episcoporum, the head of all other Bishops: we answer, that
it was but a title of excellency and commendation, not of dominion and power:
as London is called the head or chief city of England, yet are not other
cities of the land subject unto it, or under the jurisdiction thereof. But we
shall have occasion more fully to discuss this matter afterward.

5 They would have the Pope called the Prelate of the Apostolic See: the
Rhemists say further, that the Papal dignity is a continual Apostleship,
Annot. 4. Ephesians. sect. 4.

We answer: First, if they call those Churches Apostolical, whose first
founders were the Apostles, then the Sea of Antioch, Alexandria,
Constantinople, are as well Apostolical as Rome: and this the Jesuit denies
not, Lib. 2. de pontific. cap. 31. Secondly, those Churches are Apostolical,
which hold the Apostolic faith: so is not the Sea of Rome Apostolical, being
departed and gone back from the ancient Catholic faith: but those Churches
where the Gospel of Jesus Christ is truly preached, are indeed Apostolic.
Thirdly, how can the Pope be an Apostle, or have Apostolic authority, seeing
he preaches not at all, much less to the whole world, wherein consisted the
office of an Apostle? Neither can he show his immediate calling from Christ,
as all the Apostles could: for seeing he challenges the Apostolic office by
tradition from S. Peter, and not by commandment from Christ; he can in no wise
be counted an Apostle, or his office an Apostleship: for the Apostles ordained
only Evangelists and Pastors, they had not authority to consecrate and
constitute new Apostles. Our adversaries for this their Apostleship, can find
nothing in scripture, nor for a thousand years after Christ in the ancient
writers, Fulk. annot. in Ephesians. 4. sect. 4.

6 Concerning the title of universal Bishop, it was thus decreed in the sixth
Council of Carthage, as it is alleged by Gratian: Distinct. 99
Vniuersalis autem nec Romanus pontifex appelletur: No not the Bishop of Rome
is to be called universal. In Gregory the first his time, John Patriarch of
Constantinople, obtained of the Emperor Mauritius to be called universal
Patriarch: but Gregory would not agree thereunto, calling him the forerunner
of Antichrist, that would challenge so proud a name.

Bellarmine and other of that sect do answer, that Gregory found fault with
this title, Lib. 2 de pont. ca. 31.
because John of Constantinople would have been Bishop alone, and none other to
be beside him, but all other only to be his deputies and vicars.

To this we reply: First, John did only challenge a superiority over other
Bishops, not to be Bishop alone, for this had been a thing impossible.
Secondly, if John had sought any such thing, it is not like that the Chalcedone
Council and the Emperor would have yielded to so unreasonable a matter as they
did. Thirdly, Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria does call the said Gregory
universal Pope, which name he utterly refuses: and yet Eulogius had no such
meaning to make him Bishop or Patriarch alone, but only to give him a
preeminence above the rest. Fox. page 13
This modest and humble Bishop of Rome Gregory, in stead of the title,
Universal, brought it into the Popes style to be called Seruus seruorum dei,
servant to Gods servants: Ergo, we conclude with Gregory, that this title.
Universal, is an Antichristian name, and that it has misliked the ancient
Bishops of Rome themselves, and how other Patriarchs and Bisshops have
challenged that ambitious name and title, as well as the Popes of Rome.

THE SIXTH QVESTION, WHETHER THE Pope may err, or not.
The Papists.
THey deny not but that both the Pope by himself, and together with a Bellar.
lib. 4. de pontific. cap. 1^. No nor yet in precepts of manners prescribed to
the Church by the Pope, is there any fear or danger of error, cap. 5. Yea, it
is probable (says he) that the Pope, not only as Pope, cannot err, but not
as a private person, is it like he should fall into heresy, or hold any
obstinate opinion contrary to the faith? cap. 6.

1 Luke 22.31. Simon, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Christ
here prays for Peter, and his successors, that they might not at any time
err, or be deceived in matters of faith, Bellar. cap. 3. Rhem. annot. in Luke
22. sect. 11.

We answer: First, this was a particular prayer for Peter, that his faith
should not fail in that great and dangerous tentation, into the which, our
Savior foresaw, he should fall: For if it were to be understood of Peter's
successors, they also must first be sifted by Satan as Peter was, and deny
Christ, and so being converted strengthen their brethren: if they will
understand one part of Peter's successors, I pray you, why not all? Secondly,
Our Savior prays likewise for all his Apostles, that they might be
sanctified in the truth, yea for all, that should believe by their preaching:
yet is not every Christian privileged from all error of faith. Thirdly, after
this Peter himself erred, and was reprehended of Saint Paul. Fulk. annot. in
Luke 22. sect. 11.

2. The high Priests that sat in Moses chair were privileged not to err.
Ergo, much more now are the chief pastors of the Church free from error,
Bellarm. cap. 3. Rhemist. Luke 22. sect. 11.

We answer: the high Priests had no such privilege, for some of them fell into
strange errors: Vriah the high Priest set up an idolatrous altar at the Kings
commandment, 2. King. 16. Eliashib was joined in Affinity with Tobiah the
Ammonite, contrary to the law of God, Fulk. ibid.

The Protestants.
THat the Popes and Bishops of Rome have not only erred in manners, but even
in faith; and not only privately and personally as men, but pulikely and
iudicially as Popes; that they have by their public and open preaching,
defense, allowance, and consent approved and established erroneous, and some
heretical opinions: thus we trust to make it plain and evident to all men.

1. Peter erred: Ergo, the Pope may, though he were Peter's successor. First,
Peter erred in denying of Christ: the Jesuit answers: First, he began not
yet to be the chief Bishop, which he entered not into till after the
resurrection, when Christ said unto him, Feed my sheep, John 21. therefore
all this while he might err. A goodly answer: I pray you tell me, was not the
Church before Christ's passion, and after, built upon the same rock? I trow
they cannot deny it: but Peter was not the rock before, therefore not after.

If he were therefore called a rock because of his confession of Christ, why
should he not then rather, straight after his confession, take possession of
his office, then immediately after his denial of Christ? Surely this is but a
silly shift. Secondly, says the Jesuit, Peter failed in charity when he
denied Christ, not in faith, cap. 3. and if he failed in faith, he lost the
confession of faith, and not faith it self. We answer: First, and can a true
faith then be separated from love by your doctrine? The Apostles knew no such
faith: Saint James says, it is a dead faith that is without the works of love,
and the faith of devils, that is, no faith, James 2.17.19. If then Peter's love
failed, his faith also failed. Secondly, we do not say that Peter's faith was
lost and utterly extinguished, for Christ prayed for him, but whether it were
an error in faith which Peter fell into: for it is not all one to err in
faith, or clean to lose faith. Thirdly, he lost the confession of faith, he
denied Christ in word, Ergo: he denied the faith, howsoever he thought in
heart: for these two are the principal fruits of faith, to Believe with the
heart, and Confess with the mouth, Romans 10. and where either of these is
wanting, there can not be a right faith: for he that puts away a good
conscience, makes shipwreck also of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19. But the Jesuit I see
has a queazie stomach, let him cough up lustily, and say with one of his
fellows, Petrus non fidem Christi, Alan. Cop.
sed Christum salua fide negauit. Peter denied not the faith of Christ, but,
his faith remaining sound and whole, he only denied Christ. Lo, here is new
popish divinity, that a man may deny Christ, and yet not deny the faith.

Secondly, Peter erred in constraining the Gentiles to do as the Jews.
Bellarmine says, it was an error in example and conversation, not in faith or
doctrine, cap. 7. We answer: First, in this example of Peter there was also
included an error in faith, for how should the Gentiles better know Peter's
judgment, then by his example, by the which they fell into an error of faith,
and were constrained to conform themselves like to the Jews: thinking that
the Jewish ceremonies were necessary to be retained? Secondly, Saint Paul
himself says, they went not the right way to the truth of the Gospel: Ergo,
they erred from the truth of the Gospel, and so in faith. Thirdly, the
divines of Paris do attribute to Peter an error in faith, Fulk. annot. 4.
Galat. sect. 9.

2. We can produce many examples of the Popes, which have erred iudicially,
namely, openly have maintained errors. To let pass Marcellinus, who sacrificed
to Idols, as a slip of his person, and he afterward repented him of his fall:
yet by the way the Jesuit is deceived, that thinks it probable, that the
Popes particular person cannot fall into heresy: here you see Marcellinus fell
into Idolatry.

Liberius subscribed to the Arrians, consented to the condemnation of
Athanasius: as testifies Jerome, confessed by Nicolaus Cusanus, and Alphonsus
de castro, both papists, Iuel. page 164. defens. Apolog.

Honorius 1. consented to the heresy of Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, who
was a Monothelite, and held, that there were not two wills or operations in
Christ, Lib. 6. de loc. cap. vl.
and so destroyed the two natures. That Honorius was a Monothelite, Melchior
Canus a papist confesses: he was condemned for an heretic in the 6.7. and 8.
general synodes. Bellarmine answers, that the Councels are corrupted, or
they might be deceived in judgment, as in a matter of fact: or that Honorius
only misliked the speech, to say there were two wills in Christ, and not the
thing. See what poor shifts here be to make Honorius no heretic, and yet
all will not be.

Pope Stephen the sixth took up Formosus body, and cut off two fingers of his
right hand, and buried him again in a lay-mans Sepulcher: Then followed
Rhomanus the first, Theodorus the second, Johannes the ninth, and restored
Formosus with his decrees, judging him to be lawful Bishop. After them
comes Sergius the third, who took up the body again, cut off the head,
and cast it into Tiber. The Jesuit answers, that Stephanus and Sergius erred
only in a matter of fact. A goodly cloak to cover the filthiness of their
Ghostly fathers withal.

But by your leave a little: do you not hold it to be an article of faith to
believe the Pope to be head of Christ's Church? Then was it an article of
faith to hold that Formosus was right Pope, for at that time there was no
other. Ergo, Stephanus and Sergius erred in faith, defining the contrary. All
that you can say, is this: that it was not yet determined and decreed for an
article of faith, so to believe: see I pray you, these men's faith is pinned
upon Popes sleeves. Why masters, the rule of faith is certain, you cannot make
new articles of faith now, but only declare and explane those that are. But
do you not think that these iollie Popes, that would rake the dead out of
their graves, for their holiness might deserve at GODS hand, to have a
privilege not to err in faith?

Siluester the second was a Necromancer and a Coniurer, and therefore fallen
from the faith. Bellarmine says: he was a good man, and all are fables and
lies that are told of him: and because he was cunning in Geometry, that
ignorant age straightwayes judged him to be given to Necromancie.

Thus we may take the Jesuits word, if we will. But the story is reported
by authors of better credit then Bellarmine: as Johannes Stella, Platina,
Petrus Premonstratens. Nauclerus, Antoninus. Fox. page 167.

Anastasius was a Nestorian heretic, whose heresy was this, that there are,
as two natures, so also two persons in Christ, Alphons. de castro. lib. 1. de
haeresib. cap. 4.

Celestinus is reported by Laurentius Valla a Canon of Rome, to have been a
Nestorian heretic, de donation. Constantin.

Now comes in Pope Hildebrand, or rather Heldebrand, for he was a very brand
of hell fire: called Gregory the seventh: Of whom Benno writes thus: that he
poisoned six Popes his predecessors to make himself a way to the popedom:
that he was a Coniurer, a raiser of Devils, and in his rage he cast the
sacrament into the fire. But says Harding our country man, though unworthily,
Benno was his enemy, and wrote of displeasure: and Bellarmine thinks that
some Lutherane was the author of the book, which goes under the name of
Benno, who was Cardinal in this Hildebrands time. But Benno only does not
thus report of him: he was openly twice for the same crimes condemned in
Council: first at Worms: the^ after deposed in the Counsel at Brixia in Italy,
and Pope Clement 3. elected to succeed him. Vrspergens.
And the said Gregory died in exile, of whom Antonius reports, that before
his death, he repented him of his insolency showed toward the Emperor Henry
the 4. whom with his wife and young child bare foot, and bare legd, he had
caused three days together, in extreme frost and cold, to wait at his
palace gates at Canusium, Fox. p. 179. Iuel. p. 168. defen. apol.
before he could speak with him. Yet this Hildebrand for all these insolent,
cruel, and dishonest parts, is commended by our papists, Harding, Bellarmine
and other, for a devout Catholic man, who did all things of a zeal to the
Church. By this you may judge, whom our adversaries count a Catholic man.

Pope John the 22. affirmed, that the souls lie in a trance till the day of
judgment, and feel neither pain nor joy. Harding, and likewise Bellarmine
answer, that this was an error, but no heresy. Yet in the University of
Paris, it was condemned for heresy, as Gerson writes. Again says Harding,
he held it only as a private opinion. But Massaeus says, that Pope John
preached this heresy and sent out preachers to maintain it. He was condemned
(says he) with his error by the divines of Paris in the presence of Philip the
French King, before he was Pope, when he was yet but a private Doctor. But the
contrary is proved by B. Jewel, that he was Pope 13. years before Philip was
king, Iuell. defens. apolog. p. 667.

Pope John the 23. denied the life to come, and the resurrection of the body:
And this heresy was openly objected against him in the Council of Constance.
Bellarmine and Harding before him, answer, that he was not the rightful Pope,
for there were three at that time, and therefore might err. But Platina says,
that he was chosen at Bonoma, by the consent of all the Cardinals, ex Iuel.
page 671.

Lastly, Pope Eugenius the 4. was condemned and deposed as an heretic in the
Council of Basile. Where the Jesuit has no other answer, then by condemning
the Council as Schismatical, to acquit the Pope, Lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 14.

By these examples it may appear to the indifferent reader, that it is no rare
nor impossible thing, for the Popes of Rome to err, yea become plain
heretics: And as for that shift of the Jesuit, that they are no longer Popes,
when they openly begin to teach heresy, this is, as Alphonsus says, In re
seria verbis velle iocari, De haeresib. lib. 1. cap. 4.
to dally with words in a serious and earnest matter. And so every Bishop shall
be as well privileged as the Pope, and cannot fall into heresy: for why may
we not say that a Bishop, when he is known to be an heretic, cease to be
Bishop any longer, as the Pope is no longer Pope, and so as long as he
remains Bishop, cannot possibly be an heretic? Surely this is but paltrie
and beggarly stuff.

De baptis. lib. 2. cap. 3.
4. Augustine is not a whit afraid to say, Episcoporum literas per sermonem
sapientiorem cuiuslibet in ear peritioris, and per aliorum episcoporum
grauiorem authoritatem, and per concilia licere reprehendi, si in eis a
veritate deuiatum sit. That the decrees of all Bishops whatsoever (not
excluding Popes) may be corrected either by the sentence of wiser men in that
point, wherein they erred, or by the better advised sentence of other Bishops,
or by Councels may be reuersed, where they do err. Ergo, it is possible for
Popes, by his judgment, to err.

A PART OR APPENDIX OF THIS QVEstion, whether the Church of Rome may err or
not.
The Papists.
THey do not only affirm that the Pope cannot err, but that the Church
Bellarm. lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 4. Hereupon Panormitane doubts not to say,
that he would prefer the judgment of the Cardinals of Rome, before the
judgment of the whole world: this he said, standing up in the Council of
Basile, Fox. page 669. ex Aenea Syluio.

1. The Rhemists upon those words of Saint Paul, Romans 1.5. your faith is
published through the whole world, do thus infer: See (say they) the great
providence of God in the preservation of the Roman common faith. In times past
the Roman faith and Catholic all one: Ergo, that See cannot err in faith.

We answer: they must prove their Romish faith and popish religion, to be the
same which was praised and commended by the Apostle, or else they gain nothing:
but that shall they never do.

2. So long as the Apostolic See remains at Rome, it shall be preserved from
error, but that is like there to remain till the worlds end: for it only
remains, when all other Apostolic Sees are gone: and it is very probable,
that if this See could have been overthrown, it should have been done by the
incursion and invasion of the Goths, Vandals, Turks, the emulation of
Princes, divisions and schisms of Popes themselves: yet for all this it
stands still, and has so continued almost 1600. years, and shall so continue
still. Ergo, the Roman Church can not err. Bellarmin. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Rhemist. annot. in Thessal. 2. sect. 7.

We answer: First, it is a great untruth, that all other Apostolic Sees are
gone, for there is a succession at Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople,
Ephesus, even at this day. Secondly, it is false, that the Sea of Rome has
continued in that religion it now professes, which indeed is no religion, but
superstition and heresy, these 1600. years: for first till Gregory's time,
which was 600. years after Christ, none of the popes would be called
universal Bishops: and it was more then 300. years, from Gregory the 1. to
Siluester the 2. when satan is thought fully to be let loose: for he by the
devil was advanced to the papacy: All these years therefore you must strike
off in your account. Thirdly, that the Sea of Rome, which is the seat of
Antichrist, has continued many years we grant: for it is the just judgment
of God upon the world, because they loved not the truth, that they should be
deluded a long time, and deceived by Antichrist, and believe lies: so did Saint
Paul prophecy, 2. Thessalonians 2.10, 11. And we grant also that that
Antichristian See shall in some sort remain till the coming of Christ, whom
he shall destroy with the brightness of his appearing, as Saint Paul says.
You have gained therefore nothing by this, but that Rome is the seat of
Antichrist, Fulk. annotat. in 2. Thessalonians 2. sect. 7.

The Prot^^tants.
IT is evident and plain, and need not much proof, that the Roman Church,
as also any particular visible Church, may not only err in faith, but fall
clean away into heresy and Idolatry, as we see it come to pass in the
Church of Rome.

1. The Church of Rome has no better assurance of their continuance, then the
Church of the Jews had before Christ, no nor yet so great, for they were a
peculiar and chosen nation. But Judah fell and transgressed, and committed
Idolatry in the reign of Ahaz, and therefore the Prophet Esaias complayneth and
says, From the sole of the foot to the head, there is nothing sound, cap. 1.
ver. 6.

Neither are they better then the Church of Ephesus was in Saint John's time,
who was as able (I think) to keep that Church from error, as the Pope is to
keep Rome: yet the Lord threatens to remove his candlestick from amongst
them, unless they did amend, Reave. 2.5. Ergo, the Church of Rome may err.

2. The Pope may err, as we have before showed, Ergo the Church of Rome: for
the Apostolic See, as they say, is the cause that no error can approach or come
near them. Therefore (me thinks) the Jesuit commits a foul absurdity,
in saying, the Church of Rome cannot so much as err personally, and yet they
grant that the Pope may err personally. So by this reason the body should have
a greater privilege then the head: the Church of Rome should be freer from
error then the Pope, who should preserve it from error: this sure is a great
absurdity in Popish divinity, Bellarmin. cap. 4.

3. It is confessed by our adversaries themselves, that the Church of Rome may
err: as the Council at Rome under Adriane the second erred, says the Jesuit,
in determining Honorius to be an heretic, one of his predecessors. cap. 11.

The Council of the Italian Bishops at Brixia erred in condemning Gregory the
seventh, who was, if you will believe Harding, a virtuous and an holy man. Nay
Paulus Iouius a popish Bishop confesses, that Adrianus 6. was made Pope, mira
and pudenda Senatorum factiosorum suffragatione, through the strange and
shameful suffrages of factious Cardinals, Lib. 20. fine.
because they preferred a stranger before their own order.

But our adversaries have a trick, to shift off all this that has been said:
They erred in a matter of fact, not in any point of faith. Yet they cannot so
closely convey the matter away: for Panormitane even in such questions also
prefers the judgment of the Cardinals before the whole world, speaking in
the defense of Eugenius, who was challenged in the Council of Basile, for the
dissolution of the Council, which he did (says Panormitane) with the advice of
the Cardinals: whose judgment he so much esteems in this matter, which
concerned not faith, namely, for the dissoluing of the Council. Fox. p. 669.


THE SEVENTH QVESTION OF THE spiritual jurisdiction and power of the Bishop of
Rome.
THis question has two parts: the first, whether the Bishop of Rome have a
coactiue and constrayning power to make laws to bind the conscience, and to
punish the transgressors. Secondly, whether other Pastors and Bishops have
their jurisdiction immediately from God, or from the Pope.

Other questions also there are, which belong to this matter, as whether the
Pope be the chief judge in controversies of faith, which we have already
handled, entreating of the perfection and authority of the scriptures: as also
whether it be in the Pope to summone, dissolve, and confirm Councels, which
has been sufficiently declared before, in the controversy concerning
Councels. Concerning other questions, as the canonizing of Saints, which they
say appertains to the Pope, the election and confirmation of Bishops, pardons
and indulgences, we shall have fitter occasion to deal in them, in their
several places and controversies. At this time we purpose only to touch
these two points aforesaid, of the Popes Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE POPE may make laws to bind the conscience, and
punish the transgressors thereof iudicially.
The Papists.
THat the Pope has such authorie, to make laws for the whole Church, Fox.
981. articul. 13. and p. 1101. artic. cont. Lambert. 29. But they put in this
clause, So they be not unjust laws nor contrary to the divine law, Bellarm.
cap. 15. And yet they say that the Pope may make laws, having not the
authority nor warrant of scripture, neither is it necessary for these laws to
be expressed or diduced out of scripture. And these laws are not only of
external rites and orders of the Church, but even of things necessary to
salvation, Bellarm. cap 15. in reprehens. Caluini. Yea he adds further, that
in matters not necessary to salvation, he can not be disobeyed without deadly
sin, and offense of conscience, cap. 16. loc. 1. Bulla Leonis 10. aduersus
Lutherum, Fox. p. 1283. col. 1.

1. The Apostles prescribed a law concerning the abstaining from blood, things
strangled, and offered to Idols, concerning the which, Christ gave them no
precept: But this law did bind the people in conscience: for every where the
Apostles gave straight charge, for the keeping of the decrees, Bellarm.

Answer: First, the Apostles commanded no new thing, but the same which they
themselves were taught of Christ, that they should take heed of offense: the
Christians therefore were not bound in conscience any further to keep the
decrees concerning such things, then for avoiding of scandal and offense.
Secondly, for afterward the offense being taken away, the law also ceased: and
Saint Paul gives liberty, notwithstanding this law, to eat things offered to
Idols, if it might be done without offense, Asking no question (says he) for
conscience sake, 1. Cor. 10.27. Ergo their consciences were not hereby obliged
and bound.

3. It is necessary to have some laws, beside the divine law, for the
government of the Church: for the word of God is too universal, neither is
sufficient to direct every particular action: therefore other ecclesiastical
laws must be added, but every good and necessary law has a coactiue and
constraining power, and binds the conscience to obedience: Ergo the
constitutions of the Popes and Councels, which are the only ecclesiastical
laws, do bind the conscience, Bellarmin. cap. 16. lib. 4.

Answer: First, the word of God contains all necessary rules to salvation:
wherefore all laws of the Church concerning matters of faith, are but
explanations, and interpretations of the rules of faith set forth in scripture,
if they be godly laws, and so are not the laws of men but of God, and do
bind the conscience to the observation thereof: as the laws of the Church,
which command Christians to resort to the congregation to hear Gods word, and
reverently to receive the sacraments, are the very ordinances and
commandments of Christ, who enjoined his Apostles to preach, and baptize, and
his faithful people to hear and to be baptized, and therefore in conscience
we are bound to the obedience hereof. Secondly, there are other
ecclesiastical laws appointed for the public order of the Church,
concerning external rites and circumstances of persons and place, as the
hours of prayer, the form of the le^turgie and public service, the times
fittest for the celebration of the sacraments, and such like. These and such
like constitutions do not bind in conscience absolutely, in respect of the
things themselves, which are indifferent, but in regard of that contempt, and
offense which might follow in the not keeping of them: contempt to our
superiors, whom we ought in all lawful things to obey; offense, in grieuing
the conscience of our weak brethren. So that even these constitutions also
which are made according to the rules of the Gospel, that is, unto
edification, to the glory of God, and for avoiding of offense, do
necessarily bind us in conscience, not conscience of the things themselves,
which are but external, but conscience of obedience to our Christian
Magistrates, and conscience in taking heed of all just offense, sic. Calvin.
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10.11.

3 But we are not, God be thanked, driven to any such straight, that if there
be need of any such Ecclesiastical laws, we should run for succor to the
Popes beggarly decretals. (And yet such Canons, as were in force amongst them,
agreeable to the rules of the Gospel, we do not refuse.) But if there be
want and penury of good laws, every Church has as full authority, to make
decrees and ordinances for the peace and order, and quiet government thereof,
not as the Pope of Rome has over the universal Church (for that by right is
none, or if it be, it is but an usurped power) but as the Bishop of Rome has
in his own Bishopric and dioces.

The Protestants.
WHat our sentence is of this matter, it does partly appear by that which we
have already said: that the Pope has no power over the whole Church, and
therefore can make no laws to bind the conscience or otherwise for the same,
for it belongs not to his charge. Secondly, we say, that neither he, nor any
ecclesiastical government beside, can make laws of things necessary to
salvation, other then those which are in Scripture contained. Thirdly, all
Ecclesiastical laws made concerning external rites, and public order, do
not otherwise bind the conscience, then in regard of our obedience due to
Christian Magistrates in lawful things, and for avoiding of scandal and
offense: But in respect of the things commanded, such laws do not bind.
Calvin. loc. praedicto.

1 Saint James says, there is one lawe-giuer which is able to save and to
destroy, cap. 4.12. He therefore only makes laws to bind the conscience,
that is able to save and to destroy: but that cannot the Pope do. Ergo,
Calvin. argum.

Bellarmine answers, that the laws of men do bind under pain of
damnation, in as much as God is offended and displeased with their
disobedience, and so judges them worthy of punishment. cap. 20. All this we
grant, that the laws of men being good laws, do bind in conscience in
respect of the contempt and disobedience to higher powers, but not in respect
of the things commanded, which in their nature are indifferent. The Jesuit
should have said: that God is offended not only for their disobedience, but
simply for not doing the things commanded, which he durst not say: As when
the Magistrate for some profitable and politic end commands upon some days
abstinence from flesh, it is not the eating or not eating of flesh, that
simply displeases and offends God, but the contempt of the law, and
wilful and obstinate disobedience to the magistrate: for otherwise the use of
the creature is free and indifferent.

Cap 1^. lib. 4. de pontif.
2 We will beat the Jesuit with his own staff: he says not that all laws
do bind the conscience, but only just laws, in the which four conditions
are required. First, that they be made for some profitable end: so are not
popish laws which nourish superstition, and have no edifying, and some of them
do command plain idolatry, and open impiety, as the worshipping of images,
the adoration of the Mass, and such like. Secondly, says he, they must not be
contrary to Gods law, but such are many of their ordinances, yea the most of
them. Thirdly, they must be made by him that has authority: therefore none of
the Popes laws bind the universal Church, for it is not subject to him.
Fourthly, the form and manner of imposing such laws must be orderly: but
their laws are most disordered, imposed upon the Church violently, without
their consent, or any good proceeding. Thus, you see, even by their own
confession, their laws cannot bind.

One thing more I must needs tell them of. If they would needs have their
laws to bind men in conscience, they should have made fewer of them: now they
are so many, that if the breach of them were an offense of conscience, do men,
what they could, they should daily make shipwreck of their conscience. It is a
true saying that is reported of one Thomas Arthur, a good Christian, it is an
homely speech, because the matter was somewhat homely, yet he did hit the
mark. Like as (says he) crosses were set up against the walls of London,
that no man should piss there; and while there were but a few, men for
reverence of the crosses, would not piss against the wall: but when in every
corner they set up crosses, men of necessity were feign to piss upon the wall
and crosses too. So says he, if there had been fewer laws of the Church, they
would have been better kept: Fox. page 999.
but now they are so many, that men cannot chose but break them.

3 The Pope has no power to correct the transgressors of his laws over the
whole Church. Ergo, he cannot make laws to bind the whole Church. The
argument follows, for he that has absolute power to make laws, has also
power to command obedience to the laws so made.

The first is thus proved: the Pope indeed has taken upon him many times to
thunder out his excommunication against other Churches: but it was an usurped
and tyrannical power, and many times resisted, and controuled.

Pope Victor Anno 200. would have excommunicate the East Churches about the
keeping of Easter, Fox. p. 41.
but he was stayed by Irenaeus. The Council of Constance did send out
excommunications against Pope Benedict. sess. 36.

In the Council of Basile, Pope Eugenius cited Cardinal Iuliane, with the
rest of the fathers there assembled to come to Bononia, under great penalty:
they likewise cited Eugenius under the like penalty, either to come or send to
Basile. Fox. page 668.

Pope Leo the tenth, in his fumish Antichristian Bull, excommunicated and
condemned Luther. Luther with better right pronounces sentence of
excommunication against him, being an adversary to Christ, in these words:
according to the power and might, that the spirit of Christ, and efficacy of
our faith can do in these our writings, if you shall persist still in your
fury, we condemn you together with this Bull and all the decretall, and give
you to satan to the destruction of the flesh, that your spirit in the day of
the Lord may be delivered: in the name, which you persecute, of Jesus Christ
our Lord. Fox. page 1286.

Thus you see what small force there is of these popish leaden Bulls, and
presumptuous excommunications: for it falls out justly by them, Prouer. 26.
ver. 2.
as the wise man says. As the Sparrow and the Swallowe by flying escape, so
the curse causeless shall not come. Now seeing therefore the Pope fails of
power and strength to see his laws executed in the universal Church, it
cannot be that his laws should universally bind.

Lastly, let Augustine speak: he thus defines sin, peccatum est dictum,
Cont. Faustum lib. 22. cap. 27.
factum, vel concupitum contra legem aeternam Dei, sin is any thing done,
said, or coueted against the Law of GOD: therefore the transgression simply
of the law of man is not sin; but as thereby also the Law of God is
transgressed: Ergo simply it binds not the conscience: for sin only
binds and touches the conscience.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS QVEstion, whether all Bishops do receive their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from the Pope.
The Papists.
THey deny not but that the power of order, as they call it, which consists

1 God took of the spirit that was in Moses, and distributed it among the
seventy Elders, Numb. 11.16.
that were chosen to bear the burden of government with Moses and to be his
helpers: the Lord took of his spirit, not by diminishing it, but by deriuing
of his virtue to the rest: but the Pope is now in the room and place of Moses
in the Church: Ergo, from him to the rest is this an authority derived.

Answer: First, Moses example was extraordinary, he was a figure of Christ,
not of the Pope, Deuteron. 18. verse. 15. The Pope might with better right stand
upon Aarons example, who was high Priest, not lay claim to Moses office, who
was the Prince and Captain of the people: for the Pope, I trow, would be
chief Bishop, and not Emperor too. Secondly, the meaning is not that God
derived Moses spirit to the rest: but bestowed the like gift of prophesying
upon them, as Moses had: surely never any mortal man had the spirit in such
abundance, that it could be divided into seventy portions, and one Prophet
to make many. The like phrase is used, 2. King. 2.15. Where the Prophets said,
that the spirit of Eliah did rest on Elisha, that is, God endued him with an
excellent spirit of prophesying, as Elias had. If they will understand this
place also of deriuing of spirits, how then shall that be taken in the 9. verse
where Elisha prays, that this spirit might be doubled upon him? If his spirit
were derived from Eliah, how could it be doubled upon him? How could it be
multiplied and increased? how could he have more then was in the fountain or
original, seeing he received all from thence?

3 What makes this place, I pray you, for the power of external jurisdiction?
Here it is said that God gave of his spirit to seauentie Elders and rulers of
the people, and enabled them for their office; endued them with wisdom, and
knowledge, and dexterity in judging of the people: this makes nothing for
their purpose, unless they will also say, that there is a secret influence of
knowledge and wisdom derived from the Pope to all other Bishops, whereby they
are made able to execute their office: but (I trow) they will not say so: for
Alphonsus de castro, truly says of the Popes of Rome, constat plures eorum
adeo esse illiteratos, vt grammaticam penitus ignorent: it is certain that
many of them were so unlearned, that they hard and scant knew their grammar.

4 The argument follows not from one particular country, as this was of the
Jews, to the universal Church: that because the seauentie Elders received
jurisdiction from Moses (yet that cannot be proved out of this place, for they
were rulers before, and commanders of the people, the were now but inwardly
furnished, and further enabled) yet it were no good reason, that therefore the
Ecclesiastical Ministers over the whole Church, should receive their power
from one.

5 Neither does it follow, that because the Prince and civil Magistrate may
bestow civil offices, create Dukes, Earls, Lords, constitute Judges,
Deputies, Lieutenants, by his sole authority, that by the same reason
Ecclesiastical ministers should receive their power and office from their
superiors: for although, the Church from ancient time, has thought it good, to
make some inequality and difference in Ecclesiastical offices for the peace
of the Church: yet the superiors have not such a sovereignty and commanding
power over the rest, as the Prince has over his subjects.

The Protestants.
THat Bishops have not their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from Rome, but do as
well enjoy it by right of their consecration, election, institution, in their
own precinctes, circuites, provinces, cities, towns, yea, as the Pope does in
his Bishopric, and by much better right, if they be good Bishops, and lovers
of the truth: thus briefly it is proved.

1 The Apostles had not their jurisdiction from Peter, but all received it
indifferently from Christ: this the Jesuit does not barely acknowledge, but
proves it by argument,. against the judgment of other Papists. cap. 23. Ergo
neither Bishops are authorized from the Pope, though he were Peter's successor:
for if he were (to grant it for disputation sake) he is no more to the Bishops
of the Church, then Peter was to the Apostles. If he gave not the keys to the
Apostles; neither does the Pope Saint Peter's successor, to the Bishops, the
Apostles successors: for they may with as great right challenge to be the
Apostles successors, as he can to be Saint Peter's.

Nay, the Apostles gave no power or jurisdiction to the Elders and pastors,
whom they ordained: Act. 20.28. Take heed to the flock, over the which the
holy Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers: and Ephesians. 4.11. He has given
some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some pastors and teachers: so then the
pastors and teachers, though ordained by the Apostles, yet had their calling
and office from God and not from the Apostles, much less now can they receive
their power from any, no not from the Pope, for he is no Apostle, no nor
Apostolic man, having left the Apostolic faith.

2 Augustine says, Solus Christus habet authoritatem, and praeponendi nos in
ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro iudicandi. de baptis. 2.2.
Only Christ has authority (says he) to prefer us to the government of
the Church, and to judge of our doings: the pastors then of the Church have
the keys of the spiritual regiment from Christ himself, not from the Pope,
or any other.

THE EIGHT QVESTION, OF THE temporal jurisdiction and power of the Bishop of
Rome.
THis question has two parts: first, whether the Pope in respect of any
spiritual

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE Pope directly or indirectly have authority above
Kings and Princes.
The Papists.
THe Papists of former times were not ashamed to say, that the Pope is the Lord
of the whole Church: as Panormitane in the Council of Basile, Fox. page 670.
Yea, Pope Innocentius the third said, writing to the Emperor of Constantinople,
that as the Moon received her light from the Sun, so the imperial dignity
did spring from the Pope: and that the papal dignity was seven and forty
times greater then the imperial: Innoc. 3. in decretal.
yea Kings and Emperors are more inferior to the Pope then lead is to gold,
Gelasius distinct. 96. But our later papists ashamed of their forefathers
arrogancy, in words seem to abate somewhat of their proud sentence, but in
effect say the same thing: For they confess that the Emperor has his office
and calling of God, and not from the Pope: neither that the Pope directly has
any temporal jurisdiction: but indirectly he may depose Kings and princes,
abrogate the laws of Emperors, and establish his own: he may take unto
himself the judgment of temporal causes, and cite Kings to appear before
him: yet not directly (says the Jesuit) as he is ordinary Judge over the
Bishops and whole Clergy, yet indirectlie, as he is the chief spiritual
Prince, he may do all this, if he see it necessary for the health of men's
souls. And so in effect, by their popish indirect means, they give him as
great authority, as ever he usurped or challenged, Bellarmine lib. 5. cap. 6.

1 The Ecclesiastical and civil power do make but one body and society, as
the spirit and the flesh in man: Now the Ecclesiastical power, which is as the
soul and spirit, is the chief part, because it is referred to a more
principal end, namely the safety and good of the soul: the other is as the
flesh to the spirit, and respects but a temporal end, as the outward peace
and prosperity of the commonwealth: Ergo, the spiritual power is chief, and
may command the other. Bellarm. cap. 7.

Ans. First, it is a very unfit and improper similitude, to compare these two
regiments to the soul and the body: for by this means, as the spirit gives
life to the body, and every part thereof, so the civil and temporal state
should receive their office and calling from the Ecclesiastical, which the
Jesuit himself denies, and so directly the one should rule the other: for
the soul directly I trow, not indirectly moves the body and governs it. But
if we will speak as the Scripture does, we make all but one body: and it is
the spirit of Christ, who is the head, that gives effectual power to every
part. Ephesians. 4.15.16.

2 It is false that the civil magistracy only concerns the outward and
temporal commodity only: for unto Princes also is committed the chief care
of religion and the worship of God: They are to see true religion advanced,
yea to watch over Ecclesiastical ministers, and to charge them to look to
their offices: the Prince is Gods minister, for the wealth both of the souls
and bodies of his subjects: And therefore Saint Paul exhorts to pray for
Kings and governors, that we may live (not only) a peaceable life, but in
all godliness and honesty, 1. Timoth. 2.2. Ergo, it is part of the magistrates
office, as to procure the peace of the people, so to have a care of their
godly life. Wherefore it is false, as the Jesuit supposes, that the chief
end of the civil government, is only outward and temporal: Ergo, his
argument is nothing worth.

2 Azariah the high Priest drove Vzziah the King out of the temple, when he
would have burned incense, and caused him to go out of the city and dwell
apart, 2. Chron. 26. Iehoiada likewise deposed Athalia, 2. King. 11. Ergo, the
Pope may depose wicked and ungodly Princes. Bellarmine cap. 8.

Answer: First, we deny, that there is now, or ought to be any such high
Priest in the Church of God, to have the chief authority in spiritual
matters, as there was in the law: for he was the type and figure of Christ,
who is our high Priest, and chief Bishop. Secondly, these examples do not
excuse the Popes tyranny, who has deposed rightful Kings and Emperors, and
better then himself: as Pope Zachary deposed Childericus the French King, and
set up Pipinus: Gregory the seventh set up Rodolphus against Henricus the
fourth, the Emperor. Pope Paschalis set up the son of the said Henricus
against his father. But we will answer more particularly to these examples.

To the first: First, it was not the sole act of Azariah the high Priest, but
there were 80. Priests that joined with him beside, and they all spoke to the
King: this example therefore makes nothing for the sole authority of the
Pope, who says, that he may depose the Emperor himself, without any Council.
Innocent. 4. Secondly, they did not depose Vzziah: they only withstoode him
according to the law of God, because he usurped the priests office: so ought
faithful Bishops and pastors even to reprove the greatest Magistrates, for the
manifest contempt, and open breach of Gods law: Neither did they constrain
the King to go forth, before they saw the judgment of God upon him: for the
text says, they compelled him to go forth, because the Lord had smitten him,
they saw the leprosy to rise up in his face, verse. 20. This therefore was the
extraordinary judgment of God, and not of the high priest. Thirdly, he was
not deposed from the Kingdom, though he dwelt alone: his son did execute the
office only for him, and reigned after him: for being a leper, by the law he
was to dwell apart, Leuit. 13.46. Here was nothing done (we see) by the sole
authority of the high Priest, but they had the manifest and direct law of
God, unto the which their Kings also were subject.

To the second example, we answer. First, Athaliah was a tyrant and an
usurper, and ought not to reign, and therefore was justly deposed. Secondly,
Iehoiada did it not by his own power, but assembled the Fathers and Princes of
the land, 2. Chron. 22.2. He showed them the young King, and they made a
covenant with him. Iehoiada only gave directions, (the King being now known
unto them) unto the Captains and governors. Thirdly, they had the flat word
of God for that action, The Kings son must reign, as the Lord has said,
concerning the sons of David, ver. 3. So when the Pope has any such warrant
from God, he may do as Iehoiada did.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope or any other person Ecclesiastical has no manner of temporal
jurisdiction either directly or indirectly over Kings, Princes, Emperors, but
ought of right to be subject to them and their laws: it is thus proved.

1 By the same reason whereby the Jesuit proves, that the Pope directly has
no temporal jurisdiction, we will conclude, that neither indirectlie can he
have any, and so none at all. Christ, while he lived upon earth, took upon him
no temporal jurisdiction, either directly or indirectly: he refused to be a
King, John 6. Nay he would not be a Judge in civil matters, as in dividing
the inheritance, being thereto required, Luke 12.13. He paid poll money,
Matthew. 17. he did submit himself to the judgment of Pilate an heathen Judge:
therefore seeing Christ used no such temporal jurisdiction, neither can any
Minister of Christ: for the servant is not above the Master: Only Antichrist
dare presume beyond the example of Christ.

Fox. p. 670.
2 The Fathers of Basile do urge that place of Saint Peter 1. Epist. 5.2.
against Panormitane, who had unadvisedly said, that the Pope was Lord of the
Church. But the Apostle says, Feed the flock of Christ, not by constraint,
but willingly, not as Lords over the Lords inheritance, verse 3. But the
Pope contrariwise uses all forceable, constraining, and tyrannical means,
killing, slaying, imprisoning, deposing those that will not obey him: Fox. page
786.
who calls himself chief Lord and Magistrate of the whole World. Surely
this is Antichrist, and not the Minister of Christ, or successor of Saint
Peter, whose counsel he refuses to follow and obey.

3 Let but the stories of former times be searched: there we shall find how
wickedly and insolently the Popes behaved themselves toward Kings, and
Emperors: Pope Alexander caused Henry the second to do penance for Beckets
death, and to be displed of the Monks. Innocent the third caused King John to
kiss the feet of the Bishop of Canturburie his own subject. Alexander the
third did tread upon Emperor Frederick his neck. Pope Innocent spoiled
Frederick the second of his Empire, caused him to be poisoned, and his son
Conradus to be beheaded: and these Emperors were deposed by the Popes in order,
Fox. p. 787.
Henricus 4. Henricus 5. Frederick 1. Philippus Otho the 4. Frederick 2. and
Conradus his son.

It is not good, they say, to put a sword into a mad man's hand: and think you
not, that these Popes used the temporal sword very discreetely, which they thus
usurped, making fools and slaves of Emperors, as Pope Adriane did, that
rebuked Frederick the first, because he held his stirrup on the wrong side, and
did excommunicate him, for setting his name before the Popes in writing? The
very insolent, devilish, and Antichristian practice of this their temporal
power, shows from what original it comes, even from the father of pride.

Lastly, Augustine says, writing upon those words, Romans 13. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: Si quis putat, quia Christanus est, non sibi esse
vectigal reddendum aut tributum, aut non esse exhibendum honorem debitum, eis,
qui haec curant potestatibus; in magno errore est. If any man think, because
he is a Christian, that he is not bound to pay tribute and tax, and yield due
honor to the temporal powers (for of such Augustine speaks) he is in a great
error. If all then are subject to the temporal magistrate, that are Christians,
then all Bishops and Ecclesiastical persons, yea the Pope himself, if he be a
Christian. Ergo, the Emperor is not subject to him.

THE SECOND PART OF THE QVESTION, concerning Saint Peter's patrimony, whether
the Pope may be a temporal Prince.
The Papists.
THey say that it is not against the word of God, that the Pope should be
Bellarm. lib. 5. c. 9.
and that both the swords of spiritual and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction do
belong unto him: and that he is the right heir of Saint Peter's patrimony: to
him belongs as chief Lord the Imperial city of Rome, the palace of
Laterane, Fox. p. 793.
Capua also and Apulia are his. distinct. 96. Constantin.

1 Moses (says the Jesuit) was both priest, and Prince: so was Heli 1. Sam.
4. He judged Israel forty years: so were also the Macchabees, Judas,
Jonathan, Simon: yea Melchisedech long before Moses, was Priest and King: Ergo
the Pope is lawfully both chief Bishop, and chief Prince also, and Lord of
that which he now possesses. Bellarmine cap. 9.

Ans. Concerning Melchisedech. Who knows not, that he being King and Priest,
was a lively figure of our Savior Christ's spiritual Kingdom and Priesthood?
Heb. 7. And as yet the offices of the spiritual and temporal government were
not distinguished: for all the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest
were sacrificers, therefore we cannot borrow any examples from them for this
matter.

Moses also did offer sacrifice to God, and was chief judge both in spiritual
and temporal affairs unto the people, until such time, as when by Gods
commandment, Leuit 8.9.
Aaron was chosen to the priesthood, unto whom the charge of sacrifices and
unto his sons was committed: so Moses remained still Prince of the people,
whom Joshua succeeded, and Aaron was invested to the priesthood, and so the
offices were distinct: this example therefore of Moses is extraordinary, and
proves not.

Concerning the time when Ely judged Israel, which was in the days of the
judges, we must understand, that the government of Israel was very dissolute,
and men were left to themselves to do almost what themselves listed: as Iud.
17. we read that Micah set up an Idol in his house, and the reason is
rendered, there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which seemed good
in his own eyes. Likewise the tribe of Dan offered violence to Micah, and
robbed him, Iud. 18. For there was no King in Israel, verse. 1. The Levites wife
was most shamefully abused by the Gibeonites, for there was no King, chap.
19.1. The men of Benjamin took them wives by force: for they had no King,
chap. 21.25. So you see that both religion was corrupted, and the manners of the
people grew to be outrageous; and all because there was no perfect distinct
government, there was no King in Israel.

In Elie his time, the word of God was precious, 1. Sam. 3.1. Great was the
ignorance of the whole land: the licentiousness also of his sons was a great
offense to all Israel, and brought a great decay of godliness with it, 1. Sam.
2.17.23. Yea they caused the people through their evil example to sin,
verse. 24. Wherefore Elie his house was judged of GOD for his remisnes in
government, in not correcting his sons, chapter 3.13. And he that cannot
rule his own house, how should he care for the Church, 1. Timoth. 3.5? It
cannot now be proved by the example of Elie, that the civil government was
annexed to the priesthood by the Lords appointment: but it is rather to be
ascribed to the corruption of those times: for having no King nor Captain over
them, they were driven of necessity to come to the high Priest, unto whom the
judgment of many matters was committed by the law of God, Deuter. 17.8.
Leuit. 13.2. But the priesthood, and the civil magistracy were two distinct
things always from the time of the law established.

It is then no good argument, which is drawn from the practice and example of
those corrupt times: And yet we say not, that these offices were so distinct,
but that the Lord might raise up some extraordinary prophet, as he did
Samuel, who to restore justice and religion decayed, might for a time both
judge the people and offer sacrifice, as we see he did.

As for the examples of the Maccabees, they move us not, you must bring better
scripture for your purpose: the authority of those books bind us not: and
again we see they did contrary to the law, in taking upon them both
offices: for the priesthood was annexed to the posterity of Aaron for ever,
Numb. 3.10. And the scepter was not to depart from Judah till Christ came,
Genes. 49.10. As the Lord also had promised to David, that the Kingdom should
remain in his seed. 2. Chron. 22.3.

2 Constantine the great gave unto the Pope the chief government of the City
of Rome, and other Lordships in Italy, yea the sovereignty over the West
parts: why then is it not lawful for him to enjoy his gift? Bellarmine lib. 5.
cap. 9.

Ans. First, the donation of Constantine seems to be forged: for if
Constantine resigned to Siluester the political dominion of the west parts,
how could he then have distributed his Empire amongst his sons, as the West
part to one, the East to the second, the middle part to the third? Again, the
donation says, that Constantine was baptized at Rome by Siluester before the
battle against Maximinus, and that then the patrimony was given: but it is
certain by stories that he was baptized at Nicomedia, by Eusebius Bishop
there, in the 31. year of his reign: wherefore it seems to be a forged and
devised thing. plur. apud. Fox. page 105.

2 Aeneas Siluius says, that Mathilda, a noble Duchess in Italy, Fox.
protesta. ad Angl.
gave those lands to the Pope, which are called S. Peter's patrimony: how then
can it be true, that they were given by Constantine? Thirdly, the popish
doctors and Canonists confess, that Constantines grant is not so much to be
counted a donation, as a restitution of that which tyrannouslie was taken from
him: but he has his power spiritual and temporal immediately from Christ:
you see then that they themselves make no great reckoning of Constantines
donation. Antoni. summa, mayor. 3. part.

4 Yet if Constantinus that good Emperor had been so minded, Fox. p. 791.793.
to have bestowed the imperial dignity upon the bishop of Rome: there
remains a great question, whether he ought to have accepted of it or not; nay
he should have refused it: for the temporal sword belongs not to spiritual
governors: At the least it had been a charitable part, not to have suffered the
Emperor to disinherite his own sons, for to enrich the Sea of Rome: as
Augustine very well says, Qui vult, exhaeredato filio, ecclesiam haeredem
facere, quaerat alterum, qui suscipiat, non Augustinum, immo deo propitio
nullum inueniat. Ad Frat. in e^emo. ser. 52.
He that would make the Church his heir, and defeat his own children, let him
seek some body else, to accept of his gift: surely Augustine will not, nor I
trust any honest man beside.

The Protestants.
FIrst we willingly grant, that the Church may enjoy those te^porall
possessions, which have been of old granted unto it for the better maintenance
thereof, so they be not abused to riot and excess: as the Levites beside
their tithes, had their cities and fields, Numb. 35. Secondly, the judgment
of Ecclesiastical matters does of right appertain to the Church, as Amariah
the Priest was the chief in all matters of the Lord, 2. Chron. 19.11. Thirdly,
we do not utterly exclude spiritual persons from temporal causes: but as the
civil Magistrate has his interest in ordaining of Ecclesiastical laws, so
spiritual persons ought not to be strangers from the civil state; being meet
men for their knowledge and conscience to be consulted withal, and conferred
with, and to be joined in Council with the Magistrate in difficult matters: as
we read, Deuter. 17.8. How the high Priest, and chief judge, did join in
mutual help and assistance. But that any spiritual person may be a
temporal prince, and have the chief government of both states, and handle
both swords, we say it is contrary to the word of God: for in these three
points stands chiefly the office of the prince, in making and ordaining
civil laws, in having power of life and death, in proclaiming of war, and
waging of battle: with none of these ought Ecclesiastical persons to deal,
as we will now show in order.

1 Concerning the making of civil laws and statutes, though the
Ecclesiastical body, according to the ancient custom of this land, have
their suffrage and voice, and do give consent: yet the chief stroke, in
alowing, confirming, and enacting of such laws is in the prince, and cannot
agree or be matched with any spiritual office.

Saint Paul says, Who is sufficient for these things? that is, for the work of
the Ministry, 2. Cor. 2.16. If therefore spiritual persons suffice not to
execute to the full, their spiritual charge, though they should bend all their
study and care that way, much more insufficient shall they be, if they be
entangled in temporal affairs, for the well guiding and ordering whereof a
whole man likewise is scarce sufficient.

Again (says he) no man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life, 2. Timoth. 2.4. By affairs seculare here are not only
understood (as the Jesuit imagines) merchandise, traffike, buying, selling,
and such like, but the care and charge also of civil government, of making
laws and orders for the civil state, which must needs be a great let to the
spiritual business, and require greater study and labor, then the other baser
works which are named. To this Augustine agrees: Quo iure (says he) defendis
villas? Vnde quisque possidet quod habet? Iure humano, iure imperatorum: quare?
quia ipsa iura humana per imperatores and reges seculi Deus distribuit generi
humano. tract. in Ihoann. 6. By what law do thou defend thy possessions? by
the law of man, the law of the Emperors: for these humane laws, by Gods
ordinance are given unto men by the Emperors and Kings of the world. See then,
civil laws, and humane constitutions are given and made, not by the Pope,
Priest, or any other Prelate, but only by Kings and Princes, and the civil
magistrates.

2 It were a monstrous and an unnatural thing, that any Ecclesiastical governor
should have power of life and death: for he has no better right to the civil
sword, then the prince to the Ecclesiastical sword: and if it be not lawful
for the civil Magistrate to excommunicate, which is as the spi^tuall sword,
and the greatest censure of the Church, no more is it to be suffered, that by
the authority or commandment of any Ecclesiastical person, any man should
be put to death.

The high Priest was not to deal with matters of blood, which touched the
life: but the offenders were brought to the gates of the city, where the
magistrates sat. Deuter. 17.5. Not to the temple, where the priest ministered.
Nay, we see, that in the most corrupt times of the Jewish commonwealth,
namely, when they put our blessed Savior to death, the priests did not
challenge any such power: It is not lawful (say they) for us, to put any to
death: John 18.31. But that power was in the temporal Magistrate, as Pilate
said to Christ, Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and power
to loose thee? Ioh. 19.10. Ergo, the Pope cannot be a temporal prince, to
have power of life and death.

3 If the Pope be a temporal prince, then he may wage battle, which
although the Jesuit dare not plainly affirm, yet it follows necessarily
upon his assertion: for it is lawful for any temporal prince to make war:
And it has been the common practice of Popes and popish prelates so to do.

There were great and bitter battles fought between Vrbane the sixth, and the
Antipope Clement, in the which on the one side there were 5000. slain. Fox
page 434. Henry Spenser a lusty young blood, Bishop of Norwich, was the Popes
Captain general in France: where he sacked the town of Grauenidge, Fox. page
446.
and put man, woman and child to the sword.

So Pope Julius cast his keys into the River Tybris, and took himself to his
sword: waged many battles, and at the last was encountered withal by Jews
the French King, upon Easter day: where there was of his army slain, to the
number of 16000. But these warlike affairs of the Pope misliked the Papists
themselves: for he was therefore condemned in the Council of Turone in
France, Fox. p. 798.
Anno. 1510. We may see how well these furious Popes do follow the rule of
Christ, who commanded Peter to put up his sword into his sheath: If it were
not lawful for Peter to strike with the sword, how is it lawful for the
Popes, that, I am sure, dare not challenge more to themselves, then was lawful
for Peter? Thus we see how absurd a thing it is, that the Pope should be a
temporal Prince.

THE NINTH QVESTION OF THE Prerogatives of the Pope.
BEside these privileges and immunities of the Sea of Rome, which hitherto we
have spoken of both in spiritual and temporal matters, there are other
prerogatives, which have been in times past given to the Bishops of Rome, most
blasphemous and wicked, which the Papists of this age are ashamed of, and
therefore pass them over with silence: for Bellarmine says nothing of them:
We will therefore spare our labor in confuting of them, they are so gross and
absurd, but only bring them forth, that the godly reader may understand the
abomination of the whore of Babylon.

There are three monstrous and shameful prerogatives, which the Canonists
ascribed to the Pope in times past: and they are these, his power dispensatiue,
his power exemptiue, his power transcendent, so we will call them at this time.
Papa potest dispensare contra ius diuinum, Iuell. p. 59. Defens. Apolog. Fox.
p. 785.
the Pope may dispense against the Law of God, contra ius naturae, against the
Law of nature: contra Apostolum, against the Apostle, contra nouum
testamentum, against the new Testament: Nay, Papa potest dispensare de omnibus
praeceptis veteris and noui testamenti: the Pope may dispense with all the
Commandments both of the old and new law. What intolerable blasphemies are
here? The practices also of Popes are agreeable hereunto: for did not the Court
of Rome dispense with King Henry the eights marriage with his brothers wife?
but that ungodly dispensation at the last was overthrown: and it was well
concluded by act of Parliament: Anno. 1533. That no man had authority to
dispense with Gods laws.

Fox. p. 785. artic. 188.
but rather excused, by the murders of Sampson, theftes of the Hebrews, the
adultery of Jacob. As Oziah was stricken for putting his hand to the Arc
inclining, no more must subjects rebuke their Prelates going awry: Fox. p. 788.
artic. 130.
by the inclination of the Arc, the fall of prelates is understood. This
generally is the opinion of the Canonists: but the Jesuits do hold the
contrary, that it is lawful, even for an inferior priest to rebuke the Pope.
Rhemist. Annot. in 2. Galath. sect. 8. Wherefore, seeing they confute
themselves, they need not any other refutation.

Antonius in Sum. part. 3.
non minor honor Papae debetur, quam Angelis, that there is no less honor due
to the Pope, the^ to Angels. Another says: Papatus est summa virtus creata,
The Popedom is the highest power, that was created of God, above Angels, or
Archangels. Again, those words of the Psalm, thou have put all things under
his foot, John de Parijs.
as sheep and oxen, fowls of the air, fishes of the sea: they thus
blasphemouslie apply to the Pope, by sheep and oxen understanding men living
upon the earth: Antonius Sum. mayor par. 3. did. 22.
by the fowls of the air, the Angels in Heaven, whom they say, the Pope may
command; by the fishes, the souls in purgatory: Over all these the Pope,
say they, has absolute power, who may, if it please him, release all
purgatory at once. What horrible blasphemies are here? Yet our Rhemists and
other Jesuits are somewhat more modest, which confess that the Pope is but
Christ's Vicar in the regiment of that part which is on the earth. Annotat. 1.
Ephesians sect. 5. Seeing then they confute themselves, we will not further
travail herein, but proceed.

THE TENTH QVESTION, CONCERNING Antichrist, and whether the Pope be that great
adversary unto Christ.
THis question is divided into many parts. First, whether Antichrist shall be
some one singular man. Secondly, of the time of his coming and continuing.
Thirdly, of his name. Fourthly, of what nation or kindred he shall come.
Fifthly, where his place and seat shall be. Sixthly, of his Doctrine and
manners. Seauenthly, of his miracles. Eighthly, of his Kingdom and wars.
Ninthly, whether the Pope be the very Antichrist. This then is a most famous
question, and worthy thoroughly to be discussed, every point therefore must
be handled in order.

The Papists.
THey hold that Antichrist, whose coming is foretold in the Scripture, shall
Bellarm. cap. 2. lib. 3.

1 They urge the words of our Savior, John 5.43. I come in my Fathers name,
and ye receive me not, if another come in his own name, him will ye receive.
Here Christ, say they, speaks of another that shall come, namely Antichrist,
for here one is opposed to one, namely, Antichrist to Christ, not a Kingdom to
a Kingdom, or sect unto sect, but one person to another. Bellarmine cap. 2.
lib. 3.

Ans. First, here is not so much an opposition of persons, as there is of
doctrine, as to preach in the name of God, and to preach in the name of men:
and though Christ be the chief doctor and teacher, that came in the name of
his Father, yet all true preachers beside, do come in the same name: for so
our Savior says of his Apostles, He that receives you, receives me, and he
that receives me, receives him that sent me Matthew. 10.40. Therefore, he that
receives the Apostles, receciueth God: they also then do come in the name of
Christ: and so Christ and all the faithful make but one, John 17.21.

2 Neither does Christ here speak of one special enemy, but of all false
prophets, for it is not unusual in the Scripture, in the singular number to
express a multitude being of the same kind, as John 10.11.12. There is a
comparison between Christ the true shepherd, and the hireling: where, by the
name of hireling, all false shepherds and spiritual thieves are understood,
and so is it in this place: therefore they cannot conclude out of this place,
that Antichrist shall be but one man.

2 An other proof is out of 1. John 2.18. the Antichrist shall come, (...), the
Greek article, (...), expresses some singular notable person. Bellarmine ibid.

Ans. It is false. The Greek article does not always in scripture assign
some particular person: as Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not live by bread only: the
Greek text has (...), the man, and yet is it understood not of any one man,
but of all in general, so 2. Tim. 2.17. The man of God, that is, every
faithful minister, or good Christian, yet is it expressed with the article.
Fulk. Annota. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 8.

3 Apocal. 13.18. It is the number of a man: the proper name of Antichrist is
set down, Ergo, but one man. Bellar. ibid. Rhemens. 2. These. 2. sect. 8.

Ans. The name here mystically described, which shall contain 666. in number,
for so the Greek letters (...)* do signify being nu^bred, does not express
any particular name of one man, but rather of the whole society and body of
Antichrist: for it is said to be the number of the beast. Now by the beast is
understood the Roman Empire, the name whereof is (...), Latinus, which
letters do arise in computation to the whole number of, 666. And this name
Irenaeus thinks to agree best to this place. Further, seeing the Rhemists
themselves by the best do understand the universal company of the wicked,
Revel. 13. ve. 1. And this is the name or number of the beast: it must be
understood, by their own confession, of a company and congregation, and not of
one singular person.

The Protestants.
THat Antichrist, which is interpreted an adversary, or against Christ, shall
not be one man (as the Papists imagine, that the Popes might be disburdened and
discharged of this name, who are many) but that it is a whole body, company
and sinagogue, and a succession of heretics, we do thus prove it.

Argument. Bezae.
1 The mystery of iniquity wrought in Paul's time, then was there a way in
preparing for Antichrist. 2. These. 2. But it is impossible for one man to
continue from Paul's time to the end of the world, Ergo, Antichrist is not one
man but a succession of heretics.

Bellarmine answers: if the mystery of iniquity began in Paul's time, that
is, the kingdom of Antichrist; and you will needs make Rome the seat of
Antichrist: belike S. Paul and S. Peter were the Antichrists, for there were no
Bishops of Rome beside at that time. Ans. First, that Antichrist began then to
work even in Rome it cannot be denied, seeing the Papists confess, that Simon
Magus first broched his heresy there, and that Peter calls Rome Babylon. It
is not necessary, that the mystery of iniquity should so soon creep into
the very chair of the Pastors and Bishops: that should come to pass in the
full revelation of Antichrist: It is sufficient that it wrought closely amongst
the false apostles: wherefore the Jesuits objection concerning Peter and Paul,
is ridiculous. Fulk. Anno. 2. These. 2. sect. 9.

2 S. Paul says, that there must come a departing or apostasy and general
falling from the faith: for that an apostacy signifies a relinquishing of the
faith, not a departure from the Roman Empire. Now this general falling away
from the faith cannot be accomplished in one man, but it shows a whole body
or company, whereof Antichrist is the head, one man of sin succeeding
another by succession: and this apostacy cannot be wrought at one time, but it
shall come to pass in several ages: for how is it possible, that at once such
a general apostacy should be? Ergo, Antichrist shall not be one particular
man, Argum. Caluini. Neither can the Jesuit thus shift off the argument, to
say, that this general apostacy is but a preparation to the kingdom of
Antichrist, not that he shall then be presently come: for S* Paul joins both
these together: There must come a departing first, that the man of sin be
disclosed, verse. 3. So that this very apostacy and departing shall be a
disclosing and manifest declaration of Antichrist.

3 John 3.7. The Apostle says: Many deceivers are come into the world, which
confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: the same is the deceiuer
and the Antichrist: Mark then, one deceiuer is many deceivers: one Antichrist
many Antichrists, 1. John 2.18. Ergo, Antichrist shall not be one man, but
many, Argument. Full. annot. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 8.

4 Augustine shows, how that in his time this place of S. Paul was not
expounded of any one man, but of a whole body: Nonnulli non ipsum principent,
sed vniuersum quodammodo corpus eius, De ciuitat. dei 20.19.
simul cum suo principe hoc loco intelligi Antichristum volunt: Some (says he)
do take Antichrist not for the head alone, but for the whole body and
multitude together with their prince. And their conjecture is this: because
these words, verse. 7. He which withholdeth, are understood of the Empire and
Emperors of Rome, which were many: so the man of sin, which is described as
in the person of one, may fitly be understood of a succession of many.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER ANTICHIST be yet come, and how long he shall continue.
The Papists.
THe Romish Jesuits do hold that Antichrist is not yet come, neither can they
tell when he shall come: But this they say boldly, that Henoch and Elias,
Bellarm. cap. 4. lib. 3. de pontif. Rhemist. 11. Apocal. sect. 2.4.

1 The Roman Empire must utterly be destroyed and laid wast before Antichrist
come: as S. Paul says, That which withholdeth must first be taken away, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. that is, the Roman Empire. But the Empire yet remains: for the
Emperor is known by name, and there are also prince electors of the Empire:
Ergo, Antichrist is not yet come, Bellarm. cap. 5.

Answer: It is true that the Roman Empire, while it retained and kept the
ancient dignity, majesty and power thereof, was an hinderance and let to the
tyranny of Antichrist, but when it began to decay, then Antichrist set in his
foot. First, it was not necessary therefore that the Empire should utterly be
extinguished, but so much only taken away, namely the ancient honor and
imperial majesty thereof, as hindered Antichrist, and so we find, that the
Roman Empire was more then half decayed, when Antichrist crept into Rome.
Secondly, the imperial power must in some sort be restored by Antichrist: for
the Pope usurped the same authority which the Emperors had, yea greater: for
the whore is described sitting upon the beast, Apocal. 17. which is the Empire:
and therefore it is said, verse. 8. The beast that was, and is not, and yet is:
for the ancient Empire both is, and is not: It is, because the power thereof is
translated to the Pope: it is not, that is, not in that kingly manner, as it
was in times past. Apocal. 13.12. The beast that rose out of the earth with two
horns like a lamb, did all that the first beast could do before him: that is,
the power of the Empire was in the Pope. Thirdly, Apocal. 13.15. It is said,
that the image of the beast remained, and that the other beast gave a spirit
unto the image of the beast: So is it at this day, the name and image of the
Empire remains, but the majesty and power is gone: And who gives life to
the image but the Pope? he confirms and ratifieth the election of the
Emperor. Wherefore, this rather is an argument that Antichrist is already
come, because nothing but the image of the beast remains.

2 Antichrist shall reign three years and an half: but if he were already
come, he must needs have reigned diverse hundred years already, Bellarmin.
cap. 8.

They prove this reign of Antichrist for this short season, out of those
places of Daniel 7.25. A time, times, and half a time: and Apocal. 12.14. Also
it is described by days 1260. days, and by months 11.2. two and forty
months: which all come to one reckoning, and make three years and an half.

Answer: First, the time is also set down by the name of three days and an
half, Apocal. 11.11. How then is it likely, that 1260. days and three days
and an half, should signify the same time? Secondly, with much better sense
are these times applied by our learned and painful countreyman Master Fox, to
the great persecution under the Emperors, which continued 294. years, which
time is mystically signified by 42. months, taking every month for a sabbath
of years. And the rest of the numbers agree hereunto: for 1260. days make
three years and an half, that is, months 42: and three days and an half
make hours 42. Fox. p. 101.
So taking every hour in the days, and every month in the years for a
sabbath of years, there arises 294. years, which was the just time of the
persecution from the death of John Baptist, unto the end of Licinius the tyrant
and persecutor. This account, I say, better agrees with the truth of history,
then their imagined computation. Thirdly, if it should be taken, as they
expound it, for so short a time, then very little of the prophecy in the
Apocalypse is yet fulfilled, which we doubt not but is most accomplished, as it
may appear in comparing the visions revealed in that book together. And
again, there is no prophecy beside this of 42. months, which can be applied
to the great persecution in the Primitive Church: wherefore it is not like that
the Lord would leave his Church, without some comfort, in forewarning them of
those great troubles which immediately ensued. But if these prophecies, which
are wrested by the Papists, did no^ foretell of those persecutions, then are
they utterly forgotten in that book: which is not like, it being the greatest
trial that ever the Church had.

4 We say then, that we are not curiously to search into times and seasons,
which the Lord has not revealed: Only this we learn, that the time of
affliction being set down by days and months, the faithful should hereby
be comforted, knowing that the time of their trouble is limited of God, and
is but short in respect of the kingdom of Christ.

2 The Lord says, Math. 24. that those days shall be shortened, lest no flesh
should be saved. But how can the time be short, if it should last some
hundreds, or a thousand of years? Bellarmin. cap. 8. Rhemist. annot. Matthew.
24. sect. 6.

Answer: First, that place verse. 22. is properly understood of the calamity
of the Jews, which if it had continued any longer, the nation of the Jews had
bin utterly destroyed. Secondly, yet notwithstanding the reign of Antichrist
is short in respect of the eternal kingdom of Christ: yea the whole time from
his ascension until his coming again, is counted but short, Apocal. 22.20. I
come quickly: and S. Peter says, That a thousand years before God is as one
day, and one day as a thousand years, 2. Pet. 3.

3 Christ preached but three years and an half, therefore Antichrist shall be
suffered to preach no longer.

Answer: First, yet Christ was thirty years old when he began to preach, and
showed himself before, though not so openly, as when he was twelve year old
he disputed with the Doctors in the temple: he was also acknowledged for the
Messiah in his nativity. If Antichrist then must in this respect be
correspondent to Christ, he must also be known to be thirty years upon
earth, before he be fully manifested. Secondly, though Christ himself preached
no longer, yet he sent his Apostles, who preached many years after: we do not
therefore oppose the person of Antichrist, whom we deny to be a singular man,
to Christ, but the kingdom of the one to the other. Now by their own reason,
it follows, that because the kingdom of Christ endured many years, and yet
does, that therefore Antichrists kingdom must likewise.

Other demonstrations the Jesuit has to prove that Antichrist is not yet
come: as because the Gospel is not yet preached to all the world, cap. 4.
Bellar. Helias and Henoch are not yet come, who are certainly looked for, cap.
6. There shall be a most grievous and terrible persecution under Antichrist,
which is not yet past, cap. 7. But these arguments shall be answered in
another place toward the end of this work, when we come to speak of the
appearing of Christ to judgment.

The Protestants.
THat Antichrist shall reign but three years and an half, we take it for a
mere fable, and a very popish dream: whereas on the contrary side, we are
able to show, both that Antichrist is already come, and has tyrannized in
the world these many years.

1 We will make it plain by demonstration, that Antichrist has been in the
world many years ago, by the prophetical places of scripture. First, it is
said, the number of Antichrist is 666. Apocal. 13.18. So, anno. 606. or
thereabout, Boniface the 3. obtained of Phocas the Emperor to be called
universal Bishop. Thus says Illyricus, Chytraeus. Also beginning at the year
of the Lord 97. at which time John wrote the Apocalypse, and counting 666.
years, we shall come to the time of Pipinus, whom the Pope made King of France,
and he again much enlarged the jurisdiction and authority of the Pope. And
yet more evidently, about the year of the Lord 666. the Latin service was
commanded to be used in all countries subject to the Sea of Rome, by Pope
Vitalianus: and about the same time, Constantius the Emperor removed the
ancient monuments of the Empire to Constantinople, and left the city to the
Popes pleasure, Fulk. annot. in 13. Revel. sect. 10.

Another prophecy we have, Revel. 20.3. that after one 1000. years Satan
must be let loose. Even so, a thousand years after Christ, Pope Siluester a
great coniurer, having made a compact with the Devil, obtained the Papacy,
and not long after him came in Gregory the 7. a great Sorcerer also and
Necromancer, sic Lutherus.

But because it is not to be thought, that Satan was bound during that great
and long persecution under the Roman Emperors, we must begin the account of
the 1000. years, from the end of the persecution, which continued 294. years:
unto that add a thousand, so have we the year of our Lord 1294. About which
year Boniface the 8. made the sixth book of the Decretals, confirmed the
orders of Friars, and gave them great freedoms: with this number agrees
Daniel his 1290. days, Dan. 12.1^. Also somewhat before this time, anno 1260.
the orders of Dominicke and Franciscane Friars began first to be set up by
Honorius the 3. and Gregory the 9. and so have we the 1260. days, which are
set down, Apocal. 12. plura apud Fox. page 398.

2 If Antichrist should reign but three years and an half, as our
adversaries teach, and then immediately that time being expired, the world
should end: then it is possible to assign the time of our Lord Christ his
coming to judgment, so soon as Antichrist is revealed. But the Gospel
says, that of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven,
Math. 24.36. yet these good fellows take upon them to be wiser then the
Angels: for they dare set down the very day of Christ's coming: which shall
be, as Bellarmine presumptuously imagines, just 45. days after the
destruction of Antichrist. And to this purpose he abuses that place of Dan.
12.11. where mention is made of 1290. days, that is, as he fondly
interprets, three years and an half, the just time of Antichrists reign:
But blessed is he that comes (says the Prophet) to 1335. days: that is,
says Bellarmine, to 45. days after the destruction of Antichrist, and then
Christ comes, cap. 9. What intolerable boldness and presumption is this,
contrary to the saying of Christ, to attempt to declare the very hour of his
coming?

Again: the prophecy of Daniel had no such meaning: for he only speaks of
the afflictions of the Church, before the coming of Christ, as John
prophecieth of the troubles that came after. Daniel therefore in that place
receives instructions concerning the cruel persecution of the Jews under
Antiochus Epiphanes, the beginning, and the end thereof: There are three times
revealed unto him.

The first is of a time, two times, and half a time, or rather the dividing of
time, or as Tremellius more agreeable to the Hebrew, a part or parcel of times:
Dan. 7.25.
so long should the temple be defiled, and the abomination set up in the
temple, that is, three years and certain days: And so it came to pass, for
this desolation began in the temple the 145. year of the reign of the
Greeks, the fifteen day of the month Casleu. 1. Macchab. 1.57. when
Antiochus caused the daily sacrifice to cease, and incense to be burnt to
Idols: And just three years and ten days after, which is to be reckoned for
the odd parcel of times, Ann. 148. the 25. day of Casleu, they began to offer
sacrifice in the temple according to the law, 1. Macchab. 4.52.

The second time revealed, is of a 1290. days, Dan. 12.11. which makes three
years, seven months and odd days: which is the time, counting from the
desolation, when as the sacrifices should be restored, and confirmed by the
Kings grant, and Letters Patents: which accordingly came to pass, ann. 148.
the fifteenth of the month Xanthicus, which was the last month but one, as it
is recorded, 2. Macchab. 11.33.

The third time is described by days, 1335. Dan. 12.12. Blessed is he that
should live to see that time: namely, when the Church of the Jews should
fully be delivered by the death of Antiochus, which was in the beginning of
the next year, which was 149. 1. Macchab. 6.16. Thus we see these times were
fully accomplished under the tyranny of Antiochus: wherefore these prophecies
being once fulfilled, they cannot be drawn to signify any other time, but by
way of similitude and comparison.

Neither is that any thing worth, which the Jesuit obiecteth out of S. Paul,
2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Then shall the wicked man be revealed, whom Christ shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth: As though presently after the revelation
of Antichrist Christ should come. And therefore Antichrist must not be expected
or looked for before the end of the world: for the whole time from the first
coming of Christ to his second, is in the scripture called nouissima hora, the
last times, 1. Ioh. 2.18. And therefore Antichrist, at what time soever he is
revealed after the ascension of Christ, he comes in the last times: whose
utter ruin and destruction shall be reserved for the glorious appearing of
Christ, as the Apostle there speaks.

3 Whereas the scripture says, that Satan must be bound for a thousand
years, and after let loose again, Apocal. 20.2: And it is plain that the
thousand years since Christ are expired more then five hundred years ago: It
follows hereupon that Antichrist is already come: for he must be revealed
with the loosing of Satan. Our adversaries have nothing to answer but this,
that by this 1000. years, a certain time is not meant, but the whole space
during the time of the new Testament, till the coming of Antichrist, Rhemist.
Revel. 20. sect. 1. To whom we answer, that by the same reason, neither shall
their 42. months show any certain time, but the whole space so long as
Antichrist shall reign: and this number of months, as of days, weeks,
hours, the scripture every where takes mystically in prophecies: but when
thousands, or hundred years are mentioned, they are always taken literally:
as Isay. 7.8. it is prophesied, that Ephraim, that is, Israel, should utterly
cease to be a people within 65. years, which even so came to pass, counting
from the fourth year of the reign of Ahaz King of Judah, to the 25. year of
Manasses, when the remnant of Israel was carried away.

THE THIRD PART CONCERNING THE NAME, character and sign of Antichrist.
The Papists.
THey stoutly affirm, that Antichrist shall be one particular man,
consequently Bellarm. cap. 10. Rhemist. annot. Apocal. 13. sect. 10.

1 Apocal. 13.18. Count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man,
and his number is 666. Hereupon they conclude, that Antichrist shall have a
certain name, which conteyneth that number, Bellarm. ibid.

Answer: First, it is the number of the beast, and yet of a man: Ergo, it
cannot be the name of any one man: for by the beast, the Jesuits themselves
understand a company or multitude, Rhemist. Apocal. 13. sect. 1. Wherefore it
must be such a name as agrees to a company or succession of men, and such is
the name Latinus, as afterward we will show. Secondly, it must be a name by
number, showing the time, not an idle number signifying nothing; the time of
his coming is set down to be 666: But the name of their Antichrist cannot
show any such time, seeing there are years more then twice 666. gone already,
and yet they say, their Antichrist is not yet come.

2 Antichrist shall have a name, as Christ had, but it is not necessary to be
known, otherwise then Christ his name was: i. 10. e. 8. s. 200. o. 70. u.
400.. 200. 888.

which was described by Sibil by the number of 888. as Antichrists is by 666.
yet was not his name, Jesus, perfectly known before his coming, neither is it
necessary that Antichrists should before that time. Jesus, in Greek letters
thus, (...), makes as you see 888. Bellarm. cap. 10.

Answer: First, you must prove Antichrist to be one singular man as Christ
was, and then strive for his name. Secondly, you do evil to match Sibils
prophecy, and John's revelation together, as though her conjecture of the name
of Christ, by the number 888. were of like authority with John's prophecy, of
666. Thirdly, it is false, that the name, Jesus, was only by Sibil signified
by these numbers: for Augustine alleges certain verses of Sibil, which
began with the letters of Christ's name in order one after another: so that the
first letters of the verses showed this title or name: (...): Jesus Christus
filius Dei saluator: And the Latin verses translated out of the Greek, do
almost keep the same order of letters, August. cont. Iudaeos pagan. cap. 16.
We see then that Sibil foretold the very name, Jesus Christ, and did not only
decipher it by numbers. Why might not Antichrists name as well be showed?

The Protestants.
WE affirm by warrant of scripture, that as it is a mere fable, that
Antichrist shall be one singular man; so of the like truth is it, that he
shall be known by some notorious name: neither can any such thing be
gathered, Apocal. 13.18.

1 If there should come such a notorious wicked person into the world, who only
should deserve to be called Antichrist, it is not unlike, but that the spirit
of God, speaking of his name, both could and would also have expressed it: As
Josias was described by name, 1. King. 13.20 and Cyrus, Isai. 44.28.45.1. long
before either of them came into the world: And why, I pray you, might not this
prophetical Evangelist, have named Antichrist, as well as Sibilla foretold the
name of our Savior Jesus Christ?

Again, Christ's names were prophesied of and known before: One name of his is
to be called a Nazarite, so the people call him, Math. 2^.11. a prophet of
Nazareth. This name the Prophet has, Isay. 11.1. he calls him, Netser, in
Hebrew it signifies a branch. Another name of his, is King of Israel, John
12.23. prophesied of by Zachar. 9.9. Also he was called the son of David,
Math. 21.9. And Isay says, he shall spring out of the root of Iesse. 11.1.

Further, he was known by the name Messiah, or Christ, before he came, Ioh.
4. the woman of Samaria said, I know well that Messiah shall come, which is
called Christ, verse. 25. This name was revealed to Daniel, 9.25. he is called
Messiah, the prince.

But will our adversaries say, his name Jesus was not known before his
coming? yes, even that name also has some evidence out of the Prophets: for
Jesus or Iesua, is all one, and signifies a Savior: of the which name we
read Zachar. 3. where mention is made of Ieshua the high Priest, who was a
type of our Savior Christ, and bare his name, for verse. 5. a Diadem is set
upon his head: which must needs be understood of Jesus Christ, our high
Priest. Again, he is called Hosanna, John 12.13. which signifies the same
that Jesus, and both are derived from the same root: translated, Save us.
Which name we find in the 118. Psalm. verse. 25.

Lastly, if the name Jesus Christ were revealed to Sibilla a heathen
prophetisse, how can it be, that the Prophets of God were ignorant of it?
Therefore by their own argument, seeing Christ's names were known before his
coming, why should not Antichrists in like manner, if he should be some one
singular notorious man?

2 We can bring forth a name, which in all respects agrees with that
description, Apocal. 13.18. which is a name both of a man and of the beast,
that is, of a company, or succession of men, which shows the time of
Antichrists birth, namely, the year 666. which also does fitly agree with the
manners and properties of Antichrist: and that is the name Latinus, which in
Greek letters (...), shows in account, the number 666. and so does the name
of Rome in Hebrew -- (...), romiijth. And, ecclesia Italica, l. 30. a. 1. t.
300. e. 5. i. 10. n. 50. o. 70.. 200. 666.
. 200.. 6.. 40.. 10.. 10.. 400. 666.

in Greek letters do make the same number.

We see then, that all things do well agree to this name: first, that is
signifies the whole Latin Church or Empire, and so is the name of the beast.
Secondly, it shows the time 666. about which year Pope Vitalianus composed
the Latin Service, and enjoined all Nations to use no other. Thirdly, it
properly agrees with the Antichristian practice of Rome; which is called the
Latin Church. And contrary to S. Paul's rule they have brought an unknown
tongue which edifieth not, into the service of God: yea they prefer it before
the Greek and Hebrew, making the Latin translation of the scriptures only
authentical, as it was concluded in their Tridentine chapter. And they do so
much extol their Latin text, as the setter forth of the Complutense edition
is not ashamed in his preface to write, that he has placed the Latin text
between the Hebrew and the Greek, as Christ between the two thieves, Fulk.
Apocal. 13. sect. 10. What Church then in the whole world but theirs, can be
called the Latin Church? Fourthly, it also makes much for us, that we have a
consent of names, for (...), and in Hebrew Romiijth, do all make the same
number, and do note the Latin, Roman, or Italian Church.

But they object: First that Latinus makes not that number with (...). but
Lateinus with (...). A great matter: wherein they show their ignorance, as
though the Greek dipthong, (...). be not usually expressed by a single (...).
in Latin, as we say, (...), Antiocheia in Greek, and (...), Alexandreia, with
(...). dipthong: in Latin, Antiochia, Alexandria, with single (...). for the
cities of Antioch, and Alexandria: this therefore is a small quarrel. But mark
I pray, what a poor shift this is: If this small letter (...). be but admitted,
the Pope is made Antichrist: so we have found out Antichrist, saving one small
letter.

2. Why, there are many names beside, that make that number, as (...), and
others: nay the Rhemists say, that Luthers name, in the Hebrew, and Bellarmine,
that David Chytraeus his name, do express that number of 666. But what of all
this? there is none of these names, unto the which the three properties
aforesaid do agree, as they do unto Latinus, as to betoken the whole body of
Antichrist, to show the time of his birth, and describe the qualities of his
Kingdom, as the word Latinus does, yet this we do not say, that this is the
very name which is meant in that place, and that the Prophecy can have no
other meaning: But to show how ridiculous their interpretation is, and how much
nearer ours comes to the truth.

OF THE CHARACTER OR SIGN and badge of Antichrist.
The Papists.
THey do hold that Antichrist shall have a certain outward mark or character,
which he shall cause to be printed in the right hands, and foreheads Apocal.
13.16. But this mark is not yet known, no more then his name is: Only this
they are sure of, that the Pope has not Antichrists character, but rather the
character of Christ, the sign of the Cross which he causes to be signed in
the foreheads, Bellarmin. cap. 11.

1. Antichrist must in all respects be contrary to Christ: for as he sees his
image and crucifix adored, so shall he set up his own image to be worshipped:
and therefore as Christians now do bear in their foreheads the sign of the
Cross which is Christ's mark, so he shall invent an other mark contrary to
Christ's: and he will make his name and the letters thereof sacred, as now the
name of Jesus is worshipped among Christians, Rhemist. Apocal. 13. sect. 7.

Answer: First, where have you learned, that roodes and images are to be
adored and worshipped? or does not the word of God teach the plain contrary
Psalm. 115.8.9? O Israel trust in the Lord: but they that worship images are
like unto them: he therefore that trusts in an image cannot trust in God.
Again, where learn you to make an Idol of the letters or sillables of
Christ's name, to cause men to carry it in their caps, and bow their knee unto
it? think you that Saint Paul, when he says, that all things do bow the
knee to the name of Jesus, yea of things in heaven, Philip. 2. that he meant,
that even the Angels do stoup and make obeisance, when they see the name of
Jesus written in a glass window? Or who taught you that the sign of the
Cross is to be borne upon men's foreheades, and that with crossing of the
forehead, we are preserved from danger? Saint Paul, you know, has no such
meaning, when he says, He bare in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus,
which were nothing else, but the signs and tokens of his persecutions, as
whippings, stoning, and such like in his flesh: Galath. 6.17. Neither, when he
says, He rejoiced in nothing but the Cross of Christ, whereby he was
crucified to the world, verse 14. has he any relation to the Cross in the
forehead: for it were a miracle, that a man by crossing his forehead, should
straight ways crucify and mortify his affections: Nor yet did our Savior
speak of this mark, where he says, that they which will follow him, must
take up his cross, Mark. 8.34. for in that place, by taking up of the Cross,
he means, nothing else but the forsaking and denying of our selves. So it is
plain, that in the scripture you find not this superstitious sign of the
cross in your foreheads.

2. Where you say, that you do honor the character of Christ, as his name,
and the sign of the Cross: You do even so honor Christ, as the soldiers
did, that gave him a reed for a scepter, and thorns for a Crown, and bowed
themselves in mockage: So you do leave Christ certain badges and signs of his
kingdom; but indeed you spoil him of it, and of his Priesthood too, making
other mediators beside him, and other sacrifices propitiatory beside his.
What do you else now, in bowing the knee to the name and sillables of Jesus,
and spoiling him of his honur, but with the soldiers in mockage to bow unto
Christ? And I pray you, how do you honor the name of Christ, when you make a
jest of the name of Christian? for in Italy it is a word of reproach, taken
for an idiote or fool.

3. We answer, that the sign whereby Christians are marked, are not external,
but internal: we are sealed by the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. The outward
signs are none other, but the two sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper:
by the right administration whereof the congregations of the faithful are
known. But of this, more shall be spoken in the Antithesis, or Antidotum, in
the declaration of our opinion.

The Protestants.
BY the character or mark of Antichrist, we do not understand any visible
sign or badge to be printed in the right hand or the forehead, as the Jesuit
imagines: as though he should brand all his subjects in the hand or forehead:
But hereby is meant and signified chiefly the society and communion, whereby
they shall be joined to Antichrist, by giving unto him their fidelity, oath, and
obedience, agreeing together in the same corruption of faith, and doctrine.
This is Antichrists badge or cognizance. Fulk. Apocalip. 13. sect. 7. There are
also outward marks of their coniuncton with Antichrist: as the shauing of
Priests, and greazing them with oil: such are the receiving of holy bread,
the wearing of beads, the annoynting with chrisome: But the proper note and
character, is the oath and profession of fealty and obedience.

1. Antichrist say they, shall bring in another contrary character, to disgrace
the sign and character of Christ, namely the cross in the foreheads: Argum.
But Christ has appointed no such visible character, neither are true
Christians known by any such: therefore also the character of Antichrist is no
such thing.

1. The people of the Jews had no such outward badge, who were more charged
with outward observations, then Christians are: Circumcision was the only
sign of the covenant to them, Genes. 17.11. which was one of their chief
sacraments, in place whereof Baptism is enjoined us: Ergo, much less are we
to be known by any other outward badge.

2. This place Apocal. 13. is taken out of Ezech. 9. where the Angel is
commanded to set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn: but that was
no visible external mark, for it was showed the Prophet in vision: Ergo,
neither is it to be taken so in this place.

3. We grant, the sacraments are badges and marks of our profession: which
marks the Pope, the only Antichrist has defaced, by bringing in five other
sacraments, and clean changing, polluting and altering, the right sacraments
which Christ instituted: for they have brought into baptism, chrisme, salt,
oil, spittle, and such trash: into the Eucharist, adoration,
transsubstantiatio^, sacrifice, with such like: so that herein he shows
himself Antichrist, and has altered the true marks of Religion.

2. It appears by the effect what is the Character of Antichrist: Argument.
The text says, It was not lawful for any to buy or sell, but he that had the
mark or the name of the beast: No more was it lawful for any to have
traffic amongst the papists but he that acknowledged the Popes cross keys,
or made himself a member of the Romish Italian Church: Nay they say, he is not
of the Church, that acknowledges not the Pope to be head of Christ's Church,
Fulk. Apocal. 13. sect. 7.

The Jesuit obiecteth: First, this oath of fidelity and conjunction cannot be
that character: for it must be in the right hand or forehead. Answer, We have
already declared, that it is too childish to take these words literally, as
though all Antichrists subjects should carry brandes in their foreheads or
hands. Secondly, says he, many do both buy and sell amongst them, that have
not made profession of their fealty to Rome, as the Jews, Bellarm. cap. 11.
Answer: Yea no marvel, for Antichrist is an enemy only to Christ: al other
people he can brook well enough beside good Christians: tell me I pray you,
whether our merchants be admitted to traffic safely in Spain, if their
religion be known: The servants of God amongst you, can neither enjoy, houses,
lands, liberty or life: which yoke also was laid a long time upon this land,
till it pleased God to have mercy on us: for the which his name be blessed.

3. Again, many years ago, even in Augustines and Ambrose his time, all
Churches were joined to Rome, before Antichrist was yet revealed. Ergo. This is
not the Character of Antichrist. Bellarmin. ibid.

Answer: First, they were joined then in common consent of religion, not as
subjects by compulsion, but voluntary, because at that time Rome in the
chiefest points of Religion was in the right faith. 2. But of late days in the
Council of Constance not yet 2. hundred years ago, it was made an article of
faith, to believe, that the Pope was the head of the Universal Church: yea
about the year 600. the title of Universal Bishop first began to be
appropriate to Rome: whereby was insinuated, that all Churches in the world
should be under the obedience thereof.

Lastly, we have the testimony of one of their Popes themselves, who says
plainly, 1. Gregor.
that he is the forerunner of Antichrist, which would be called Universal
Bishop. lib. 4. epistol. 32. See then by his testimony, the title of
Universality, and exacting of obedience of other Churches, is the character and
mark of Antichrist.

THE FOVRTH PART, CONCERNING the generation and original of Antichrist.
The Papists.
Nero, raised from the dead. Refusing these fables, they have found out one as
foolish: Our Rhemists hold, that Antichrist shall be borne of the tribe of Dan.
Bellarm. dare not say so, but he thinks that he shall come of the Jews
stock, and be circumcised, and be taken of the Jews for their Messiah. cap. 12.

1. That he shall come of the tribe of Dan: thus they would prove it, Genes.
49.17. Dan shall be a serpent by the way biting the horse heels: Ierem. 8.16.
The neying of his horses is heard from Dan. And Apocal. 7. where 12. thousand
of every tribe are reckoned, only Dan is left out, because (belike) Antichrist
should come of that tribe. Rhemist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 8.

Answer: Bellarmine confuteth all these reasons: the first he says with
Hierome to be understood of Sampson, who came of the tribe of Dan: the second
place is of Nabuchadnezzers coming to destroy Jerusalem, as Hierome also
expounds it: to the third he says, that Ephraim is left out as well as Dan:
yea and so is Manass^h too: because the tribe of Joseph is named for his two
sons: but Dan is left out because Leui is reckoned in his place. We may see
now, how well they agree, when one Jesuit confuteth another. Bellarmin. cap.
12.

2. Bellarmine stands much upon that place, John 5.43. If an other come in
his name, him will ye receive: But says he, the Jews will receive none, but
of their own kindred, and whom they look for to be their Messiah. Ergo.
Antichrist must come of the Jews. ibd.

Answer: This place we have showed before, part 1. of this question, to be
understood of false prophets amongst the Jews, such as mention is made of Act.
5. as Theudas and Judas, and not of any one false prophet: so John 10. where
Christ compares himself, which is the true shepherd, with the hireling, he
understands all hirelings, though he speak in the singular number.

The Protestants.
THat it is a very fable and cousoning device of heretics, to make men believe
that Antichrist shall come of the tribe of Dan, or of the stock of the Jews,
thus we show it.

1. It is out of doubt, that the nation of the Jews shall be converted unto
God, and mercy shall be showed again to the remnant of Israel, Romans 11.25.
confessed also by the papists: But if one come, which shall reedifie the
temple, and restore the sacrifices and circumcision, such an one, as the Jews
shall take for their Messiah: who sees not, that by this means the Jews will
be more hardened, having now their own hearts desire, their temple; Messiah,
circumcision: and their conversion would be greatly hindered, nay quite and
clean overthrown?

2. If Antichrist should come of the Jews, it is like that his seat should
be at Jerusalem, and that the temple shall be built again by him: but that
cannot be, for the temple, as Daniel prophesies, shall lie desolate even unto
the end, Dani. 9.27. Ergo. he shall not come of the Jews. More of this in the
next part.

THE FIFTH PART CONCERNING THE seat and place of Antichrist.
The Papists.
BEllarmine holds opinion, that Antichrist shall have his imperial seat at
Jerusalem, and reedifie and build again the temple, yea for a while command
Bellarm. cap. 13. lib. 3. de pontif. Rhemist, 2. Thessa. 2. sect. 11.

1. Apocal. 11.8. the City of Antichrist is called the great City where our
Lord was crucified. But Christ was crucified at Jerusalem. Ergo.

Answer: First, it cannot be so understood, for ver. 2. Jerusalem is called
the holy City. ver. 8. This great City is called Sodom and Egypt: how can
the same City be capable of such contrary names? How can that be called an
holy City, where the abomination of desolation shall be and the seat of
Antichrist?

Secondly, Augustine in Apocal. homil. 8. understands by the great City and
the streets thereof, the midst of the Church: And by the great city very
fitly is understood the large jurisdiction of the Pope, who says, he is head
of the great city and Catholic Church: Whose seat we see is at Rome, by
authority of which city Christ was put to death: and by Antichrist the Pope,
Christ also is persecuted in his members. Fulk. annotat. Apocalypse. 11. sect. 2.

2. Apocalips. 17.16. the ten horns, that is, ten kings, amongst whom the
Roman Empire shall be divided, shall hate the scarlet whore, that is, Rome,
and burn it with fire: how then shall it be the seat of Antichrist? Bellarm.

Answer: The text is plain, that the same kingdoms, that before had given
their power to the beast, and were subject to the whore of Babylon, shall after
make her desolate, and eat her flesh: which thing we see in part to be
accomplished already, that many princes have redeemed their necks from
Antichrist his yoke, Fulk. Apocal. 17. sect. 3. It is not necessary therefore
to be done all at one time, but one after another.

3. 2. Thessal. 2. he shall sit in the temple of God: but at that time the
Jews only had a temple, the Christians yet had none, and the Apostle speaking
of the Church of God, did of purpose refrain this name, lest the Church of
Christians should be thought like the Jews Synagogue. Bellarm.

Answer: First, the Jewish temple shall not be built again, as Daniel
prophesies, 9.27. and how can it be built in so short a space, seeing
Antichrist, as they say, must reign but three years and an half? and to what
purpose, seeing he will abolish all sacrifices? Secondly, though it should be
built again, nay if it were standing now, for the exercise of Jewish
sacrifices, it could not be called the temple of God. Thirdly, by the temple
therefore is meant the visible Church, that which sometime was a true visible
one, as the Church of Rome, and after should be so taken, reputed and
challenged, as it is at this day by the papists: Neither have the papists
hereby any advantage, as though the Pope sat in the very true Church: for it
is not the true Church indeed, but so reputed and taken by them. Fourthly,
though there were no material temples of the Christians in Paul's time, what of
that? he speaks not here of any such material temple, but of the Church of
God, neither does Saint Paul in this sense refuse to use the name of temple, as
1. Corinthian. 3. verse. 16. and 6. verse. 19. and in other places.

The Protestants.
THat Rome is the seat and place of Antichrist, beside that the Rhemists
confess so much that Antichrist shall reign there, annot. Apocal. 17. sect.
4. We prove it thus.

1. Antichrist is called the great whore of Babylon, Apocal. 17.5. But Babylon
is Rome, Ergo, Rome is the seat of Antichrist.

Object: It was Babylon, while it was governed and ruled by heathen Emperors,
but the Church was not then called Babylon, Bellarm. Answer: First, Ergo by
your own confession, Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist, seeing by Saint
John it was called Babylon. Secondly, it was not only called Babylon in the
time of the heathen, but even of Christian Emperors: Augustine says, it is
Occidentalis Babylon, the Babylon in the west parts, De ciuitat. dei 18.22.
and 27.
and prioris filia Babilonis, and daughter to the first Babylon. Thirdly, Saint
John does not only prophecy of the cruelty of the terrene state, but of the
false prophet Antichrist, you should also usurp an ecclesiastical government
there.

Object. Secondly, they object that by the damnation of the great whore, is
understood the final destruction of all the company of the reprobate,
Rhemist. Apocal. 17.1. Answer, the damnation universally of the wicked is
described cap. 20. and therefore this place must be understood of Antichrist,
and his adherents: And very fitly does the name of whore agree to that See, for
once a whore indeed was Pope there, called John the eighth. Which so wringeth
the Papists, that they have no other shifte but impudently to deny it.

2. We have another argument out of the same chapter, verse. 9. the seven
heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sits: But there is no city
in the world notoriously known to stand upon seven hills but Rome: Ergo, it is
the seat of Antichrist.

Object. The text is, they are also seven kings, so the seven heads or seven
hills signify seven kings: for there shall be so many chief Empires which
shall persecute the Church, there are five part: Egypt, Canaan, Babylon, the
Persians, Grecians, the sixth, the Romans, which in part stands yet, the
seventh shall be Antichrist, Rhemist. Apocalip. 17. sect. 7.

Answer: First, the seven heads are expounded to be both seven hills and seven
kings: the scripture uses not to expound one hard and obscure thing by an
harder and more obscure, as to say, seven heads are seven mountains, that is,
seven kings: for we were nearer the sense before: and the term of heads does
more fitly resemble kings, then mountains. Secondly, the seven kings are
more fitly taken for seven principal governors of the Romans, as Kings,
Tribunes, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictators, Emperors, Popes: for by these seven
orders has the common wealth been governed first and last. Fulk. ibid.

Object. Rome is not now built upon seven hills, it stands in the plain in
Campo Martio, Sander. ibid.

Answer: First, you have then no right to Peter's Chair, for when he sat at
Rome, the City stood upon seven hills. Secondly, though the Pope now has
removed his palace to the Vaticane, on the other side of the river, yet he
did sit for many years in Laterane, until the time of Pope Nicholas the
second, who was almost 1100. years after Christ. Thirdly, though the Pope has
removed his palace upon pleasure beyond the river: yet his See is not
removed: for upon every one of those hills there are Monasteries, and chapples,
and such like monuments to be seen to this day. In mount Caelius there is the
Monastery of Gregory the first, the Cathedral Church of Laterane. In mount
Auentine, the Monasteries of Sabi^e and Boniface. In the mount Exquilinus the
Minster of S. Maria mayor, the ruins of Saint Cyriacus Church, which is yet a
title of a Cardinal. The mount Viminalis has the Church of Saint Laurence. The
mount Capitoline has an house of friars, called Ara coeli. The mount Palatine
the Church of Saint Nicholas. The mount Quirinalis has S. Maria de populo.
Wherefore though the Popes person be removed a little aside, yet the popish
religion is exercised, and relics of superstition are to be found in every
one of those hills. Wherefore we nothing doubt to conclude, but that Rome is
that City upon 7. hills, and so the principal seat of Antichrist.

THE SIXTH PART CONCERNING THE doctrine of Antichrist.
The Papists.
Rhemist. annot. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 10. Bellarmine draws all the doctrine of
Antichrist, to these four heads. First, he shall deny Jesus to be Christ, and
abolish the sacraments instituted by Christ. Secondly, he shall make himself
Christ. Thirdly, he shall make himself God, and be adored as God. Fourthly, he
shall abolish al other worship, both true and false, yea the worship of Idols.
Wherefore, says he, the Pope cannot be Antichrist, that does none of these
things, cap. 14. of these now in their order.

Argument.
1. Antichrist shall utterly deny Christ. 1. John 2.22. and 4.3. Every spirit
that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God,
this is the spirit of Antichrist. Ergo, Antichrist shall altogether deny
Christ.

Answer: First the Rhemists say that this is not a mark for all times, to
know an heretic by, but it was only for those times, to confess Christ to
be come in the flesh: this is a surer note now, say they, that whosoever
confesses not Christ to be really present, and to be sacrificed in the mass,
is not of God. Rhemist. annot. 1. John 4. sect. 2. Sermon. de verbis Apostoli. 33.
Where I will not stand to note the presumption of these papists, that will
correct and amend the Apostles rule, to know heretics by, which serves for
all times, and so Augustine takes it. But here first I oppose our Rhemists
judgment against Bellarmine: for they deny that this place serves to
describe Antichrist, belonging only to the Apostles times: Bellarmine says,
it does most properly decipher Antichrist.

2. The great Antichrist shall deny Christ no otherwise then other Antichrists
and heretics did in the Apostles time: for they are all Antichrists 1. John
2.18. and he gives one rule to know them all by, verse. 22. But the Antichrists
then denied not Christ apertly, but covertly, Ergo, so shall the great
Antichrist.

The first is true, that the old heretics did not plainly deny Christ to be
come in the flesh: but some denied his humanity, some his divinity, some his
person. Augustine says, Arriani hoc negant, licet verbis fatea^tur, the
Arrians deny that Christ is come in the flesh, though they confess it in word:
for he that does not confess that Christ is equal unto God, denies Christ in
the flesh: and so of other heretics. The second also is as true: that
Antichrist, who is no other but the Pope, shall also cunningly and covertly
deny Christ, for he that denies the offices of Christ, denies Christ: As
Augustine says of Peter's denial, Quicquid eius negauit, ipsum negauit. Tract.
in Iohann. 66. whatsoever he denied of or belonging to Christ, he denied
Christ. So the Pope denies Christ to be our Prophet, King, and Priest: His
prophetical office he defaceth, and in effect denies, in disgracing the
scriptures, saying, they are imperfect, and contain not all matters necessary
to salvation, that their authority binds us not without his allowance: His
Kingly office, in making himself Christ's Vicar and Vicegerent upon earth, in
making new laws, sacraments, ordinances beside Christ's, as necessary to
salvation as the rules of the Gospel: His priesthood, in setting up a new
propitiatory sacrifice in the abominable Mass, beside the only sacrifice of
atonement upon the Cross, in making other mediators and intercessors beside
Christ: and such like, whereof we shall have occasion to entreat afterward
more at large. Ergo, the Pope in denying the offices of Christ, denies Christ,
and so is Antichrist.

2. He shall make himself Christ and Messiah, Argum.
which the Jesuit would prove out of John 5. ver. 43. If another come in his
name, him will ye receive: But the Pope comes not in his own name, but in
the name of Christ, he calls himself Christ's Vicar. Ergo he can not be
Antichrist, Bellarm.

Answer: First, It is not necessary that Antichrist should openly profess
himself to be Christ, in name, but he shall do it, opere, indeed, and that
closely and covertly: for those whom Christ calls, pseudochristos, false
Christ's, Matthew. 24.23. John calls Antichristos, Antichrists, 1. John. 2.18.
False prophets therefore are false Christ's, and Antichrists: yet all those
false prophets and heretics did not in name and outward profession make
themselves Christ's.

2. The Pope of Rome in effect makes himself Christ: for who but Christ is
the head of the Church? who but Christ is superior to the Angels, and to
command them? who but Christ can make sacraments and articles of faith? But
all this the Pope takes upon himself to do: yea the Jesuit is not ashamed
to say, that he has the same office which Christ had being upon earth, lib. 5.
de pontif. cap. 4. And whereas they say, the Pope comes in the name of
Christ: it shall as much profit him (it being not in truth* but in color
only and show) as it shall profit the false prophets to say in the day of the
Lord, Have not we in thy name prophesied, and cast out devils? Matthew.
7.22.23. to whom Christ shall make answer, Verily I know you not.

3. Antichrist shall openly name himself God, and command men to worship him
as God, Argum.
2. Thessal. 2.4. But this does not the Pope: Ergo, he is not Antichrist,
Bellarm.

Answer: First, If Antichrist should be such an one, you might have found
amongst the Emperors of Rome diverse Antichrists: for such an one Caligula was,
that commanded temples to be erected in his name, and his images to be set up
to be worshipped, yea in the temple at Jerusalem.

2. Saint Paul's words will not bear any such sense: he shall sit, (...), as
God: and your vulgar Latin has ostendens se, tanquam sit Deus, showing
himself as though he were God, that is, in deed and effect, not in open
profession: for he should sit and be worshipped in the temple as God: how
then can it be called the temple of God, being thus a temple of most gross
Idolatry?

3. The Pope in effect makes himself a god upon earth: for he can dispense
against the law of nature, the law of GOD, against both new and old testament:
as we have showed before, quest. 9. of this Controversy* yea Bellarmine says,
he may by his Apostolic authority dispense with the precepts of the Apostles
cap. 14. He is able to change the nature of things, and of nothing to make
things to be, of wrong to make justice, etc. Pope Nicholaus distinct. 96. yea
it is said of the Pope, that he is neither GOD nor man, Extrauag.
but a middle thing between both: Pope Boniface. I pray you then what is he?
he is no Angel, for he is above them, and commands them: Papa Angelis
praecipit, Agrippa.
the Pope commands Angels. He must then either be a God or a devil, by your
own confession, choose which you will: Nay they do make him a plain God: Es
alter Deus in terris, an other God upon earth: and they salute him by these
names, Dominus deus noster Papa, our Lord god the Pope. Thus it is proved, that
the Pope, both by his deeds as also by his titles, does make himself god upon
earth.

4. Antichrist say they, shall take away all worship yea of Idols, and shall
command nothing to be worshipped but himself, Argument.
2. Thessal. 2.4. the word is (...), numina, all things that are worshipped.
But so does not the Pope, for he prays to Saints, adoreth the body of Christ
on the altar. Ergo. Bellarm. cap. 14. Rhemist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 10.

Answer: First, the text proves not, that he shall take away, all Idols, or
things worshipped, but shall exalt himself against them, and make small
account of them. The place also of Daniel is plain, 11.37. He shall not
regard the God of his fathers, nor care for any God, but shall magnify
himself above all: And in his place shall he honor the God Mauzzim, and the
God which his fathers knew not, shall he honor, with gold and silver. Out of
this place we gather two things: first, that Antichrist shall bring in a
strange God, which his fathers never knew: so has the Pope invented a breaden
God, which he honors with gold and precious stones, making more account of
it, then of any image or relic whatsoever.

Secondly, yet he shall magnify himself above all such Gods, Images, Roodes,
shrines and the like* yea above his own breaden God: so does the Pope: for he
rides upon men's shoulders, when his breaden God is carried upon an hackney: he
exalts his throne above the altar, the Cross is carried on the right hand of
Emperors swords and scepters, but is laid under his feet: In the year of
Iubile, he beats upon the gates of Paradise with a golden hammer: Fulk.
annot. 2. Thesse. 2.10. so then howsoever like an hypocrite he seem to adore
his breaden God, yet indeed does he magnify himself above it.

Bellarmine has no other shifts to foyst off our arguments, but these: he
says, this Mauzzim, is like enough to be the devil himself, whom Antichrist
shall worship: but he cares neither for silver or gold: or else it is
himself. And how I pray you can a man worship himself? or else, says he, it
is some strong castle where he shall lay his silver and gold: or else you know
not what, Bellarmin. 14.

2 That Antichrist shall not abolish Idols of silver and gold, but rather
command the people to worship them, as the Pope now does, it is plain,
Apocalypse. 9.20.

The Rhemists object, that he speaks here against the heathen Idols, which
is here called the worship of devils. Answer: First, in this place John
speaks of the end of the world, in the opening of the seventh seal: and
the Idols of the heathen were abolished long ago: Neither is there any known
nation in the world that has worshipped Idols of gold, silver, brass,
stone, or wood, but the papists, for these many years. Secondly, all
worshippers of Images, do worship devils: for Idolatry is a service invented
by the devil, Fulk. annot. Apoc. 9. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
THat Antichrist shall not in outward show be an open enemy to Christ, but
secretly and closely, and under pretense of religion take away all religion:
thus we make it plain.

1 These places alleged before do prove it: John. 1.2.18. the Antichrist,
and the Antichrists, shall be enemies all alike, but the Antichrstes in Saint
John's time, were covert enemies. Ergo, so shall the great Antichrist.

2. Saint Paul calls it the mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and he shall
come in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, verse. 10. and God shall send
them strong delusion, to believe lies, verse. 11. All this proves that
Antichrist shall work closely, cunningly, mystically, by deceiving, by
delusion, not by open enimitie, and prophanenes, or by violence and tyranny
only, as the papists imagine.

3 Antichrist shall be the greatest enemy to Christ, and his kingdom, that
ever was in the world. But he is a greater enemy that pretends friendship,
and yet is a foe, that under the name of Christ persecuteth the Christian
faith, then he that openly destroys it, making no show of Religion: as David
complayneth, Psalm. 41.9. Yea my familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, has lift up his heel against me: This was accomplished in Judas,
who betrayed Christ with a kiss, who was the greatest enemy of Christ,
sinning against his own knowledge and conscience: Even so they now a days,
are the greatest enemies that Christ and the Church has, that betray Christ
with a kiss, which name themselves the Church of God, and yet make hauock of
the Church.

4. Lastly, Augustine says as much, that Antichrist shall come with
deceivable doctrine, and show of righteousness. Quid expa^escimus in
Antichristo, nisi quia nomen suum honoraturus est, and Domini contempturus*
Quid aliud facit, De verb. domin. secu^d. Johan. sermon. 45.
qui dicit, ego iustifico? Quid aliud est dei ignorare iustitiam, and suam
velle constituere, quam dicere, ego iustifico, ego sanctifico? What other thing
do we fear in Antichrist, but that he shall honor his own name, and
contemn Christ's? What else does he, which says, I do justify, I make holy?
What is this but to destroy the righteousness of God, and to bring in his own?

Mark now I pray you, if all this be not true of the Pope of Rome: for he
takes upon him to justify, to sanctify, to dispense with men's sins for an
hundred, yea a thousand years: to rid souls out of Purgatory: nay to
command Angels to carry their souls to heaven, that die in their Pilgrimage
to Rome, as Pope Clement the sixth did: what is this* else but to say, Iuel. p.
595.
Ego iustifico, sanctifico, I justify, I sanctify? and who I pray you, does
so, if Augustine may be judge, but Antichrist? but thus the Pope does. Ergo he
is Antichrist.

THE SEVENTH PART CONCERNING the miracles of Antichrist.
The Papists.
ANtichrist, they say, shall be a Magitian, and work strange signs and shall
be wrought by him: He shall cause fire to come from heaven, and make the
Image of the beast to speak; and thirdly, he shall feign himself dead and
rise again, Bellarm. cap. 15.

1. He shall by the help of the devil cause fire to come down from heaven,
as it is Apocal. 13.13.

Answer: First, it is a great question whether the devil have any such power
to bring down fire from heaven: for the Jesuit himself remembers the story
1. King. 18. How Baal his priests would have fetched down fire from heaven, but
they could not: only Elias did it: and he that will do the like, must have
Elias his spirit, as Christ says, Luke 9.55.

2. It is very gross to understand this literally: for the whole chapter is
mystical, of the Beast with seven heads, of another beast with two horns, and
all the rest. But three ways Antichrist may fitly be said to bring fire from
heaven: First, by fire the holy Ghost may be understood, as Matthew. 3. and Act.
2. The spirit appeared in fiery tongues: so Antichrist and his ministers make
men believe, that they do confer the holy Ghost, as in consecration, in
absolution of sinners, and such like. Secondly, the Popes thunderbolts of
excommunication, are resembled to fire, whereby he has made the whole world
afraid in times past, as though he could cause the heavens to fall upon men:
yea, to make the matter more likely, the Pope uses burning Tapers in
excommunicating men, which with violence are thrown down as though GOD
himself did rain fire from heaven upon them. And this is the terrible manner
of their excommunication: there are three candles burning set up: Fox. p. 1038
and then they begin to accurse them, whom they excommunicate, body and soul
to the devil: and let us, say they, quench their souls in hell fire, if they
be dead, as this candle is put out (and with that they put out one of the
candles) If they be alive, let us pray, that their eyes may be put out, as this
candle is, and so the second candle goes out, and that all their senses may
fail them, as this candle loses his light, and so the third candle goes
out. Behold, here is the fire which the Pope and his popelings do bring from
heaven. Sic Bullinger. sermon* 60. in Apocalips. Thirdly, the Dragon is said,
Apocalips. 12.4. with his tail to draw many stars from heaven: that is,
many excellent men, as stars in gifts and knowledge, shall be deceived by
the Pope, and be won unto him: yea the Pope himself is a Star fallen from
heaven to the earth, from heavenly doctrine to earthly tradition, Apocalips.
9.1. thus Antichrist also may be said to fetch fire from heaven.

2. The second miracle, he shall cause the Image of the beast to speak, which
the Jesuit understands literally, that is, grossly.

Answer: First, Bellarmine and our Jesuits do not here agree: for Bellarmine
says, that these two miracles shall be wrought by Antichrist himself, to
fetch fire from heaven: and to cause the Image to speak: But the Rhemists
say, this other beast, is another false Prophet, inferior to Antichrist,
which shall also work wonders, such an one as Calvin, say they: where they
show their malice, more then learning, for Calvin, they know, took not upon
him to work miracles, annot. Apocal. 13. sect. 3.

2 This causing the image to speak has a better meaning: The image of the
beast is the shadow of the old stately Empire of Rome, which was erected by
the Pope: for the west parts wanted an Emperor the space of three hundred
years from Augustulus time till Pope Leo the third, who made Charles the great
king of France, Auentin. lib. 4.
Emperor: And at this day is there nothing in the Empire, but only a name,
title and image: for neither has the Emperor the Imperial authority, which
is in the Pope, nor the Imperial kingdoms, unless he have them of his own.
And the Pope only makes this Image to speak, for unless he do confirm the
election of the king of the Romans, he is not thought worthy the name of
Emperor. Bullinger. ibid.

3 And yet we deny not, but that they both have and may make images speak
either by the help of the devil, as Dunstane caused a roode to speak, or by
iugling, as the Roode of grace by gimmals was made to roll the eyes, move the
lips and such like, in king Henry's days.

3 The third miracle that Antichrist shall work, is to feign himself dead, and
to rise again, Apocalypse. 13.3.

Answer: There can be no such thing gathered out of the text: First, the
words will not bear it: the text is, that one of the heads was wounded to
death, and the wound was healed: which cannot be so meant, as though he feigned
himself dead: but he received a wound indeed.

2 The sense is mystical, as thorough the whole chapter: First, it is said,
that the seventh head was wounded to death: but revived again: that is, the
seventh government of the Romans in the Popedom: for the papacy had many
times deadly blows, and yet was healed again: especially when there were
three Popes together, at Rome, in France, and the third in Spain: but this
wound was cunningly healed up in Pope Martin the fifth, in the Council of
Constance, the other three being deposed. Sic Bullinger Sermon. 59. Secondly, it
is said verse. 14. that the beast whose image remained, had the wound of a
sword, and yet lived: which is understood of the Roman Empire, revived and
quickened by the Pope.

The Protestants.
IT is true that Antichrist shall work signs and wonders by the power of
Satan, 2. Thessal. 2. but lying signs, both because they shall be done to
confirm lies, neither shall they be such as the Prophets wrought, but many of
them but cunning and cousening sleights of iuglers. And for such wonders we
need not to search far, the Popish Church is full of them* Where else then
should we look for Antichrist?

1 There have been of the Popes themselves* Sorcerers and Coniurers, such an
one Antichrist shall be, says Bellarmine. Siluester the second came up to the
papacy by the help of the devil, as we have before showed. Gregory the
seventh was condemned in the Council of Brixia for a Coniurer: And Benno a
Cardinal in those days thus writes of him: that on a time he sending two of
his servants for a certain Sathanicall book, charging them not to look into
it: they notwithstanding looked into it, and presently a great multitude of
devilish spirits were round about them: who were instant upon them to know
why they were called for: the servants being at the first astonished, yet
coming to themselves, enjoined them to pluck down certain high walls near
to Rome: and so they came to their master, Fox. page 176. What other Antichrist
now need we look for? If he must be a Coniurer, we may here make our
choice.

2 We are not ignorant, what lies and fables are reported by the papists of
the myraculous acts of their popish Saints, of the which we have spoken
before: As how Dunstane appeared to a cripple, that came to his Tomb to be
helped of his lamenesse: How Plegildus a priest saw and handled the shape of a
child upon the alta^, which after he had kissed returned again to the
likeness of bread. How a certain Jews boy told his father that he saw a
child broken in pieces upon the altar and distributed among the Christians:
and the boy for that, Fox. p. 1148
was cast into a furnace of fire, and was preserved from the fire by the Virgin
Marie, which appeared to him, and spread her garment over him. Many such either
lies and fables, or works of devils the popish Church has many: What need
we therefore doubt, but that it is the Antichristian Church?

3 Augustine says, Saint Paul calls them lying wonders, either because
Antichrist shall deceive men per phantasmata, with iugling sleights, or
because, ad mendacia per trahet credituros, De ciuitat. deilib. 20. cap. 19.
by his wonders he shall make them believe lies. But in which sense they are so
called, it shall appear when Antichrist is come says he: and indeed it is
now apparent; for our adversaries have plenty of both kinds, both miracles
wrought indeed by the devil, and many pretty iugling feats beside.

THE EIGHTH PART OF THE QVEstion, concerning the wars, and kingdom of
Antichrist.
The Papists.
BEllarmine says, that Antichrist shall make great battayles against the
Lybia, Egypt, Aethiopia. Thirdly, with a great army he shall persecute the
Christians throughout the world, and this shall be the battle of Gog and
Magog, Bellarm. cap. 16.

1 That he shall craftily aspire to the kingdom, he proves it out of Daniel,
11.21. where it is prophesied of one that he shall obtain the kingdom by
flatteries.

Ans. This prophecy of Daniel, as likewise the whole chapter, was historically
accomplished in Antiochus Epiphanes, who defrauded Seleucus his brothers son
of the kingdom, and circumuented his elder brother Demetrius: so that it being
once fulfilled, it cannot be wrested to any other sense: of Antichrist it
cannot be meant; for here is a succession of Kings described, verse. 19. One is
said to be overthrown, that is, Seleucus, but not in battle, for he was
poisoned, verse. 18. There another is said to be overthrown and to be no more
found, that is, Antiochus magnus. But Antichrist cannot succeed any in the
kingdom of the Jews: for he shall be their first King, as the Papists imagine.

2 He shall (says Bellarmine) overcome three kings, of Lybia, Egypt,
Aethiopia, Dan. 11.43. and this horn shall remove three other horns, Dan. 7.8.

Ans. This also must needs be understood of Antiochus Epiphanes: and they are
two prophecies. First, he is called a little horn, because he was not heir to
the kingdom: he remoueth three other horns: for by his means Ptolemaeus
Philopater was cast out of the kingdom in his fathers time Antiochus the
great: his brother Seleucus poisoned, his son Demetrius disinherited,
Tremell. Dan. 7.20. The second prophecy was also accomplished by Antiochus,
who overcame Egypt, and the countries adjoining.

Of Antichrist it cannot be understood: for the first prophecy speaks of a
beast with ten horns, which must be understood of one kingdom and monarch,
and by the ten horns ten Kings are signified: for so was Antiochus Epiphanes
the tenth from Seleucus: here then is a succession of Kings: but Antichrist
shall not succeed any.

3 The Jesuit says, that Antichrist with a great army shall vex the whole
world, and that shall be the battle of Gog and Magog prophesied of Ezech.
38.39. and Apocal. 20.

Ans. The prophecy of Ezechiel was fulfilled in the time of the Macchabees,
when as Gog and Magog, that is Antiochus, with the help of the Syrians and
Scythians and other countries, molested the people of God: for verse. 23. chap.
39. the Prophet speaks of the captivity of Israel, from the which they
should at that time be delivered. And again, the Lord would not leave his
Church, which at that time endured great afflictions at the hands of the
heathen, comfortless: but if these prophecies of Ezechiel and Daniel concern
them not, then small had been their comfort. Lastly, the Jews may with as good
reason understand the prophecies concerning Christ, of their Messiah, whom they
yet look for, as you may these prophecies concerning the enemies of the
Church, of your Antichrist.

The other prophecy also is fulfilled, Apocal. 20.8. how Gog and Magog from
the four corners of the earth, shall compass the tents of the Saints: for by
Gog and Magog, is understood the whole multitude of the enemies of the Church
both within and without, as Turks, Papists, Infidels, which all have agreed
together at times and in their turns, though enemies amongst themselves, to
afflict the people of God, Fulk. annot. in hunc locum.

And if you will needs also have the other two prophecies fulfilled again,
being once before accomplished: they agree fitly to the Turkish Empire: for
Mahomet by craft and subtlety aspired to a kingdom, and in short time he
ouerranne Egypt and Lybia, with other parts of Africa.

The Protestants.
WE deny that there shall come any such Antichrist: or that it is possible for
him to wage battle with the whole earth. We grant that the Antichrist of
Rome has warred with the Church, poisoning it with corrupt doctrine, and
persecuting the same by fire and sword: which his rage is well slaked now, God
be praised, in many places, and his tyranny ouerpast: miserable were the state
of the Church if it should endure such a brunt again.

1 It is impossible that Antichrist in so short a time as three years and an
half, should conquer all nations, and be Monarch of the whole world, burn and
sack Rome, and drive out the Pope, as the Papists grant themselves, Bellarm.
lib. 4. cap. 3. de pontifice. A man cannot in that space traua^le through the
whole world, much less conquer it.

And seeing Antichrist shall begin at Jerusalem, make his habitation there, and
have an end there: (for (say they) he shall be slain in Mount Oliuet, Gloss.
sup. Apocal:) It is not like that in his own person he should conquer the
world: neither can it be thought that he shall do it by his deputies, for then
they should be the Antichrists and not he. See what a Labyrinth you are fallen
into, out of the which you cannot wind yourselues.

2 Antichrist is not described in scripture as a warrior, or warlike man
sitting harnessed in his tent, but like an hypocrite adua^cing himself in the
temple; not coming with engines of war, but deluding and deceiving with false
miracles, and lying signs, 2. Thessal. 2. Not with Harolds of arms openly
proclaming war: but he shall work in a mystery, Apocal. 17.5. Wherefore it
is but a popish dream and fancy, that Antichrist shall be such a mighty
warrior: yet we deny not but that diverse of the Popes have been warriors,
but that was beyond the commission of Peter's cross keys.

3 Lastly, they have no ground of this their opinion out of scripture: for
neither Ezechiel nor Daniel makes for them, prophesying of the state of the
Church before Christ: nor yet the Apocalypse, the prophecy of Gog and Magog
being accomplished in the greatest part already: Wherefore away with these
mistie clouds of your brainsicke inventions: they shall not be able to abide
the lightsome sunbeams of the truth.

THE NINTH AND LAST PART OF THIS question, whether the Pope be Antichrist.
The Papists.
THis question pincheth our adversaries very sore, that we should touch their

They therefore, craftily foreseeing this, do take great pains to deliver the
Pope out of this danger, and have found out many starting holes, but all to
small purpose: yea their forefathers seeing the matter so plain, and almost put
out of doubt, Council. Later. sess. 11.
gave straight charge in the late Council of Laterane to all preachers, that
none should dare once to speak of the coming of Antichrist. This argues a
guilty conscience. But yet they face out the matter, and say, the Pope cannot
be Antichrist: their arguments are none other then those we have heard, being
eight in number.

1 Antichrist shall be one singular man: the Popes have been many, part. 1. of
this question. Secondly, he shall reign but three years and an half: but the
Pope has continued many hundred years, part. 2. Thirdly, he shall be known by
his name: the Popes have sundry names, part. 3. Fourthly, he must come of the
stock of the Jews: but there was never yet any Jew Pope, part. 4. Fifthly,
his seat must be at Jerusalem: the Popes is at Rome, part. 5. Sixthly, he shall
manifestly deny Christ: so does not the Pope, say they, part. 6. Seventhly, he
shall do strange miracles, as bring down fire from heaven, cause Images to
speak, part. 7. Eighthly, He shall wage great battles, and conquer all the
world, part. 8. Which cannot agree to the Pope: Ergo, he is not Antichrist.

Answer: To these eight arguments, we have before answered severally: showing,
how fabulous, ridiculous, and impossible our adversaries assertions are,
without ground of scripture, show of reason, or color of argument. Wherefore
we will not trouble the reader with needless repetitions, desiring him to have
recourse to that which has been already said.

The Protestants.
THat the Pope of Rome is very Antichrist, and that all the qualities and
properties which the scripture describes Antichrist by, do fitly agree unto
his person: and that we are not therefore to expect or look for any other
Antichrist. Thus by testimony of scripture, and sufficient reasons deduced out
of the same, we trust it shall appear to all men.

1 The first place of scripture is Daniel 11. where many notes and marks are
declared proper to Antichrist, yet especially set forth to describe Antiochus
Epiphanes, who might be very well a type and figure of Antichrist who was then
to come.

1 verse. 36. It is said, He shall do what him lists. This is most true of
the Pope: his will must stand for reason, Distinct. 96. cap. satis. If the
Pope should draw infinite souls to hell, no man is to say unto him, Sir, why
do you so, Distinct. 40? Here Bellarmine has but this poor shift, to say,
that it is meant only of public judgment, that no man is by authority to
call the Pope to account: but yet a brotherly admonition may be used. But who
sees not that the words are general: Nemo debet ei dicere, No man ought to
say unto him: neither Judge, nor other?

2 He shall magnify himself against GOD, and speak blasphemous things
against GOD: has not the Pope done so? Of him it is said, that GOD and the
Pope have but one Consistory: I am able to do almost all that GOD can do,
Fox. page 785. articl. 192. I am above all and in all: Hostiens. Nay, that
Dominion and Lordship which Christ had in earth, but habitu, in habit, the
Pope has actu, in act and in deed. Again, as we read, the earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, and as Christ says, all power is given me
in heaven, and in earth: so is it to be affirmed, that the Vicar of Christ
has power on things celestial, terrestrial, infernal, apud Fox. page 791.
col. 1. Now let the discreet reader judge, whether this fellow do not
magnify himself, and speak blasphemously against God.

3 He shall prosper till the wrath be accomplished: So has the Pope had but
too good success: he has subdued Emperors, and made them his servants,
trod upon their necks, made them serve at his table, crowned them with his
feet, made them hold his stirrup, and lead his horse by the bridle. But we
do hope that his date is out, and that he shall prosper no longer.

4 verse. 37. He shall not care for the God of his fathers: No more does the
Pope: for he has invented and erected a new breaden god, which he
worshippeth, hangs up in Churches, carries about in procession, being but a
piece of bread. This breaden god a might, his forefathers never knew.

5 He shall not care for the desires of women: So he prohibiteth lawful
marriage, permits adulteries, and the unnatural lust of Sodomites.
Bellarmine first denies the text, which is faithfully translated according to
the Hebrew. Secondly, he says, the place is meant literally and properly of
Antiochus, who was given to the pleasures of women.

Answer: First, if it be meant literallie of Antiochus, then can it not be
meant literallie of your Antichrist: If Antiochus be but a type of Antichrist,
then can you not necessarily conclude out of this place: for types prove not,
unless they be divine, that is, appointed of God to be types, which you can
not show for this place: see then, the best arguments that you have for your
Antichrist, out of the prophecies of Daniel and Ezechiel, are proved nothing
worth. Secondly, as Antiochus was given to unlawful desires of women, so is
the Pope: yet might he be an enemy to chaste and holy marriage, and so is the
Pope. And by the way let it be noted, that the Jesuit picketh quarrels with
scripture, and makes it false: for the text says, He, that is, Antiochus,
shall not care for the desires of women. Yes (says the Jesuit) he shall be
given to the pleasures of women, clean contrary to the text, Bellarm. cap. 21.

6 verse. 38. He shall honor his god Mauzzim, that is, a god of power and
riches, with gold, silver, precious stones: Both of these are most true of the
popish religion: for their god has brought them great riches, lands, treasure,
possession: by their idolatrous Masses, they have greatly enriched themselves,
wherein their breaden god plays the chief part: and therefore they do
worship him again with gold, silver, precious stones: what rich Corporals, and
Altarclothes, Copes, Vestiments of velvet, silk, wrought with gold, are seen
in their Churches? what gilding of Roodes, and Roodlofts, garnishing of Idols,
what rich Crucifixes of silver, of gold, beset with pearl and precious stones?

This description therefore of Daniel, as you see, does in every respect agree
with the conditions and properties of Antichrist of Rome, Argument. Illyrici.

Secondly, Saint Paul's description in every point also is verified in the
Pope. First: He shall exalt himself above God, and all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. So the Pope challenges the full authority of Christ, as we have
showed before, and exalts himself above Emperors, which are called gods
upon earth: yea they have taken the just proportion of inequality between the
Pope and Emperor: for the Pope is 47. degrees above the Emperor: as the Sun
is 47. degrees bigger then the Moon, Innocent 3. in decretalib.

2 He shall sit in the temple, that is, in the Church: so the Pope names
himself head of the Church, and has the keys, as he braggeth, both of heaven
and hell. Therefore the Turk cannot be that Antichrist, because he is out of
the Church: and so in truth is the Pope, but yet he challenges to him and his
the name of the Church.

3 The mystery wrought in Paul's time, and afterward increased: so not long
after the Apostles time, the Bishops of Rome began to lift up their heads above
other Churches, as Zozimus falsified the Council of Nice, and sent to the 6.
Council of Carthage, to have it there confirmed, that it might be lawful to
send up appeals to Rome.

4 Antichrist shall come with lying signs: So has the Pope done, as
experience proves, and we have showed before.

5 verse. 11. God shall send strong delusions, that they shall believe lies. And
in time of Popery, men indeed were so strongly deluded, that the father
persecuted the son, the sons set fire to their father, yea the husband was
made a witness against the wife, the wife against her husband, and servants
accused their masters. These things are so well known in stories, that I need
not come to particulars.

6 Antichrist is called a wicked man, and a man of sin, verse. 3.8. And where
shall you find more wicked men, then among the Popes? Siluester the 2. gave
his soul to the devil to obtain the Papacy, Fox. page 167. Benno reports
of Hildebrand, that he poisoned six Popes to come to the Popedom. Pope
Stephen and Sergius, took up the body of Formosus, and mangled it, cutting
off his head and fingers, and so cast it into Tibris, Fox. page 120. We have
heard before, what a holy Father Pope John the 13. was, he lay with his own
sister, and with his fathers Concubines, playing at dice, called for the
devil, was slain in adultery. And was it not, I pray you, a common proverb
in England? He that goes to Rome once, sees a wicked man; he that goes
twice, learneth to know him; he that goes the third time, brings him home
with him, Fox. page 841. argument. Illyrici.

The third place we do take out of the Apocalypse, chap. 9. where is a plain
story set down of the Pope.

1 verse. 1. He is a star fallen from heaven: he is departed from the ancient
faith of Rome to superstition and idolatry.

2 He has the key of the bottomless pit: who gives the cross keys in his
arms but the Pope? who says he may euacuate all Purgatory at once, if he
will, but he? Who says, he may, Pleno iure currus animarum plenos secum ad
tartara detrudere, by full right, carry down to hell with him charriots Ioden
with souls? cap. si Papa. distinct. 42. Is not this the Pope? who then more
fitly may be said to have the key of the bottomless pit.

3 There arise out of the bottomless pit a great flock of Locusts, that is,
the innumerable sort of begging Friars: for they are in every respect
described: First, compared to Locusts for their number, verse. 3. There were an
100. diverse sorts of Friars, Fox. page 260. Secondly, they had power given them
for five months: that is, as Walter Brute expounds it, taking a month for
thirty days, and a day for a year, as it is prophetically taken: an 150.
years, for so long it was from the beginning of the Friars under Innocent the
3. anno 1212. to the time of Armachanus, who preached, disputed, and wrote
against the Friars, about anno 1360. Fox. page 414. Thirdly, they shall sting
like Scorpions, not slay all at once, but venom and poison the conscience with
the sting of their pestilent doctrine. Fourthly, other parts also of the
description agree, as verse. 7. They are as horses prepared to battle, that
is, stout and ambitious, their hair as the hair of women, that is, they
shall be effeminate, and given to the lusts of the flesh: their teeth as the
teeth of Lions: they by valiant begging shall devour the portions of the
poor: as it was well proved in King Henry the 8. days, in the Supplication of
beggars, that the sum of the Friars alms came to a great sum in the year:
for the five orders of Friars had a penie a quarter for every one of every
householder throughout England, that is, for them all twenty pence by the
year* suppose, that there be but ten households in every town, and let there
be twenty thousand parishes and towns in England; it will not want much of
twenty thousand pound. Thus had they Lions teeth, that is, consuming and
devouring. Lastly, they have a King, verse. 11. whose name is Abaddon, a
destroyer: for the Pope their chief prince and patron, has by his
Antichristian doctrine laid wast the Church of God, Argument. Chytraei.

The fourth place of scripture we will take out of the 17. of the Apocalypse*
there the seat of Antichrist is described. First, verse. 5. It is called
Babylon, the city which reigns over the Kings of the earth, verse. 18. This
can be no other but Rome, which then had the Empire of the whole world.
Secondly, It is the city built upon seven hills or mountains, verse. 9. that is
no other but Rome. Thirdly, the whore, which is Antichrist, shall sit upon the
beast with seven heads and ten horns, that is, shall succeed in the Empire,
and have the authority thereof: so has the Pope. Fourthly, the ten horns,
that is, the Kings of the earth, shall give their authority to the beast: but
afterward shall devour her flesh: Even so the Kings of the earth by their
sword maintained the authority of the Pope. But now being taught by the
Gospel, they are made the Lords free men, and begin to subdue their necks
from his yoke.

The fifth place is 1. John 2.22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus
is Christ? the same is Antichrist that denies the father and the son.

Even so the Pope of Rome, though not openly and apertly, yet closely and
subtly is an enemy unto the whole trinity: He exalts himself above God
the father; because he takes upon him to dispense not only against the law
of nature, but against the law of God, the moral law, and against the
precepts both of the old and new testament: but a law cannot be dispensed
withal, but by the same authority or greater.

Against Jesus Christ he exalts himself, and all his offices, he denies him
to be the only Prophet, saying, the scriptures are imperfect, and that their
traditions are also necessary to salvation. Again, he makes other books
scripture, then those which are Canonical. His kingly office he does arrogate
to himself, in making laws to bind the conscience, in ordayning other
Sacraments, in granting Indulgences and Pardons, and saying that he is the head
of the Church. His Priesthood he is an enemy unto, constituting another
priesthood after the order of Melchisedech, then that of our Savior Christ
which begun upon the Cross, and remains still in his person, being
incommunicable to any other creature: yet they make every sacrificing Priest to
be of the order of Melchisedech.

He impugneth the office of the holy spirit, counting that profane which the
holy Ghost has sanctified, as marriage and meats: arrogateth in all things
the spirit of truth not to err: applies the merits of Christ's passion after
his own pleasure, by Pardons, Indulgences, by ceremonies and Sacraments of his
own invention, Fulk. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 10. Ergo, we conclude out of S. John,
that seeing he denies Jesus to be Christ, he is Antichrist.

Sixthly, S. Paul says, that Antichrist shall be an adversary, (...). 2 Thessalonians.
2.4 An adversary in doctrine, teaching clean contrary to the Gospel of
Christ: so does the Pope.

1 The scripture says, we ought to put our trust only in God, and not in
man, Ierem. 17.7. and to call upon God only in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15. and to worship him in spirit and truth, John 4.24. The Papists say
clean contrary, that we must call upon Saints, and believe they can help us,
and they teach us to fall down before Images, which are stocks and stones.

2 The Gospel teaches, that we are freely saved by Jesus Christ, without
works, which neither merit remission of sins, nor eternal life, for
eternal life is the free gift of God, Romans 6.23. And our sins are forgiven
us freely, because they are not imputed, Romans 4.6. They affirm clean
contrary, that by our merits we may deserve heaven: and that vita aeterna, is
merces bonorum operum, that eternal life is the reward of good works. But S.
Paul says, it is a free gift, Bellarm. cap. 23.

3 The Gospel teaches us, that we should grow up to an assurance of our
election, 2. Pet. 1:10. and with boldness to call upon the name of God, Heb.
4.10. The Papists say, we should be kept always in doubt, and it is
presumption to be assured of the favor of God.

4 The Gospel says, that not only external acts, but even secret thoughts
are sin, yea the very concupiscence of the flesh to be sin, Genes. 6.5.
Romans 7.7. They deny that concupiscence and evil thoughts are sin, unless
the be voluntary, and have the consent of the will, ibid.

5 The Gospel teaches, that it is impossible for any man to keep and
perform the law of God, Romans 8.7. Luke 17.10. They doubt not to say, that a
man by grace may fulfill the law, and by fulfilling of it deserve heaven.

6 Christ instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, and Paul. 1. Cor. 11. giving
a direction concerning the Sacrament, not only to the Pastors and Ministers,
but to the whole Church of Corinth, does rehearse the institution in both
kinds. But the Papists do minister but in one kind to the people.

7 The Gospel says, that the Church is builded upon Christ, and he is the
only foundation thereof, 1. Cor. 3.11. The Papists hold that Peter first, and
now the Pope, whom they make his successor, is the foundation of the Church,
Argument. Chytraei. And thus we see, the Pope in his doctrine is a plain
adversary to Christ, and therefore Antichrist.

The seventh argument, Apocalypse 17.1. Antichrist is called the great whore:
And here we are to note the singular providence of God, who suffers not one
jot of his word to fall to the ground: for even soverily, Anno 853. next after
Leo the 4. there was a right whore elected Pope called John, or if you will,
Ioane the 8. who fate in the Papacy two years, six months; and on a time
being with child, fell in labor in the midst of a solemn procession.
Whereupon there was a certain Image of a woman with a child set up in the same
place where the Pope was delivered: And ever since the Popes, when they go to
Laterane, do shun that street, being yet the nearer way, abhorring that fact
and the memory thereof. There was also long after a chair of Porphyrie stone
kept in Laterane, with an hole in the midst, wherein the new elected Pope was
wont to sit to have his humanity tried, Iuell. page 428. Defens. Apol.

Object. 1. Harding, and since him Bellarmine object, that there was never any
such Pope, because she is not registered in the Popes Calendar. Ans. No, they
left her out for shame, as Marianus Scotus writes. Again, Bishops names have
upon sundry occasions been left out: as Chrysostomes name was stricken out upon
displeasure out of the table of the Bishops of Constantinople: So Pope Cyriacus
is not reckoned in the Calendar of the Popes, and yet he was one of them.

Object. 2. Whereas it is said, that this Pope Ioane was first student at
Athens, and afterward professed at Rome, Harding denies, that at Athens then
there was any place for students, but all was barbarous, and so says Bellarm.
neither that at Rome there was any open profession of letters at that time.
Ans. First, anno 680. the Bishop of Athens was at a Council at Constantinople,
called Synodus sexta, anno 742. at the second Council of Nice, there were many
Bishops of Greece present: and Pope Ioane followed, anno 853. and how should
Athens afterward become barbarous, being inhabited all this while by
Christians? for it was not taken of the Turks before anno 1440. Secondly, and
me thinks it is a discredit for Rome, that there should be there under the
Popes nose no profession of learning, and that there should be there no
University of Students, where the universal Bishop sat. But Theodoricus
Niemus, sometime the Popes Secretary, says, she read a Lecture two years at
Rome.

Object. 3. It is not like that God would suffer S. Peter's chair to be
polluted by a woman, Harding. Ans. You presume to much of Gods providence,
having no such promise. Why might not a woman as well creep into S. Peter's
chair at Rome, as one did into S. Andrews of Constantinople? as Bellarmine
confesses, what privilege has one more then the other.

Object. 4. As for the chair (says Harding) it is a fable: but Bellarmine
more modestly grants there is a chair of Porphyrie, but to another purpose,
to show the Popes humility, not to try his humanity. Again, Harding says
it is a lie, that the Popes refrain to go that way. But Bellarmine, that
knows Rome better then he, denies not that the Pope so does, but not for any
such heinous fact there committed, but because it is a strait way, and is not
fit for his train. And as for the Image, Harding says, it represents no
such thing, but is rather like one of the great ragged stones at Stonage.
Bellarmine denies not, but there is such an Image, but it seems not to be a
picture of a woman, but rather of some heathen priest going to sacrifice. We
see how handsomely they agree in their answers: And no marvel, for if one
liar is many times contrary to himself, how should two liars agree? But these
men go only by conjectures: we have their own writers against them: for
Theodoricus Niemus says there is such an Image that resembles such a thing,
and that the Popes will not go that way in procession to this day upon that
occasion. And as for the chair of marble to that use, to search the Pope,
Sabellicus reports it, Aenead. 9. lib. 1.

In this one example we may see the boldness of our adversaries, which are not
ashamed to deny so famous a story, being reported by Sabellicus, Leonicus
Chalcondyla, Marianus Scotus, that lived about the year 1028. Sigebertus
Gimblacens. anno 1100. beside thirteen Historiographers, as they are quoted by
Bishop Jewel, and of them all not one a Lutherane. Desens. Apol. p. 434.
It is almost as foul a shame for them to deny so manifest and plain a
thing, as it is a great blot to their succession, that a whore sat sometimes
in the Papal chair. Thus then by evident demonstration it appears, that the
Pope is the whore of Babylon, and so consequently very Antichrist.

Lastly, in the eight place, their own witnesses shall speak: Bernard says,
Bestia de Apocalypsi, cui datum est os, loquens blasphemias, Petri Cathedram
occupat. The Beast in the Apocalypse, Epistol. 125
to the which a mouth was given speaking blasphemies, does occupy Peter's
chair. Ioachim. Abbas says, Antichristus iam pridem natus est Romae:
Antichrist a good while since was borne at Rome. The Bishops in the Council at
Reynspurge say thus: Hildebrandus Papa, sub specie religionis, iecit fundamenta
Antichristi: Hildebrand under color of holiness, has laid a foundation for
Antichrist. Nay, long before any of these, Gregory the 1. first of all the
Gregory's, and the best of all the Popes that have followed him, thus
prophesied of his successors: Ego fidenter dico, Lib. 6. epist. 30.
quod quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in
elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit: I speak it confidently, that whosoever
calls himself, universal Priest, or desires so to be called in the pride
of his heart, is the forerunner of Antichrist. But the Popes of Rome are now
called universal Bishops or Priests: Ergo, they are either Antichrists, or the
forerunners of Antichrist. But it is not like that Antichrist should have so
many forerunners, and so many years, almost a thousand since Boniface the 3.
was first called universal Bishop: Ergo, Antichrist is already come, and has
been a good while: and where else should he be, but there where his forerunners
were, namely, at Rome? Now therefore seeing we have so many witnesses, the
scripture, reason, experience, authorities to prove the Pope Antichrist: who
will either be so simple, as seeing so good grounds, not to believe it, or so
scrupulous, having such certain evidence, to doubt thereof? And thus at the
length, by Gods gracious assistance, we have finished and brought this great
question concerning Antichrist, to an end, as also the whole controversy as
touching the Bishop or Pope of Rome.

THE FIFTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING SPIRITVAL PERSONS, COMMONLY CALLED
THE CLERGY.
Having now sufficiently handled the controversy of the chief member of the
militant Church, which our adversaries say is the Pope, we must come in the
next place to speak of the middle parts, which are those whom they call
Clericos, Clerks, and they are of two sorts; Secular, which have any public
function in the Church: or Regular, which live according to some rule, and they
are called Monachi, Monks. First then of their secular Clerks.

This controversy conteyneth six questions.

1 Of the name and title of Clerks or Clergy men. 2 Concerning the election
of Bishops and Ministers: first of all in general: secondly, of the election
of the Bishop of Rome. 3 Concerning Ecclesiastical orders. First, in general:
secondly, of the difference of Bishops and other Ministers. Thirdly, of
Cardinals. 4 Concerning the keys of the Church, and the power of binding and
loosing: the question divided into four parts. 5 Concerning the marriage of
Ministers: three parts of the question. 6 Of the maintenance of the Church by
tithes: in two parts.
THE FIRST QVESTION, CONCERNING THE name of Clerks or Clergy men.
The Papists.
Clerus, is a name made proper to the Spirituality, by use of antiquity, and
agreeably to Scriptures: they are so called, because they are the Lords lot,
and consecrate to the divine service: the rest are called popular, or lay men,
which meddle not with any function of the Church.

1 This word (say they) has been used by all antiquity, and thereby Church
Ministers only signified: Ergo, it is a fit and decent name, Bellar. lib. 1. de
Clericis, cap. 1. Rhemens. 1. Pet. 2.3

Ans. First, the Fathers used this name Clergy, but not as it is now used of
the Papists, which do hereby as it were exclude the people of God from the
Lords inheritance, counting them as Asses and Dogs, in respect of the Clergy:
they used it as a civil indifferent name, for an outward distinction of their
callings, not as a name of more holiness, and so we refuse it not.

2 What though by custom and continuance this name has been somewhat abused,
we will learn herein to speak of the scriptures, and not of men.

Secondly, we mislike this name (say our adversaries) because we would have no
difference between the people and Clergy, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. It is a great slander: because we make no such difference, as they do,
as to make the Clergy only Gods lot and portion, and to count the people as
unholy, and to prefer every ignorant doltish Mass priest, before the best
and deuoutest of the people: therefore they imagine we make no difference at
all. We do distinguish the calling of the one, and the other: none of the lay
sort to be so hardy as to meddle with the word or Sacraments, which are
committed to the Ministers, which you notwithstanding permit them to do: and
the people every where to reverence their Pastors and to yield due obedience
unto them. But that the calling of the one before God in it self, is more
meritorious then the other, that we do not, neither dare affirm.

3 The Levites in the time of the law, were severed out from the rest of the
Lords people, and he was their lot and inheritance, and they the Lords lot.
Deuteronomy. 18.2. And as the Levites were then, so are the Ministers of the Gospel
now. Bellarm.

Ans. First, the Lord is rather said to be their lot, because they had the
Lords portion, and lived of the Altar, then they are said to be the Lords lot:
for the whole nation was holy unto God, and a kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6.
Secondly, it follows not, that because there was a legal and ceremonial
difference then between the Priests and the people, that therefore it ought to
be so now: Nay rather the contrary follows, because there was such a
difference then, that therefore the Priesthood of the law being ceased, there
ought to be none such now: for Christ has made us all Kings and Priests to
God his father, Apocal. 1.6: And we are al a royal priesthood and holy nation,
1. Pet. 2.9. Now, though there be a difference of callings amongst men, yet
before God we are all Priests alike, and there is but one Priest for us all to
Godward, even Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Protestants.
THe name of Clerks, or Clergy men, if it be not used as a name in it self
of greater holiness and merit, and so is in effect a proud excluding of the
rest of Christians from the Lords inheritance, we refuse it not, though there
are better names and titles, to call the Ministers of the Gospel by: yet being
taken as it is in Popery, we do utterly refuse and reject it.

First, 1. Pet. 5.3. The Apostle exhorts the pastors and teachers to feed
the flock of Christ, non vt dominantes Cleris, not as Lords over Gods Clergy
and inheritance. Here S. Peter calls the whole flock, the Clergy: wherefore
it appears, that this difference was not known in the Apostles time of lay
and Clergy men: And it is against all sense, that Saint Peter should
understand here the inferior Ministers, and so exhorts the superior Pastors
and Bishops to look to their Clergy, as the Rhemists would have it: for S.
Peter speaks of the whole flock and congregation, which cannot be
understood properly of many Ministers dispersed into several places.

2 Neither shall we find this word Clerus, the Clergy, properly applied to
the Ministers, throughout the new testament, let our adversaries brag never so
much of scripture as they do. Galat. 6.6. S. Paul uses these names of
difference, (...), the teacher, and he that is taught: and 1. Corinthians. 14.16.
(...), the speaker, and (...) the private or unlettered man. So that all their
names are given in respect of their outward ministry and calling, not in
regard of any difference before God. For before the Lord, as there is neither
Grecian nor Jew, bond nor free, Galat. 3.28.
male nor female; so neither is there Clerk or lay man.

3 Augustine thus writes concerning this name, Cleros, qui sunt in
ecclesiastici ministerij gradibus ordinati, sic dictos puto, quia Matthias
sort electus est, in Psalm. 67. Clerks, which serve in the Ministry, I
think, were so called, because Matthias was chosen by lot. See then, they are
not called Clerks because they are the Lords lot, but because they are
allotted and chosen out of the people for that service: as the Levites are
called the peoples gift, Numbers 18.6. and the Priests office an office of
service: not of more merit or holiness, or an office of Lordly preeminence,
but of ministry and service. Augustine therefore has a notable saying: Non
nos digni, qui pro vobis oremus, vos indigni, qui pro nobis oretis, Psalm. 68.
We are not only worthy to pray for you, and you unworthy to pray for us:
Auditoribus suis, quibus verbum praedicauit, se commendauit Apostolus, ibid.
The Apostle commends himself to their devout prayers, to whom he preached.
By this their error is confuted, that think the prayer of a Priest to be the
rather heard for the merit and dignity of his calling, howsoever else he be
affected in his prayer. So the Rhemists say, that a prayer not understood
profits by the virtue of the work wrought and the office of the Priesthood,
Annot. 1. Corinthians. 14. sect. 10.

THE SECOND QVESTION, CONCERNING the election and institution of Bishops and
Pastors.
THis question has two parts: First, of the election generally of Pastors and
Ministers: Secondly, of the election of the Bishop of Rome.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING THE ELEction generally of all Bishops and Pastors.
The Papists.
Rome: as for the people, they have (they say) nothing at all to do in the
election of their pastors, or ordayning of them, that neither their suffragium,
consilium, or consensus, suffrage, counsel or consent is to be required,
Bellarm. de clericis lib. 1. cap. 7. and 8.

1 That the people are to be utterly excluded, thus they would prove it: Aaron
was only elected of Moses, without consent of the people, so were the Apostles
by our Savior: Ergo, the peoples consent is not required, Bellarm.

Ans. Who sees not, that there is great difference between ordinary and
extraordinary callings? such as the calling of the Apostles was, and Aarons at
the first, though the office of the high Priest afterward became ordinary.
Also it follows not, the Apostles were chosen without consent of the people,
when there were yet no faithful and Christian congregations, and because they
were pastors of the whole world, Ergo, as well the peoples consent may be
wanting in the election of ordinary Bishops and Pastors, which have their
peculiar and proper charges, and there being now many faithful and well
instructed congregations. It is one thing to appoint Pastors for the Church not
yet planted, and an other thing to constitute them in a Church already
reformed and instructed: for we read of nations that have been converted to
the faith, by those that had no calling of the Church, as a great nation of the
Indians was by Aedesius and Frumentinus, Ruffin. lib. 1.9. and the Iberians by
a captive woman, Ruffin. 1.10.

2 The people cannot judge, who are fit to be pastors, and their elections are
tumultuous, as we may read, how in the election of Damasus there were 137.
persons slain, and therefore it is not meet, nor convenient, that the matter
should be committed to the people, either to elect, or ordain: but whatsoever
they did in times past, it was either by sufferance or negligence of the
Bishops, Bellarmin. cap. 7.

Ans. First, mere popular elections were never allowed in any well ordered
Church, neither was the allowa^ce of their pastors wholly referred to the
people, neither did they bear the chief stroke, but the election was
moderated by the wisdom and gravity of the Clergy, Fulk. Tit. 1. sect. 2.
Secondly, the question is not between us, concerning the ordayning of pastors,
for that belonged only to the Eldership, and was done by laying on of their
hands, 1. Timoth. 4.14: but concerning the electing and choosing of them.
Thirdly, neither do we dispute, whether it be convenient and necessary at al
times, but whether it be lawful: for neither do we affirm, that it is of the
essence and substance of the calling of ministers to be chosen by the voices of
the people: as though they were no ministers, but usurpers and intruders that
are not so called: Fulk. Act. 14.22.
but whether it has been at any time, and may yet be lawful, to require the
consent of the people. Fourthly, it is false, that the people had this right by
usurpation, or else sufferance of the Pastors: for Cyprian says, it did, De
diuina authoritate descendere, lib. 1. Epistol. 4. That this custom was
grounded upon divine authority, yea it was established by the laws of Kings:
as there was a law made by Lodouicus Pius King of France, that Bishops should
be ordained by the free election of the Clergy and the people, ex Ansigis.
lib. 1. cap. 20.

3 Therefore (say they) elections of Bishops ought to be at the Popes
assignement: for unto Peter was committed the care of the universal Church,
when he bad Peter feed his sheep. Hereupon they are bold to affirm, that we
have neither true Bishops nor Ministers, because they are not lawfully sent,
that is, as they interpret it, from the Sea Apostolic, Bellarm. lib. 1. cap.
3.8. Rhemist. Romans 10. sect. 5.

Answer: First, the charge given to Peter bears no such sense: that because
Christ bad him feed his sheep, therefore he and his successors should only
have authority to consecrate Ministers: for if Peter had it by this grant,
other Elders and Pastors had it in like sort, to whom it as well appertayned to
feed the flock of Christ, 1. Peter 5.2. And again, not Peter only, but the
rest also of the Apostles did ordain and consecrate Pastors and Elders, as it
shall be showed afterward.

Secondly, neither is it a good reason to condemn our Ministry, because it
has not the Popes allowance: for every Church has a lawful calling within it
self, without sending to forrayne Prelates for their approbation. And if you
ask us by whom our Ministers were first called, seeing there were none but
popish Bishops in every Church: we answer: that some had their calling in the
Popish Church, which afterward being more effectually called of GOD, became
profitable teachers of the Gospel. Neither is it necessary, that the Church
should always be bound to an ordinary calling; when as the state of the
Church is so corrupted, and the government thereof, that no good calling can
be obtained: for then the Lord raises up some extraordinarily for the
reformation of the Church, such as we doubt not, but Luther was. In which and
the like cases, the ordinary imposition of hands by the Pastors of the Church,
being heretics and idolaters, as it was in time of Popery, is not to be
expected or stayed for, Plura apud Fulk. annot. Romans 10. sect. 5.

The Protestants.
COncerning election or choice to be made by the people, we are to put three
cases. First, mere popular elections, wherein the people by multitude of voice
should carry all away, are in no case, nor at any time to be allowed.
Secondly, for the people to give their voice in elections, which are moderated
and governed by the grave and wise Pastors and Elders, it has been used in
times past, and may be again, and is in some places, where the state of the
Church, the condition and quality of the people will bear it. Thirdly, though
the people neither bear sway in the election, nor give their suffrages and
voices, yet it is convenient and requisite, that their consent should be had,
and public testimony: for the Ministers should be such as have a good report
of all, 1. Timoth. 3.7. Fulk. Act. 14. sect. 3. But as for the Pope, let him
keep himself, as a Bishop in his own Dioces, he has nothing to do with
ordayning or electing of Ministers in other Churches.

1 Numb. 20.27. Eleazar was made Priest in Aarons place, in the sight of all
the congregation: Ergo, Ministers ought to be ordained publicly in the sight
of the congregation: not in corners or private places, as they used to do in
time of Popery: yea it is recorded of Pope John the 13. that he ordained
Deacons in a stable. And herein they offended manifestly against their own
rules: for their decree is, Nullus inuitis detur Episcopus, Ex Celestin pap.
distin. 63. cap. cleri.
sed Cleri and plebis consensus and desideriu^ requiratur: Let no Bishop be
thrust upon any against their wills, but let the consent and desire of the
people and Clergy be known.

2 We have the example of the Apostles, Act. 1. and 6. and 14.23. When Matthias
was elected, the whole multitude was called together: and Act. 6. the Deacons
were chosen by the whole multitude: Ergo, the people had an interest in times
past in the election of Church officers: and this example of the Apostles may
safely and lawfully be followed of the Church, when time and place serves.

Bellarmine answers: First, the election of Deacons and Pastors is not all
one, neither is there the like reason. Ans. They are both public officers for
the good of the Church, and therefore if the people have any interest in the
one, why not in the other? Secondly, this was done by the grant and sufferance
of the Apostles. Ans. Yea the Apostles called them together, but by the
direction of the holy Ghost: as Act. 15. when the Church was assembled together
upon another occasion, it is said, It seemed good to us and the holy Ghost.
Again, in the election, beside imposition of hands, prayer was used, which was
a chief part of that action: but the people had their interest in public
prayers, as being part of the congregation, and were not admitted thereunto at
the pleasure and will of men: wherefore it is not true, that it was a mere
grant of men, that the people might be present at elections, but it so seemed
good to the Apostles thereto directed by the spirit of God.

3 But as for the right of elections in the Pope, it has no show of reason:
for be it that Peter had only the right of consecration amongst the Apostles,
you do but flatter your selves in thinking, that whatsoever right was in
Peter, it must needs be in the Pope: for he is not Peter's successor, as we
have showed before at large. But we will hold you rather to this point: that
all the Apostles had as full right to ordain and consecrate by laying on of
hands, as Peter had. Look Act. 6.6. and Act. 13.3. and Act. 14.23. And if the
Pope cannot have all that which Peter had, much less can he be capable of
that which Peter never had.

4 We have had good experience in England, of the Popes great discretion and
wisdom, in collation of spiritual preferments, and ordayning of Bishops.
About anno 1253. the Pope wrote a very imperious and commanding letter to the
good Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Grostede, Fox. p. 323.
to bestow a Canonship in Lincoln upon his nephewe, a boy: for so Popes call
their bastards: but he suffered the repulse for that time. In the time of
Edward the 3. and Richard the 2. a certificate was sent up into the Chauncerie,
of such Ecclesiastical dignities, as were possessed by strangers not
inhabiting the land: and there were found above forty Deaneries,
Archdeaconries and Prebends, and those not the worst, some worth one hundred,
some two hundred, nay, some four hundred pound by the year, the Archdeaconrie
of Canturburie was valued at seven hundred Florences by the year, which a
Cardinal of Rome had: And there were above a dosen Cardinals resiant at Rome,
Fox. p. 429.
that had at once the best and richest dignities in the land: beside a great
sort of Italian priests, and others, that were beneficed in England. By this it
may appear, what good choice the Pope-holy father of Rome was wont to make in
bestowing Church dignities: and it were pity but he should have the ordering
of them still, he did so well dispose of them when he had them.

5 Let Augustine speak, who growing now old, was desirous to know his
successor while he lived: he went not to Rome for the matter: but assembling
the Church together at Hippo where he was Bishop; in the presence of two
Bishops beside, and seven Presbyters or Elders, Astante clero and frequenti
populo, the whole Clergy, and a great sort of people standing by: Augustine
himself began first and said, Presbyterum Eradium mihi successorem volo: I
would have Eradius presbyter to be my successor. Afterward, hearing how the
people did approve and like of his motion, he desired them to subscribe to that
which was done, Rogo vt dignemini gestis subscribere, qui potestis. And when
they held their peace, he urged them further, saying, Hic mihi responsione
vestra opus est, de hac assensione aliquid acclamate: I must needs have you
make some answer, and testify your consent by your acclamation: A populo
acclamatum est, fiat, fiat, dictum vicies quinquies: The people cried out, let
it be as thou have said, let it be, and this was repeated five and twenty
times, Augustine. epistol. 110. By this example it appears, though the people
made not the choice, yet their consent was demanded. And thus a Bishop was
elected, and no word sent up to Rome at all.

Neither was it the custom of the Church so to do in those days: for whereas
the Donatists objected against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, because he stayed
not to be ordained of the chief Bishop of Numidia, Vt princeps Episcopus a
principe ordinaretur: That one chief Bishop might be ordained of an other.
Augustine answered, that there was another custom of the Catholic Church, Vt
non Numidiae, sed propinquiores Episcopi, Episcopum ecclesiae Carthaginis
ordinarent: Breuicul. collation. 2. cap. 5.
That not the Bishop of Numidia, but those Bishops that were nearest at hand,
should ordain the Bishop of Carthage. So we see, they were not only bold to
choose an inferior Bishop, as was Eradius of Hippo, without the Popes consent:
but they would adventure to ordain a chief Metropolitan Bishop even of
Carthage, without the Popes leave.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the election of the Pope.
THey say, that the surest and safest way and simply the best, is that which
is Peter, and the undoubted Pope of Rome.

1 None can better judge who is fittest for the papacy, Argum.
then they which are the Popes Counselors, and know the affairs of the
Church. Ergo, the Cardinals the meetest men.

Answer: First, you take that for granted, which we instantly deny, that
the Cardinals of Rome are always the wisest and most learned: as though a
Cardinals hat does bring with it such abundance of virtue and learning: nay a
title of a Cardinalship is sooner obtained by favor than desert, by masses of
money, then weight of learning: And good reason, seeing that the Cardinals make
a gain of the papacy: For an Ass laden with gold shall sooner enter into
the Castle of Saint Angel, then any other coming with a cart load of books:
they that read Cardinal Wolseyes instructions sent to Stephen Gardener at
Rome, what great promises of money and preferment, may easily understand the
disposition of the Pope-holy Electors of Rome: Seeing they make a gain of the
Pope, why should not he set Cardinalships to sale? Fox. p. 992.
for if Iacobus Archbishop of Mentz paid 27000. florences for his pall, what
think you a Cardinals hat is to be valued at, which is a higher degree, Fox.
p. 794.
then either Bishop or Archbishop?

We say then, that there may be wiser and more learned men of the Clergy in
Rome then the Cardinals: and that the whole Clergy may better judge, then a
few ambitious Cardinals, and are freer from corruption.

2 They are not fitter, not concerning the affairs of the Church, for Bishops
are like to know better, what appertains to the office of a Bishop, then
priests and Deacons, as most of the Cardinals are.

2 It appears by the continuance to be the best: Argum.
for it has now endured four hundred years: and by the effect, for the Sea
of Rome has never been freer from Schisms, then since this order was taken
for the Popes election, Bellarmin. cap. 9.

Answer: First, how can it be of such long continuance, seeing by your own
confession, it exceeds not four hundred years? Nay who will not grant,
that the ancient order of electing the Bishop of Rome by the whole Clergy, and
consent of the people of Rome, with the confirmation of the Emperor, which
lasted a thousand years, till this new device came in place, was far more
ancient and durable? Secondly, how well the Cardinals election has kept the Sea of Rome from Schism, experience of former times teaches us: In pope
Vrbanus time the 6. there were two popes many years together: and one did so
deadly pursue the other, that Pope Vrbane at once cut off five of the Cardinals
heads: might they not have great joy, think you, in choosing such a Pope? In
the time of Pope John the 23. there were three Popes at once. In the Council of
Basile Pope Eugenius was deposed, Fox p. 434.
and counted an heretic. And yet for all this, the Cardinals are the only
preseruers and maintainers of the peace of the Apostolic See.

The Protestants.
THough it do not greatly concern us, what manner of election is used at
Rome: (for unto us the election of the meanest Bishop in the land is as much,
yea and more, then the glorious enthronizing of the Pope:) Yet it shall not be
amiss briefly to show, how these great antiquaries are become enemies of
antiquity, refusing the ancient manner of election, which was used in Rome for
a 1000. years together, namely, that the Bishop there should be elected by the
whole Clergy, wiht the consent of the people and confirmation of the Emperor.

1 It is a plain case, that till the year 685. in all their elections they
waited for the authority of the chief Magistrate, the Emperor, or the
deputy of Italy. But then came in the constitution of Constantine the 4 that
their elections should be firm without the consent of the Emperor. Yet for
all this constitution, anno. 810. Pope Adriane gave unto Carolus magnus full
authority to elect the Bishop of Rome: and anno. 961. Leo the 9. made the same
grant to Otho first Germane Emperor. This continued in force till Alexander the
2. his time, who was elected first without the Emperors consent, but afterward
repenting of it, he protested openly, that he would be no longer Pope unless
he had the Emperors consent, and thereupon he was deposed by Hildebrand, and
thrown into prison. This was more then a 1000. years after Christ: since that
time the Emperor has been excluded, and shut out from their elections. But
all this while notwithstanding, though the Emperors consent sometime was not
necessary, yet the Clergy of Rome, and the people retained their ancient
privilege still. So we see by this new erection of the College of Cardinals,
Fox. p. 4.6.
there is great injury offered to three estates, the Emperor, the Clergy of
Rome, the people.

2 This new form of election has not stood continually in force, since it was
first founded. For in the Council of Constance sess. 40. they proceeded to the
election of a new Pope, not staying for the rest of the Cardinals, but
appoynting other electors in their room. In the Council of Basile, the Duke of
Sauoy was elected Pope, by other electors, then Cardinals: Nay there was but
one Cardinal, namely, Arolatensis, the rest were Bishops, Doctors and others.
And though they will say perchance that this Pope was chosen in a schism, for
they hold the Council of Basile to be schismatic: yet they can not, neither
do deny, but that Pope Martin the 5. who was chosen at Constance, was
rightfully Pope.

3 In Augustines time the rest of the Bishops of Italy near unto Rome, should
seem to have had some interest in the election of the Bishop: Romanae
ecclesiae Episcopum non ordinat Episcopus aliquis metropolitanus, sed de
proximo Ostiensis Episcopus: The B. of Rome is not ordained by any
Metropolitan, but by the Bishop of Ostia that is near at hand, Breuicul.
collation. lib. 2. cap. 5.

THE THIRD QVESTION CONCERNING THE degrees and orders of ecclesiastical
ministers.
THis question has 3. parts: first of the 7. degrees of popish priesthood.
Secondly, of the difference and distinction of Bishops and other Ministers.
Thirdly, of the institution of Cardinals, a new degree of the popish Clergy.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SEVEN degrees or orders Ecclesiastical.
The Papists.
THough they have diverse degrees of dignity in the Church, as Popes,
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Primates, and such like: yet they make but seven
Ostiarij, doore-keepers, Exorcistae, Exorcists, Lectores, Readers, Acolythi,
Attenders, Subdiaconi, Subdeacons, Diaconi, Deacons, and the highest degree,
Sacerdotes, Priests; unto the which all the other are but rises and steps.
All these they maintain to be Ecclesiastical orders, and to be retained in
the Church, Bellarm. cap. 11. Rhemist. 1. Tim. 3. sect. 7.

They have no proof nor warrant out of scripture, for these frivolous orders,
but only a show of antiquity, as they allege certain Canons out of the 4.
Council of Carthage, where such offices are reckoned up, Rhemist. ibid.

Answer: First, to let pass this, that the Council may be suspected for the
credit thereof, seeming wholly to be patched out of the Popes decrees.
Secondly, we deny not but they had such offices, as Readers, to read the text
of the scriptures, exorcists to cast out devils, which was an extraordinary
gift for that time, Acoluthists, young men appointed to attend upon the Bishop
for their better instruction: Doore-keepers, that kept the entry of the Church
that no heathen person or excommunicate should enter. But these were both
diverse offices, then are now appointed for them in the popish Church: for they
make them now, all or the most ministers and seruitors for the idolatrous
service of the Mass, which in those days was not heard of: neither though
there were such offices and services in the Church, were they made orders and
degrees of the ministry.

3 They had other offices beside, which now are not in use, no not amongst the
papists: for they had also singers, laborers, confessors, diggers or Sextons:
so that if you will make all those offices used in time past in the Church, so
many orders of the ministry, you must make ten or eleven: more, then you do
acknowledge, or use in your Church, Fulk. annot. 1. Tim. 3. sect. 7.

The Protestants.
THe question is not between us and our adversaries in this place, concerning
the titles and dignities annexed to the ministry, as of Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deanes, Prouosts, but of the several orders of the Ministry: For Bishops and
other ministers do not differ in order, but in office of government: They
hold that there are seven several such orders, which have their several
rites of consecration, and peculiar offices in the Church allotted them. But we
content ourselves with those orders only and degrees as necessary, which the
holy scripture has commended, Fulk. ibid.

1 As for the names and offices of Subdeacons, Readers, Exorcists, Acolythi,
doore-keepers, we have no such warrant out of the scripture, to make them
orders of the Church: and therefore we condemn them. All necessary orders for
the edifying and building of the Church, the scripture has prescribed us, Ephesians.
4.11. there are al offices set down needful for the doctrine, instruction, and
edifying of the Church: Fulk. Ephesians. 4. sect. 4. Wherefore away with these
popish orders, invented by men. But as for unable offices and services, which
shall be thought meet for the affairs and business of the Church, they may be
retained and kept, but not as new orders of the ministry.

2 These offices are first Idolatrous, as they are now used among the papists,
for the Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolythi, were to attend upon the Priest at Mass.
Secondly, some of their offices were ridiculous, as to sweep the Church, to
drive out dogs, and to hold a fly-flap of Peacoks feathers, to keep the flies
from falling into the communion cup. Clemens constitut. lib. 8. cap. 15
Thirdly, they were distinguished, by ridiculous ornaments and attire, which
were proper to every one of them: as it shall appear now in their description.

From the Priest when he was disgraded, they took the Chalice, patine, and
host, that he should have no power any more to offer sacrifice: they scraped
his nails with a piece of glass, and so took away his annoynting: and
lastly, they took away his priestly ornaments, the Che^ile, which signified
charity, the Stole, that represented the sign of our Lord. From the Deacons
in their disgradation, they took first the book of the Gospels, and so all
power to read the Gospels: Then they took away his Dalmatike a sign of his
Leuiticall office, and the white Stole behind his back that signified
innocence.

From the Subdeacon they took the book of the Epistles, that he should have no
more power to read them, also the empty Chalice, and Subdeacons vesture: his
office was to serve and minister to the Deacons at the Altar.

The Acolythi did light the candles in the Church, and brought wine and water
to the altar in pitchers and bottels: and in his degradation there was taken
from him, an empty flaggon or bottle, and a candlestick, with a wax candle
put out.

The order of exorcisme was taken away, by depriving him from power to read in
the book of exorcismes.

From the Reader they took the book of Church lectures or lessons. Last of
all, from the doore-keeper was taken the keys of the Church: And so was he
deprived of all power to open or shut the Church doors, and to ring the bells.
Ex Fox page 2134.

Thus we see, how much these offices are degenerate from the ancient use:
First, they are all but Ministers and attendants for the abominable sacrifice
of the mass, which in those days was not known, for the Acoluthus or waiter
waits upon the Subdeacon, the Subdeacon upon the Deacon, and all of them upon
the Priest at Mass. Secondly, whereas then the Exorcists had a peculiar grace
of God to cast out devils: their Exorcists do but read certain exorcismes in
books, their Readers only read the text of scripture: now they read the
legends of popish saints. Then in time of persecution, when Christians
assembled in the night, the wayters had the charge to light the candles, but
now they do light them at noone day.

3 These offices have not been in use these many years among the papists
themselves: for many times the Sexton or his boy, do execute the charge both
of Acolites, Ostiaries and Readers, yea of Deacons and Subdeacons also, when
the Priest with his boy can dispatch a Mass. Neither are these orders retained
amongst them, for any especial service or office, but only as praeparatories,
and steps and degrees to the priesthood, Fulk. annot. 1. Timoth. 3. sect. 7.

THE SECOND PART OF THE DIFFErence of Bishops and other Ministers.
The Papists.
WE differ from them in two points: First, they say, that Bishops are not only
in a higher degree of superiority to other Ministers, but they are as Princes
of the Clergy, and other Ministers as subjects, and in all things to be
commanded by them. Secondly, they affirm that Bishops are only properly
Pastors, and that to them only it does appertain to preach, and that other
Ministers have no authority without their license or consent, to preach at
all, and that not principally or chiefly, but solie and wholly to them
appertains the right of consecrating and giving orders.

For the first, for the princely authority of Bishops, whom they would have
obeyed in all things; they wrast these and such like places of scripture: as 2.
Cor. 1.9. I write unto you, to know whether you will be obedient in all things,
Ergo, they must be absolutely obeyed. Answer: the Apostle challenges only
obedience in such things, as he should command agreeable to Gods word, for if
I my self (says he) preach another Gospel, hold me accursed, Galat. 1.
Fulk. annot. 1. Cor. 2. sect. 3.

2 Against an Elder receive no accusation under two or three witnesses, 1. Tim.
5.19. Ergo, the authority of Bishops is absolute and princelike: Videmus
Episcopum iudicem esse presbyterorum, proinde verum principem, we see the
Bishop is the judge of the Elders, Ergo, a prince over them, Bellarm cap. 14.

Answer: First, it follows not, Bishops have jurisdiction and authority
over other Ministers, Ergo, they are princes over them. Can there be no
preeminence and superiority in the Church, but it must needs be princelike?
Is every judge a prince over those, which are brought before him to be judged?
2. Timothy had no such princelike authority, for here it is restrained and
limited, a rule is set down by the Apostle which he must observe: Ergo, his
authority was not absolute. Thirdly, Saint Paul was so far off from making
Timothy a prince in the Church at Ephesus, that he would rather have him not
to rebuke, but to exhort the Elders as fathers, the younger men as brethren,
cap. 5.1. Where now is his princely authority become, whereas he makes his
subjects (as our adversaries call inferior Ministers) his fathers and brethren?

For the second, the Apostles properly had the preaching of the word committed
unto them, Act. 6. For other were chosen to attend upon tables: the Apostles
also only had the right of laying on of hands, Act. 14.23. Ergo, It is proper
only to Bishops to preach, and to ordain, who are the Apostles successors,
Bellarmin.

Answer: First, Bellarmine denies that Bishops do properly succeed the
Apostles, de pontifice lib. 4.25. because he would magnify the Pope his
ghostly father above all Bishops: but now forgetting himself, he says,
Episcopi proprie succedunt Apostolis, Bishops do properly succeed the
Apostles, cap. 14. and so by this reason every Bishop has as full authority as
the Pope. Secondly, Fulk annot. John 20. sect. 3.
every godly and faithful Bishop is a successor to the Apostles, we deny it
not, and so are all faithful and godly pastors and Ministers: for Christ
prays for them all indifferently, having first prayed for his Apostles, John
17.20. I pray not for these alone, says our Savior, but for all them which
shall believe in me through their word. Thirdly, at that time when the Deacons
were elected, the congregation was at Jerusalem, neither were there as yet any
other Pastors ordained, and therefore the Apostles only atte^ded upon preaching
of the word: but afterward when they had ordained Pastors in other Churches, to
them also fully was committed the word of reconciliation, Ephesians. 4.11. Christ
has given some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and teachers: So
that Pastors and teachers, though ordained first by the Apostles, yet had their
calling of God, and together in their calling, authority and commission to
preach, neither being once ordained, needed they to expect any further license
from the Apostles.

And as for the right of ordayning and imposition of hands, though it were
chiefly in the Apostles, yet the Pastors and Elders together with them laid on
their hands, Act. 13.4. Yea the Rhemists confess as much, that when a Priest
is to be ordered, the rest of the Priests together with the Bishop do lay on
their hands, Annotat. 1. Timoth. 4.18. What does this else signify, but that
they have some interest in ordayning together with the Bishop? The law also
must be changed, Heb. 7.12. that is, the manner and form of the priesthood.
But we easily see your drift: you would gladly have us like of this argument,
that in stead of a high Priest in the law, you might bring a Pope into the
Church.

The Protestants.
FIrst, though we do admit, that for avoiding of schism, the Church has
thought it meet, there should be difference in degree and a superiority among
Ministers, yet your princely dominion which you do urge, in no wise must be
admitted.

1 It is contrary to the rule of Christ. Luke 22.25. the Kings of the nations
are Lords over them, and they that have authority over them, are called
benefactors: Here our Savior speaks not of tyrannical dominion (for how
could tyrants be benefactors?) but forbids, that there should be any such
princelike and pompous preeminence among ecclesiastical persons, as there is
among secular and civil governors: A superiority may be granted, but not as
the Prince is over his subjects: it was so in time of popery, that the people
were half subjects to the Prince and half subjects to their spiritual
governors: But though we acknowledge other ecclesiastical fathers and
pastors, yet we are subjects only to our prince.

2 Saint Peter also is flat against this princely rule and dominion, Feed the
flock, says he, not as Lords over Gods heritage, but that you may be
ensamples, 1. Pet. 5.3. But are not they, I pray you, Lords over the flock,
that challenge to be princes?

Secondly, concerning the power of preaching, we affirm, that every pastor
once ordained, has sufficient authority to preach in his own flock and
charge, Fox. p. 454.
as John Husse notably proved to their face out of a certain gloss in the
fifth book of the decretals, that when as the Bishop ordayneth any Priest, he
gives him also therewithal authority to preach. We deny not, but when
there is just occasion, this authority maybe restrained by the Church
governors, and so also may an evil Minister be suspended from his whole
ministry: But the power before spoken of, he has at his first receiving of
orders: We thus show it.

Whatsoever belongs to the office of a Minister set over a flock or charge,
he receives the power thereof when he is ordained: But to preach the word,
belongs to the office of such: for preaching is properly the feeding of the
people.

But see the absurdity of the papists: they say it is not proper to the
priesthood to preach, but only to have power to sacrifice the body of Christ:
But it is proper to the Bishop, say they, to preach. We answer: First, then
the Bishop is properly the pastor of every flock and congregation in his
diocese, for he that properly feeds, is properly the Pastor: And he that
is properly the Pastor, has the charge of souls properly, yea more, then has
the particular Pastor: for he is improperly their Pastor, but as it were the
Bishops substitute and Vicar: But what Bishop in the world is able to bear so
great a burden, to have the especial and proper charge of all the souls in
his diocese? It is not to be denied, but he has a charge of their souls, as
a Christian Prince also has in some respect of his subjects: but to say he is
the proper Pastor, and has the proper and principal charge of souls in
teaching and feeding of them (for the question is now of preaching, not of
governing) who is able to abide it? Secondly, but our Rhemists tell us another
tale, that many that are not able to preach, are meet enough to be Bishops,
1. Timoth. 5. sect. 13. Ergo, it is not proper to Bishops neither to preach. I
pray you then, for whom is it proper? if neither for Bishops nor inferior
Pastors, then for none. Thirdly, they make but seven orders of Ecclesiastical
Ministers, and the priesthood is the chief: for a Bishop and a priest make but
one order, as Bellarmin. confesses cap. 11. But to none of all these orders it
is proper to preach: for seeing it is not proper to the priest, none of the
inferior orders can challenge it. See then what goodly orders these are, which
leave the very chief part of the ministry undone, which is the preaching of
the word. I think their meaning is, that this preaching is not so necessary a
duty, but may be well spared in the Church.

2 That which a man is bound to do under pain of the curse of GOD, that he
may lawfully perform in due order without the leave of men: but a woe is laid
upon them that preach not the Gospel, where they are bound, 1. Cor. 9.16. Fox.
p. 453
Ergo. Argum. Wicliffi.

3 A man is bound to give corporal alms to the poor, the needy, the hungry,
the thirsty, neither is he to crave leave of any: Ergo, much more to teach the
ignorant, to comfort the weak, and do other duties appertayning to his
charge, Argum. Wicliffi.

Concerning the power of giving orders: As Saint Paul speaks of the laying on
of his hands, 2. Timoth. 1.6. so he makes mention of imposition of hands by
the Eldership: 1. Timoth, 4.14. And the Rhemists upon that place mislike not
the practice of the Church, that their Priests do lay on their hands together
with the Bishop upon his head that is to be ordained. So that by this it is
manifest, that imposition of hands does not wholly and folly belong unto the
Bishop, seeing the rest of the Elders were wont to lay on their hands likewise,
or the Bishop in the name of the rest, Fulk. annot. Tit. 1. sect. 2. So that
the Elders were not excluded.

THE THIRD PART, CONCERNING THE office and title of Cardinals.
The Papists.
BEllarmine would feign have the office of Cardinals, as ancient as the
Apostles tanquam cardo Ecclesiae, to the Church as the hingell to the door,
upon the which it is turned and borne up: so his Counselors and assistants
should be called Cardinals, having the care of the Universal Church: but the
Jesuit, beside some vain show of mothworne antiquity, has not one good
argument to prove the name, and office of Cardinals, to be either ancient or
commendable. Then especial office, as they are Cardinals, is to elect and
choose the Pope, and to be assistant unto him in Counsel, for the government
of the universal Church, Bellarm. cap. 16.

The Protestants.
THat neither the name of Cardinals, as proper to Rome, is ancient, nor their
office, or either of them lawful or commendable, but usurped and
Antichristian, thus briefly it is showed.

1 In Augustines time it was a common name, usually applied, both in the good
and evil part, to chief and principal men of any place, or sect: as he
calls the ringleaders of the Donatists, Cardinales Donatistas, Cardinal or
captain Donatists: de baptism. lib. 1. cap. 6. Surely, if it then had been
only due to the assistants of the Roman Bishop, Augustine had been much to
blame to apply the name to Heretics.

2 Augustine thus writes to Hierome, Quamues secundum honorum vocabula, says
he, Episcopatus presbyterio mayor sit, tamen in multis rebus Augustine.
Hieronim. minor est. Though according to the custom of the Church, a Bishop be
greater then a Priest, yet Augustine a Bishop in many things is inferior to
Hierome a Priest. Now Hierome was a Priest of Rome, and a Cardinal, as our
adversaries say, Epistol. 19.
and therefore they picture him commonly in a red gown and habit of a
Cardinal: yet you see Augustine as a Bishop was before him, though for his
great learning he puts himself behind him.

3 Augustine in another place complains of one Falcidius a Deacon of Rome,
qui duce stultitia, says he, diaconos presbyteris coaequare contendit: who
being led or carried away with folly, Quaest. vet. and nou. Testa. 101.
did go about to make Deacons equal unto Priests. Is not the same folly now
generally practiced in Rome, or a greater? for they do not only prefer
Cardinal Deacons before Priests, but even before Bishops and Archbishops: in
Augustines time, this was counted a great folly.

4 Concerning the office of Cardinals in the electing of the Pope, we have
showed before, quest. 2. part. 2. that it is of no great antiquity: and that
it is injurious to three estates, to the Emperor, who was wont to confirm the
election, to the Clergy of Rome, who had in times past interest in the
election, and to the people, whose consent was also in time past required: But
now all these are excluded, and the matter is wholly referred to the Chapter of
Cardinals.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION CONCERNING the Keys of the Church, committed for the
execution to the pastors and governors thereof.
THis question has four parts. First, wherein the authority of the keys
consists: secondly, to whom they are committed: thirdly, whether there is
absolute power of binding and loosing in the Church, or ministerially only:
fourthly, whether they that have the dispensation of the Keys, do always
necessarily bind and loose before God: of these in order.

THE FIRST PART, WHEREIN THE AVthoritie and power of the Keys consists.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Annot. Matt. 16. sect. 14. Bell. lib. 1. de pontif. cap. 13. Secondly,
they tie remission and retaining of sins to their imagined and devised
sacrament of penance, saying, that where Christ gave authority to remit sins
to his Apostles, John 20.23. he instituted the sacrament of penance, Rhemist.
John. 20. sect. 3. The sacrifice also and Sacraments of the Church, say they,
are ministered for remission of sins, Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 5. sect. 3.
Thirdly, they seem to grant in words, that by preaching also of the Gospel,
sins are retained, and remitted, ibid. but they make small account thereof:
for as we have heard, they make it not of the essence of their priesthood to
preach, neither does it properly appertain unto that office: yea, say they,
absolutio^ cannot be rightly sought for at the priests hands, but by confession
of our sins, which is done in penance. Rhem. Ioh. 20. sect. 5. This then is
their opinion, that by their devised ceremony and Sacrament of penance, sins
are properly forgiven, and that the preaching of the word is not thereto
necessary.

Their chief argument is, by abusing that place, John 20.23. where they say
Christ instituted the Sacrament of penance, when he gave power to his Apostles
to remit and retain sins.

Ans. First, your Sacrament of Penance, is neither grounded upon this, nor any
other place of scripture: here in the words of Christ there is no institution
of a sacrament, because there is no visible element given, whereunto the word
being added may make a sacrament. Secondly, here the commission is but renewed,
which was granted before to his Apostles, and their successors, Matthew. 18.18.
Fulk. Annot. John. 20. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
THe Keys of the Church, that is, the power to bind and loose sinners, to open
or shut unto them the kingdom of God, consists both in the external
discipline and government of the Church lawfully executed according to the
word of God, as also in preaching of the Gospel, by assuring in Christ's name
all faithful and penitent persons remission and forgiveness of their sins,
and in denouncing and threatening the wrath of God against the disobedient and
impenitent: also as the sacraments are joined to the word, as seals and
pledges of the promises thereof, so by the right administration of the
sacraments together with the preaching of the word, sins are retained or
remitted.

The Rhemists therefore do us great injury, in falsely charging of us, that
we should hold that the spiritual power of the Church stands only upon the
preaching of the word, whereas we grant, that it is exercised also in the
Ecclesiastical government of the Church, both in punishing, excommunicating
and censuring of offenders, which is the binding of them, and in releasing and
absoluing them again, which is the other power of loosing: Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. cap. 10. sect. 1. Leaving now this part of spiritual power in
Ecclesiastical discipline, which is not in this place in question between us,
we must touch that other part, which is exercised in the word and sacraments.

1 That the sacraments do bind and loose, it is proved out of the word of
God: they do bind, Whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, 1. Cor. 11.29. they do also loose, As often as ye
shall eat this bread and drink this cup, you show the Lords death, till he
come, verse. 26.

But here is a double caution and condition to be annexed. First, that all
Sacraments work not this effect, but only those of Christ's institution, which
are but two, baptism and the supper of the Lord: for Paul says, I have
received of the Lord, that which I delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.23. If the
Apostles would not, neither might deliver any Sacraments, but those which were
instituted of Christ, what great presumption is it in any other to do it?
Secondly, we must not think, that remission of sins is necessarily tied to
the Sacraments, as though there could be no remission without the^, for the
grace of remission may be effectual in the name of Christ, by the preaching of
the word without a sacrament, Ioh. 20. sect. 4. Full. For the word may be
preached without a sacrament, but the sacrament cannot be ministered without the
word: for that were as though a man should deliver a seal without a writing.
Neither is it our meaning, that as the Rhemists cauil with us, the sacrament
cannot be administered without a sermon of the death of Christ: for though that
were always to be wished, yet where it cannot be had, there must and ought
to be a brief showing and declaration of the death of Christ out of the word,
so often as the Sacrament is administered, as it is observed in our Church. Fulk.
Annot. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 15.

3 We must take heed, we conceive not thus, as though the Sacrament gave grace
by the work wrought, and that by the very use, form, and external act of the
Sacrament we obtain remission of sins, as the Rhemists would bear us in
hand, 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 15. But the Sacraments are only effectual to the
worthy receivers, and to the worthy receiving, faith is requisite, as Saint
Paul wills all men to examine themselves, 1. Corinthians. 11.28. which is, as he
himself interprets it, to prove whether they be in the faith, 2. Corinthians.
13.5. These conditions then being observed, we deny not, but that there is an
exercise of the keys even in the Sacraments.

2 But chiefly and principally, is this power dispensed by the preaching of
the word, as Saint Paul says, We are the savor of death unto death, unto
some: there is the binding: and to other the savor of life unto life: there is
the loosing, 1. Corinthians. 2.16. So our Savior Christ says, He that refuses
me, the word that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day, John. 12.48.
Here is the power of binding: Again, the truth shall make you free, John 8.32.
Here is the power of loosing. Who therefore doubts this, that the preaching
of the word is the most proper and principal way and mean, for the exercising
of this Ecclesiastical power? for seeing faith is the key of heaven, thereby
we have free access unto the throne of grace, Romans 5.2. and faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. and hearing by the word: It remains that by the word the
keys are dispensed.

Augustine also subscribeth unto this: for speaking of reformation of life and
repentance with remission of former sins, thus he says, Quid empturus es vt
facias, quae emplastra quaesiturus? ecce cumloquor, muta cor, and factum est,
quod tam saepe and tam diu clamatur, vt fiat. in Psalm. 63. What medicine or
plaster will thou buie to heal thy sin? Behold even now, while I preach
unto thee, change thy heart, and it is already done, which we so often call
upon you to be done: See then by the preaching of the word our heart is
changed, our life amended, and our sin remitted.

THE SECOND PART, TO WHOM THE authority of the keys is committed.
The Papists.
Remist. 2. 1. Corinthians. 5. sect. 3. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Clericis cap. 7. The
Church is said to bind and loose, because the Prelates do bind and loose, as
a man is said to speak, and see, though he only speak with the tongue, and
see with the eyes.

1 They seem to prove it by S. Paul's example, 1. Corinthians. 5. I absent in
body but present in spirit have decreed: S. Paul uses here his Apostolic
power, in sending his letters and Mandatum, to have the incestuous person
excommunicate: Ergo, the right was in him and not in the Church, and so
consequently in the Bishops his successors.

Ans. First, S. Paul sends no Mandatum, but shows his Apostolic power, in
decreeing the incestuous person worthy of excommunication, and requiring the
same to be executed by the Church, Fulk. 1. Corin. 5. sec. 2. Secondly, though
Paul gave the sentence, yet was it done both in the power of Christ and the
name of the whole Church: for he had decreed only that he should be
excommunicate: it was not actually done: but to the due performing thereof
there is required, the congregating of the Church in Christ's name, the presence
of Paul in spirit by his apostolic power, and that it should be done in the
name of Christ. All this shows, that Paul gave sentence in the name of the
whole Church.

2 Paul (they say) by the preeminent power of his Ministry, pardons the
incestuous person whom he had excommunicate, Rhemist. argument. in 1. ad
Corinth.

Ans. The text is plain, that he consents the Church should pardon him, 2. Corinthians. 2.10. To whom you forgive any thing I forgive also. Here not Paul
only, but the whole Church pardons, Fulk. ibid.

3 The Jesuits simile may be returned upon his own head: for as the eye and
tongue in the body are but instruments of the life and power of the soul,
which quickneth the whole body: so the governors of the Church do execute the
discipline of the Church by the spirit of Christ, which is given to the whole
body.

The Protestants.
THe authority of excommunication pertains to the whole Church, although the
execution and judgment thereof, to avoid confusion, be committed to the
governors of the Church which exercise that authority, as in the name of
Christ, so in the name of the whole Church, Fulk. totidem verbis, annot. 1.
Cor. 5. sect. 3.

1 Math. 18.17. If he will not hear thee tell the Church: this place proves,
that although the exercising of the keys be referred to the governors of the
Church; yet the authority and right is in the whole Church: for the keys were
given to the whole Church. The pastors and governors, though they be excellent
and principal members of the Church, yet are they improperly called the
Church, Argument. Illyrici.

2 We conclude the same also out of S. Paul's words, 1. Cor. 2.21. All things
are yours, whether Paul, Apollos, or Cephas, whether things present, or things
to come, and ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods: Ergo, whatsoever power is in the
Church, it is the Churches, not only the common use and the benefit thereof,
(because it may be answered, that although the keys be only granted to the
Prelates, yet they use them to the good of the Church) but the right also and
possession thereof, even as the Church is the inheritance and proper possession
of Christ.

3 Augustine consents: Ecclesia, quae fundatur in Christo, claues ab eo regni
coelorum accepit in Petro. Tract. in Iohann. 124. The Church, which is founded
upon Christ, received in Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven: But the
whole Church, and not only the Pastors, is founded and builded upon Christ:
Ergo.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER THE PASTORS of the Church have any absolute power to
remit sins, otherwise, then as Ministers only.
The Papists.
Rhemist. annot. John 20. sect. 3. And again, they call it an express power
and commission, yea a wonderful power which is given unto Priests to remit
sins, and therefore it follows necessarily, that men should submit
themselves to their judgment, for release of their sins, Annot. John 20.
sect. 5.

1 They reason thus out of our Saviors own words, John 20.21. As my father
has sent me, so I send you. He shows his fathers commission given to
himself, and then in plain terms most amply imparteth the same to his
Apostles: But Christ had full right to remit sins: Ergo, also the Apostles
and their successors: for they have the same power that Christ had, Rhemist.
annot. John 20. sect. 3.

Ans. First, it is great presumption, and spoken without any ground, to say,
that Christ, by sending his Apostles into the world, gave them as full, large,
and ample commission, as he himself had: for neither the Pope, in whom
remains, as they say, the Apostolic authority, by their own confession,
can do all that Christ did, as to ordain and institute Sacraments: and Christ
(say they) might forgive sins without the Sacraments, which the Pope cannot
do, and so consequently neither the Apostles, whose full jurisdiction he has,
in this behalf, Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. Secondly, the power
therefore here granted to the Apostles, is in the name of Christ, to declare
and pronounce remission of sins, according to the will of God, not properly in
their own power to release or absolve sinners.

2 He breathed upon them, and gave them the holy Ghost, verse. 22. Therefore he
that denies the Priests authority to forgive sins, he must deny the holy
Ghost to be God, and not to have power to remit sins, Rhem. ibid sect. 4.

Ans. What a blasphemous consequence is this? The holy Ghost has absolute
power to forgive sins: Ergo, the Apostles also, and all other Priests have
the same power. First, by this means they make no difference between the
fulness of power in our Savior Christ, and the communication of that power to
other Ministers: of Christ it is said, that the Spirit was not given him by
measure, Ioh. 3.34. and that the holy Ghost dwells in him bodily: but it were
great blasphemy so to say of any man, Apostle or Minister beside, which have
received of the same grace, but not in the like measure that Christ has, but
the spirit is given to every one in measure, as they have need in their
several places and callings. Secondly, though we should grant, that the
Apostles had the full authority of Christ actually to remit sins, which they
shall never prove, yet it may be doubted, whether al Ministers, whom they call
Priests, (which name we refuse not, if it be taken according to the sense of
the original word Presbyter, and not for a sacrificing priesthood) have as
full power, in this case, as the Apostles had, nay it is plain, they have not:
for the Apostles and other in the Primitive Church, had power to discern
spirits, 1. Cor. 12.10. and to give actually the bodies of the excommunicate to
be vexed, and possessed of the devil, 1. Cor. 5.5. and after a strange manner
to exercise power over their bodily life, as Peter did upon Ananias and
Sapphira, Act. 5: Yet we rather stand upon this point, that neither the
Apostles, nor any other Ministers have power actually to remit sins, then
only as dispensers and stewards in the name of Christ.

The Protestants.
ALL the power of binding and loosing committed to the Apostles and to the
Ministers of the word and Sacraments, is, by declaring the will and pleasure of
God out of his word, both to pronounce forgiveness of sins to all, that are
truly penitent, and the reteining of them to the obstinate and impenitent,
Fulk. annot. John 20. sect. 3. So that Ministers are not made judges in this
case, but only as the Lords ambassadors, to declare the will of God out of his
word.

1 There is a notable place for this purpose, 2. Corinthians. 5.18. God has
reconciled us unto himself through Jesus Christ, and has given us the
ministry of reconciliation. So then Christ is the only author of
reconciliation, the Apostles are but ministers: how then say the Rhemists, that
Christ himself is but a minister also of our reconciliation, yet a chief
minister, whereas the Apostle makes him the author? God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, verse. 19. We are but ambassadors for
Christ, and pray you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto God: this then is
the office of Ministers, not to reconcile men unto God, but to pray them to be
reconciled through Christ: Christ only is the reconciler, they but ministers
of reconciliation: They are but messengers and ambassadors, only to declare
their Princes pleasure; their commission is certain, beyond that they cannot
go. Wherefore that is a blasphemous decretal, and clean contrary to the
scripture, which is ascribed but falsely, to Pontianus Bishop of Rome, which
says, that God has Priests so familiar, that by them he forgiueth the sins
of others, and reconcileth them unto him, Fox. page 59. But S. Paul says, that
God only by Christ reconcileth us unto himself.

2 Augustine does very freely utter his mind concerning this matter, who
puts this objection: If men do not forgive sins, then it should seem to
be false which Christ says, Whatsoever you bind in earth is bound in heaven.
He answers: Daturus erat dominus hominibus spiritum sanctum, etc. God was to
give unto men the holy Ghost, by whom their sins should be forgiven them.
Spiritus dimittit, non vos; spiritus autem Deus est: Deus ergo dimittit, non
vos: the spirit therefore remitteth sin, and not you: the spirit is God, God
forgiueth sins, and not you. Here is one argument, God only forgiueth
sins: Ergo, not man. Again, Quides homo nisi aeger sanandus? vis mihi esse
medicus? mecum quaere medicum. O man what art thou that take away my sins,
but a sick man thy self? would thou be my physician? nay, let us both
together go seek a physician that may heal us. Lo, another argument: He
cannot be a physician to others, that needs a physician himself: he cannot
reconcile others to God, who has himself need of a reconciler. Further, he
says: Qui dimittit per hominem, potest dimittere praeter hominem: non enim
minus est idoneus per se dare, qui potest per alium dare. He that can forgive
sins by man, can forgive also without man: for he may as well forgive by
himself, as he can do it by another. Here is then the third argument: If man
do actually forgive sins, then Christ should not forgive sins without man:
Augustine. Homil. 23.
for the whole power is committed to man. Yea, the Rhemists affirm the same,
that it is necessary we should submit our selves to the judgment of the
Priest for release of our sins: if it be necessary, then sins cannot be
remitted without the Priest: then is Christ's power limited, he cannot forgive
without man, which is contrary to that Augustine affirms here.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER STRAIGHT ways whatsoever be loosed or bound by the
ministry of men upon earth, be so in heaven.
The Papists.
AN express power (say they) is given unto Priests to remit and reteyne
Rhemist. annot. John 20. sect. 5. Whereby it appears it is their opinion,
which is manifest also by the practice of their Church, that at the will and
pleasure of every priest exercising the keys upon earth, men are bound and
loosed in heaven.

They ground this their opinion upon the generality of the words: Whosoeuers
sins you remit they are remitted, John 20.23. and Math. 18.18. Whatsoever you
bind in earth shall be bound in heaven.

Answer: These places are not so to be understood, as though God were bound to
ratify every decree of men upon earth: for first this power is given to all
lawful pastors which do hold the Apostolic faith, not to Idolatrous,
ignorant and blasphemous priests, such as most, if not all, of the popish sort
are. Secondly, they must decree in the earth according to Gods will: Wherefore
John 20.22. first Christ breaths his spirit upon his Apostles, and then
gives them their commission: signifiyng hereby, that they must execute this
power as they shall be directed by Gods spirit: and Matthew. 18.20. it
follows, that they must be assembled in the name of Christ: that is,
according to Christ's rule and the direction of his word, they must bind and
loose, and not at their own discretion.

The Protestants.
THat no sentence or decree of men binds or loses before God in heaven, but
that which is pronounced according to the will and pleasure of GOD, and by the
warrant of his word, the scripture every where teaches us.

1 Prouer. 26.2. As the sparrow by flying escapes, so the curse that is
causeless shall not come. Isay 5.20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil,
and evil of good: He that justifies the wicked and condemns the just, they
are both an abomination to GOD, Prouer. 17.15. Wherefore a priest binding a
penitent man, and loosing a wicked man, does flatly transgress the law and
rule of Gods word: neither shall his sentence be ratified in heaven.

2 In saying that whosoeuers sins the priest binds or loses, his sentence
stands in effect before God, they must needs admit one or both of these
absurdities: either to grant, that a Priest cannot err in dispensing of the
^eyes, which were too shameful a saying, to give so great a privilege to
every ignorant and simple priest, (such as their Church has great store of)
which no mortal man can have. Saint Paul gives warning to Timothy, who was
more then a common or ordinary minister, that he lay not his hands suddenly
upon any, ad 1. Timoth. 5. verse. 22. But if Timothy so excellent a man had
been free from erring in executing his function, this exhortation of Saint
Paul had been needless and superfluous.

Or else, they must say that the judgment of men's souls is committed unto
them: for if, look, how they pronounce upon men on earth, even so it fares
with them before GOD: then the salvation and damnation of men depends of
their sentence: But the scripture says, Do not judge thy brother, for we shall
al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. Men therefore are
not judges to pronounce who are saved or damned, but the judgment must be
committed to Christ.

But who knows not that the popish Church does arrogate unto themselves this
power, to define who are Saints in heaven, and whose souls are tormented in
hell? Thus they dealt with John Husse: having condemned him, they set a crown
of paper upon his head pictured with devils, saying unto him: Now we commit thy
soul to the devil. At the burning of that worthy servant of God and blessed
martyr, John Frith, one Doctor Cook, a foul mouthed papist bid the people to
pray no more for him, then they would for a dog. Fox page 1036.
And thus they take the Lords office out of his hand, in taking upon them to be
judges of men.

3 I will conclude with Augustines words, he says, that sins are forgiven or
not forgiven, non secundum arbitrium hominum, sed secundum arbitrium dei, and
orationes sanctorum: not after the will and pleasure of men, but according to
the will of God, and at the prayers of devout and holy men.

THE FIFTH QVESTION CONCERNING the lawfulness of marriage in Ministers.
THis question has three parts: first, whether it be expedient or requisite
that all Ministers should be tied unto single life. Secondly, whether men twice
married are to be admitted into the ministry. Thirdly, whether Ministers
having entered into holy orders, ought to renounce the society of their wives
before married.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER IT BE lawful for Ministers to marry.
The Papists.
BEllarmine confesses that single life is not imposed upon Ministers by the
law of God, for there is no precept either in the old or new testament, that
forbids Ministers to marry: but it is a positive law of the Church, most
ancient and most just, kept and observed even since the Apostles time. And
therefore it is not now lawful for Ministers to marry, cap. 18. lib. de
Clericis.

1 1. Timoth. 2.3. the Apostle says, that no man that warreth, entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life: But to be married and to have care of
household, are counted amongst the affairs and business of this life: Ergo, a
Minister who is the Lords soldier, ought not to entangle himself therewith,
Bellarmin.

Ans. First, the Jesuit before confessed, that they had no scripture against
Ministers marriage, how is it then, that now he pleads scripture? Secondly, we
must put the Jesuit in mind of his own exposition of this place, lib. 5. de
pontif. cap. 10. where, this place being alleged against the temporal
dominion of Ecclesiastical persons, he answers, that this place only
forbids negotiationes, and mercimonia, merchandise and traffic in the
world, not regimen politicum, not political regiment. If then the political
care of a city, province, or commonwealth be no impediment, in his judgment,
to the spiritual warfare: much less without all question is the domestical
care of one family, the charge of wife and children. Thirdly, we utterly
deny, that marriage is an hinderance or let to the calling of Ministers: nay we
say, that it is an help and comfort to those that have not the proper gift of
continency.

2 The Jesuit gives diverse instances, wherein marriage is a let and impediment
to ministers: As, it hinders their prayer, their preaching, their alms and
liberality to the poor, for they have wife and children to care for.
Bellarmin.

Answer: First, belike you esteem of marriage as of an unholy and vnpure
thing, that a man can neither pray, nor do the office of a Christian
performing the duty to his wife: and indeed one of your companions calls
marriage a profanation of sacred orders. Greg. Martin. discover. cap. 15. sect.
11. Whereas the Apostle calls it an honorable state, Heb. 13. and it was
instituted in Paradise, whereas before the fall of man there was no unclean
thing. Secondly, we deny not, but that abuse of marriage both in ministers and
other laymen, is an impediment to all holy actions: and therefore Saint Paul
gives general Counsel to all both ministers and others, that they which have
wives should be as though they had none, 1. Cor. 7.29. that is, should live
soberly in marriage, and not give themselves to the wantonness of the flesh.
Thirdly, neither does marriage hinder hospitality: for Saint Paul requiring
that a minister should be harborous, 1. Tim. 3.2. gives also rules concerning
the government of his family, his wife and children. verse 4.11. For to whom
may he better commit the care of household affairs then to his wife? And that
family which is guided by a careful and godly huswife, we see by experience,
to yield more relief to the poor, and give entertainment to strangers, then
those houses which have none. And where it is objected, that Ministers will
care altogether for their children: It has been seen that single priests in
time of popery, have been more covetous and greedy to enrich their kindred,
then married Ministers have cared for the provision of their children.

3 Single life by the Apostle is preferred before the married estate, and
therefore fittest for Ministers: for he that is married cares for the things of
the world, 1. Cor. 7 33. Rhemist.

Ans. First, single life is preferred before marriage, in all men, and not only
in Ministers: And therefore as laymen are not bound to single life, though it
be in it self more convenient, so neither ought ministers to be. 2. Though a
thing in it self be best, yet is it not universally best for every man: as
riches are better then poverty, because they are Gods blessing: yet is it not
best for every man to be rich: God sees it good, that some men should be
poor: So single life is the best for those that have the gift of chastity,
that can with a quiet conscience live single: otherwise matrimony were much
better: for Saint Paul, that wishes that every one would live single as he
did, yet afterward says, It is better to marry then to burn: So that by the
Apostles judgment, to marry is best for him that has not the gift of
continency. Jewel. page 232. defens. Apolog.

The Protestants.
THat it is not only lawful but convenient, that all men both Ministers and
others, that have not received a proper gift of continency, should marry, and
that it is agreeable and consonant to the word of God: thus we show it.

1 The scriptures are most plain for the marriage of Ministers, 1. Timoth. 3.2.
Saint Paul says a Bishop, and generally every Minister, may be the husband of
one wife: and verse 11. their wives are described, how they ought to behave
themselves: Let their wives be honest. Ergo, it is lawful for them to be
married. Bellarmine answers, that Saint Paul speaks of the wives which they
had before their calling and ordayning, not those, which they should marry
after. But there appears no such thing out of the text: Nay Saint Paul, say
we, had liberty as well as others, to lead about a sister a wife, even after
he was an Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 9. Wherefore it is as lawful afterward as
before. Bellarmine answers: We must thus read, a Sister a woman, and it is
like they were women, that did minister unto the Apostles and followed them. We
reply: First, the word Sister, does implie a woman, and therefore it had been
an improper and needless speech, to say, a sister a woman: therefore we must
rather read, a sister a wife. Secondly, if they were other women, which
ministered of their substance, what need the Apostles to be mayntained of the
Churches? if they ministered but in their service and attendance, who were more
fit to do it and to follow them from place to place then their wives? Thirdly,
the phrase of leading about a sister, imports a superiority and authority,
such as the husband has over his wife.

Another place we have, Hebr. 13.3. Marriage is honorable among all men: Ergo,
amongst Ministers. Bellarmin. If it were meant of all marriages, then to marry
within the degrees of consanguinitie, were also honorable. Answer: This is a
very childish cavil: First, he might have read further, And the bed
undefiled: Saint Paul therefore speaks of lawful marriage: and indeed the
other joining and coupling of men and women together contrary to GODS law, is
not to be counted Matrimony or Wedlock, but Incest rather and Fornication,
as the brother to marry his brothers wife, and such like. Secondly, Saint Paul
says, not all marriages are honorable, but marriage is honorable for all men;
the generality is not of the thing, but the persons: Wherefore we do fittly
conclude out of this place, that marriage is lawful and commendable even among
ministers. argum. Calvin.

Further Saint Paul says, For avoiding of fornication, let every man have his
own wife, 1. Corinthians. 7.2. Here is no restraint for Ministers. Bellarm. this
is to be understood of those that have not made a vow of continency. Answer:
First, our Savior Christ commands no such vows: it is a cruel
Antichristian yoke laid upon Ministers, to bind them, when they receive
orders, to vow single life: and therefore your Antichristian decree ought not
to abridge the general liberty granted by the Apostle. Secondly, the end of
marriage is general, to avoid fornication, and therefore the remedy also is
general: for every man having not a proper gift of continency, may be in
danger of that inconvenience, if he be denied the ordinary help. Melancthon.

Again, 1. Timoth. 4. to forbid marriage is called a doctrine of devils: but
the Popish Church forbids marriage. Bellarm. We do not forbid marriage to
any, but we require single life of all that are entered into orders, which, it
is at their own choice to receive, or to refuse. Ans. First, it is necessary
that some should receive orders, and be consecrate to the Church ministry:
wherefore requiring this condition of all such to live single, though
particularly you prohibit not this man or that to marry, yet generally you
prohibit the whole calling, which is worse. Secondly, if you say you do not
forbid marriage simply to all: no more did the Manichees, for they suffered
their scholars and auditors to marry. And Saint Augustines words are general.
Ille prohibet matrimonium, qui illud malum esse dicit: he forbids marriage,
Co^t. Faust. li. 30. cap. 6.
that thinks it is evil: you therefore forbidding marriage, must needs hold
opinion that is wicked and evil.

2 This restraint of the marriage of Ministers, has not been of ancient time
in the Church, but imposed upon the Church of late, 1000. year after Christ:
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus anno 180. had seven of his progenitors before him
Bishops of the same See. In the Nicene Council Paphnutius stood up, and stayed
the decree, that should have past, for restraining of the marriage of
Ministers, and it is said, Synodus landauit sententiam Paphnutij: The Synod
commended Paphnutius sentence. Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 11. Gregory the father of
Gregory was Bishop of Nazianzum. The Greek Church never yet received this
popish decree of single life, and their Bishops are married at this day.
Bellarmine says, that the Church of Rome has dispensed with them, cap. 18.
Ergo if the Pope would dispense with the Latin Church, it might be lawful
enough then for Ministers to marry; wherefore it is but a humane constitution.
Again, it is false that they have dispensed with the Greek Church: they care
not for their dispensations, but use their own Christian liberty: neither was
the Greek Church ever subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Thus we see, that in times past marriage was lawful for all men, until Pope
Nicholas the second, Alexander the second, and Gregory the seventh, that
notable sorcerer and adulterer: for these three coming together, one not long
after another, began by public decree to restrain Priests marriage: not long
after them, Anselme began to play the Rex here in England, anno 1104. who
stoutely proceeded in his ungodly purpose, Fox page 1166.
and enacted that married Priests should either leave their wives, or their
benefices. At which time 200. Priests at once came barefoote to the Kings
palace, to make complaint: And for all Anselmes Popelike and outrageous
proceedings against married Priests, yet they continued married well nie two
hundred years after Anselmes time, Page 1167.
do what he could: and thus it is manifest, that the restraint of Ministers
marriage is no ancient thing, but then began most to be urged, when Antichrist
fully was revealed to the world, when as the orders of Friars came in and were
confirmed and privileged under Boniface 8. about anno 1300.

3 What better argument can we have against this Popish decree, then the great
uncleanness, and foul enormities that have been brought, by the means thereof,
into the Church? In the time of Gregory the first, who enjoined his Clergy to
live single, commanding on a time his servants to catch him some fish, out of
his Motes and Ponds, in stead of fish they brought unto him six thousand heads
of young children: whereupon, he fetching a great sigh with himself, commended
then the saying of the Apostle, It is better to marry then to burn.
Bellarmine has no better answer then to deny the story, which
notwithstanding is found in the Epistle of Huldericus Bishop of Augusta, which
he sent to Pope Nicholas. Fox. page 1155.

In Anselmes time, after the restraint of Ministers marriage, great rumors, and
complaint was brought to him, Fox. page 1165.
of the execrable vice of Sodomitrie, which began to reign in the Clergy.
Pope Pius the second said, he saw many weighty causes, why wives should
be taken away from Priests, but he saw more why they should be restored to
them again. Bishop Jewel Apol. cap. 8. diuis. 3. Bernard says, Toll de
Ecclesia honorabile coniugium, etc. Take from the Church honorable Matrimony,
shall you not replenish it with incestuous persons, concubinaries, Sodomiticall
vices? Hereupon the popish Catholics seeing their own infirmity, Sup. Cant.
sermon. 66. Iuel p. 231.
began thus to salve up the matter, Si non cast, tamen caute: if thou deal
not chastely, yet deal charily. Yea they are not ashamed thus to write, If any
of the Priests should be found embracing of a woman, Fox. p 785.
it must be expounded and presupposed, that he does it to bless her.

I but (says Bellarmine) these are the abuses of single life, will you
condemn a good thing, because of the abuse? by the same reason (says he)
coelum and terra tollenda sunt, Heaven and earth must be taken away, because
they were abused of the heathen and taken for Gods. cap. 21.

Answer: First, we say not, that these be the fruits of single life, which
Saint Paul commends in all those that have the gift, but of this co-acted and
constrained Popish Virginity, which is imposed indifferently upon all, and
cannot have any good use: secondly, when you can prove that restraining of
Ministers marriage is of Gods ordinance, as it is certain Heaven and earth are
of his making, then we will grant unto you, that it may have a right use, and
for the abuse ought not utterly to be abolished.

4 Lastly, Augustine says, Quae nubere volunt, and ideo non nubunt quia impune
non possunt, melius nuberent, quam vrerentur, id est, De sanct. virgin. cap. 34.
quam occulta flamma concupiscentiae in ipsa conscientia vastarentur. Those
Virgins, which would marry, but cannot, because of restraint, and reproach,
might better marry then burn, that is to say, then with the secret flame of
concupiscence, to be wasted and consumed in their conscience. Wherefore it
follows, that all they, both Ministers, votaries and Virgins, that have not
power to abstain, should do better, for all their profession and vow, to
marry, then to burn.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER any ought to be admitted to the Ministry after
second marriage.
The Papists.
THey deny not, but that Bishops and Ministers, having been once married,
Bellarmine cap. 23. Rhemist. Timoth. 3. sect. 4. and this they call Bigamie.

1 They reason thus out of Saint Paul's words, 1. Timoth. 4.2. A Bishop must be
the husband of one wife: that is, say they, that no kind a way was, Bigamus,
or had two wives either at once, or one after another: And they prove their
interpretation thus: First, as Saint Paul describes a widow of the Church, 1.
Timoth. 5.9. that has been the wife of one husband, so here he says of a
Bishop, that he should be the husband of one wife: but that is meant,
successiue, of one husband after another: for it was never seen that one woman
should have more husbands then one at once, nor never suffered either amongst
the Jews or Gentiles: therefore it must be so taken here, a husband of one
wife: that is, who has been but once married, as it is taken there, a wife of
one husband, that never had more, not only simul, at once, but not successiue,
not successively one after another, Bellarmine cap. 23.

Ans. First, there were many women both among the Jews and Gentiles, that had
forsaken their first husbands, and were unlawfully coupled to others, and so
had more husbands at once, and likewise many men that had done the like to their
wives, but afterward repented, and were converted to the Christian faith, but
yet were not admitted to any public office in the Church, because of their
former infamous life. Of such the Apostle speaks in both these places, and
not of those that married one wife, or one husband after another. It is
therefore great boldness, and a greater untruth to say, that there were none
such heard of in those days: for although it were neither lawful then nor
now, yet both many such were heard of in those days, and it were no hard
matter to find out some now among the papists, that have had more then one
wife at once. Secondly, he is not to be counted Bigamus, or Digamus, that is
coupled and joined to one wife after another lawfully, but he that unlawfully
at once enjoys more then one. Fulk. Annot. Timoth. 5. sect. 6. and cap. 3.
sect. 4.

2 Again say they, the high Priest in the law was not permitted to marry a
widow, Leuit. 21.13. Which law being observed in the high Priest, ought much
more to be kept now, Rhemist.

Answer: That law concerning the high Priest, did only appertain to
himself, who was a figure of Christ: neither can it be extended to the
Ministers of the Gospel, no more then any other parts of his office, that
were peculiar to that state and calling, Fulk. Annot. 1. Timoth. 3. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
THat it is not by the word of God forbidden, that any man should marry the
second, yea the third time, after the decease of his wife, neither that he is
to be counted unchaste or given to wantonness in so doing (much less he that in
his first marriage takes a widow,) neither that, to have been twice married
ought to be a bar or a stop from entering into the state and calling of the
Ministry, if otherwise the man be qualified and furnished with sufficient
graces for that calling: thus it is proved.

1 They that cut off such, as have been twice married, from behauing any
calling in the Church, do savor of the heresy of Montanus, into the which
also Tertulliane fell, who condemned second marriage: for if once marriage be
no impediment nor prejudice to him that is to be ordained, but second marriage
be, then do they disallow second marriage, (because a man is thereby disabled
to be a Minister) if not simply, yet they make it less lawful, nay more
offensive, and subject to obloquie and reproach. But the scripture makes no
difference between first and second marriage: S. Paul says, For avoiding of
fornication, let every man have his own wife: he says not, his first wife: but
generally: so that it is lawful for avoiding of fornication to marry the
second or the third wife, as well as the first.

2 If it be as lawful to marry the second wife, as the first, if it be for
avoiding of fornication, then second marriage does no more hinder the receiving
of orders then the first: but the antecedent is true: for what should make the
second marriage less lawful? not any duty that the wife or the husband owes
to the party deceased: for they are free in that respect, and set at liberty,
Romans 7.3. Neither is the end of marriage made frustrate more now then before:
for he that marries the second time, may have as good cause to do it, for
avoiding of fornication, as he had at the first.

3 Second marriage, make the worst of it you can, is not so great a blot as
fornication, or adultery, or to have a Concubine: but these were no lets of
priesthood in popery: Nay, we read that Augustine in the purer age of the
Church, that confesses he had two Concubines, yet afterward was made
presbyter, Confess. lib. 6. ca. 15.
and at the last a Bishop for all that. Wherefore, there is no reason that
exception should be taken against a twice married man, seeing a fornicator is
free.

Lastly, of this opinion Augustine seems to be: That it is as lawful to
marry the second time and the third, as the first. Ait Apostolus, mulier
alligata est viro, quamdiu vir eius viuit; non dixit primus, secundus, tertius,
aut quartus: The woman is bound (says the Apostle) so long as her husband
lives; he says not, De bono viduitat. cap. 12.
the first husband, second, third, or fourth: So the woman is as free after the
first or second husbands death, as when she was a virgin. Yet if she can
content her self with her widows estate, and have the gift of continency,
she shall do better not to marry: But if she have not, it is better to marry
(S. Paul says not, the first, second or third time, but so often as she has
need) rather then to burn.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER MINISTERS ought to refrain the company of their
wives, being entered into orders.
The Papists.
THey confess, that Peter and other of the Apostles were married, but after
their calling they had no company with their wives, Rhemist. Math. 8. sect. 3
Bellarmine) be kept from the use of their wives, to whom they were married
before their calling.

1 The Priests of the law were bound to withdraw themselves during the time
of their service, while they attended upon the sacrifice, and to forbear the
company of their wives: much more the Priests of the law, that must always
offer sacrifices, must be always free from matrimony, Rhemist. Luke 1. sect.
10.

Ans. 1. The Leuiticall priesthood did represent and shadow forth the
priesthood of Christ, and their legal cleansings, washings, abstinence,
purifyings, did show forth the holiness and perfection of the priesthood of
Christ: wherefore the law of their abstinence does no more bind us, then
other of their legal purifications: they have their end in the priesthood of
Christ. 2. We acknowledge no sacrificing priesthood in the new testament, nor
any sacrifice in the Church for sin, but only that sacrifice of atonement
upon the Cross: but our sacrifices are spiritual, of praise and thanksgiving;
therefore the argument follows not from the priests of the law, to those that
are no priests, Fox. page 1166. 3. Pureness of life, we grant, is as much
required now in Ministers of the Gospel, as it was then in the priests of the
law: therefore they ought as well to have liberty to marry, seeing
matrimony is the best remedy against fornication and uncleanness of life.

2 Another argument they pick out of S. Paul's words, 1. Corinthians. 7.5.
Defraude you not one another, unless it be by consent for a time, that you
may give your selves to prayer. If the lay man cannot pray, unless he abstain
from his wife, the Priest, that must always pray, must always abstain,
Rhemist.

Ans. 1. The lay man is bound to offer prayers always as well as the Priest,
and so by this reason, neither ought any lay man to perform his duty to his
wife, if it were an hinderance to prayer. 2. S. Paul speaks not here of all
prayer, but of a special kind, which, to be made more fervent, requires
fasting and abstinence, which kind is not always necessary, but upon some
certain occasion. 3. It is so far off that a lay man cannot pray, unless he
abstain from his wife, that many times he prays more quietly then he that is
unmarried, or abstaineth, if he have not dominion over his lust, Fulk. annot.
1. Cor. 7.5.

The Protestants.
NEither the Apostles forsook the company of their wives, after they were
called and chosen of Christ, neither ought the Ministers of the Gospel to
renounce, abandon, and forswear the society and fellowship of their wives:
but rather to live with them in all temperance and sobriety, for the good
example of others:

1 It is proved out of the 1. Cor. 9.5. that Peter and the other Apostles did
lead about their wives in their company, and S. Paul there says, that he
also might use the same liberty. Likewise, 1. Timoth. 3.5. S. Paul gives
rules concerning the house and family of the Minister, his children, the
behavior of their wives. verse 11. But where, I pray you, is it fitter for the
Ministers wife and children to be, then with her husband? By these places it is
apparent, that Ministers wives were not excluded from their husbands company:
as a thousand year after and more it was decreed by Anselme, that they should
not dwell in house with their husbands, nor talk with them without two or
three witnesses, Fox. page 1167.

2 It is clean contrary to the scripture. First, our Savior says, whosoever
puts away his wife, except it be for fornication, causes her to commit
adultery, Math. 5.32. By this rule, therefore a Minister ought not for any
other cause to put away and dismiss his wife, but for fornication: Ergo, it is
not lawful because of his calling, or upon any other color to send her away.
Secondly. S. Paul says, They ought not to defraud one another but for a time,
and that with consent, 1. Corinthians. 7.5. Therefore if the wife will not consent,
her husband cannot go from her: nay, though there be consent, yet they must be
asunder but for a time: they cannot by consent altogether break off, and
dissolve their marriage, which was made before God, though they would never so
feign themselves, unless it be for fornication, then without consent the
marriage knot is broken.

3 Peter left not the company of his wife after he was made an Apostle: for he
had a daughter called Petronilla, of whom the popish legends write much
holiness, which must needs be borne after he was called Peter. And again, it
is proved by her age, for she was so young in the persecution under Domitian,
that Flaccus the County desired her in marriage: but if she had been borne
before Peter's Apostleship, she must have been threescore year old at that
time, or hard upon, Fulk. Math. 8. sect. 3.

4 Augustine thus writes of this matter: Vna sola esse causa posset, qua te
id. quod vouisti, non solum non hortaremur, verumetiam prohiberemus implere, si
forte tua coniux hoc tecum suscipere animi, seu carnis ins^rmitate recusaret,
Epistol. 45. There may be one cause, and no more, which would make me, not only
to move you to perform that which you have vowed, but to dissuade and forbid
you, namely, if your wife by reason of her weakness, should refuse to bear the
yoke with you. Therefore, by Augustines sentence, neither ought a Minister that
is married, perform the vow of continency which he made, without consent of
his wife: for he speaks generally of vows made by those that are joined in
Wedlock.

THE SIXTH QVESTION, CONCERNING THE maintenance of the Church by tithes.
COncerning the maintenance of the Church, there are diverse points, wherein we
and our adversaries agree: The maintenance of the Ministers of the Church is
either by temporal possessions, which have been bestowed upon the Church, by
the gift of devout and religious men, or else they have inheritance from their
friends and a patrimony of their own, or else they live of the tithes and
oblations of the people.

1 We grant, and agree unto them: that the Church Ministers, beside the portion
of tithes, may lawfully enjoy temporal lands, which the Church of ancient time
has been endowed withal. But we yield unto them upon certain conditions:
First, there must be a moderation used in all such gifts, which are bequeathed
to the Church: for Ecclesiastical persons ought not to be too greedy and
hasty in receiving whatsoever in simplicity and blind devotion any man shall
give unto them: as if they see that others are empouerished by the gift whereby
they are enriched. Thus the Priests offended in our Savior Christ's time, who
allured the people to bring their offerings to the Altar, though their parents
wanted in the mean time, whom they were bound to relieve by the law of God.
This also was a common practice in time of Popery: So the priests might be
enriched, they cared not greatly, though all the stock of their patrones and
founders were undone: who because they were insatiable, and had no measure in
entising simple men, to give over their lands and Lordships into their hands,
the statute of Mortmaine was made not without just cause, to be a rule unto
the^, that otherwise could not rule themselves. Augustine does highly commend
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and worthily, for this one act: A certain rich
man of Carthage having no children, gave all his substance to the Church,
reserving only the use thereof for his life time: afterward the man had
children: Reddidit Episcopus nec opinanti ea, quae donauerat. Ad fratres in
erem. ser. 52.
The Bishop restores unto him that which he gave, not looking for it, nor
making any account of it: In potestate habuit Episcopus non reddere; sed iure
fori, non iure poli: It was in the Bishops power not to restore the gift, but
by the law of the court, not by the law of heaven. I pray you how many such
examples can ye show me in the time of popish superstition? This then is the
first thing required, that although it be lawful for the Church to enjoy the
bequests of their benefactors, yet it should be done with some limitation: As
the Levites, beside their tithes, had cities appointed them: but the number was
set down, they should not exceed 48. in all: and to every city was a
quantity and circuit of ground allotted, which should in length and breadth
contain every way 3000. cubits, Numb. 35. verse. 5.8.

2 It must also be provided, that the gifts and legacies bestowed upon the
Church, be for the maintenance of piety and true religion, and to good uses,
not to nourish idolatry and superstition: or if they be given through
ignorance of the time, to such unlawful purposes, they ought by the Prince to
be converted to better and more godly uses: As now in England, the lands of
Colleges, which were first given to maintain that abominable Idol of the
Mass, are turned to the maintenance of learning and true religion. So was the
law of Moses, that the gold and silver, brass, iron, tin, lead, which the
Israelites should receive of the heathen, Numb. 31 23.
first should pass through the fire, and so be made clean, and fit for holy
uses: Even thus according to this law, the lands consecrate to superstition,
having now passed through the fire of Gods word, and trial of the truth, may
safely be used to the glory of God, in advancing and setting forward true
religion and virtue.

3 Another thing must be required: that Churchmen ought not to abuse the
possessions of the Church, to maintain pride, idleness, and ryotous living: for
in case they do notoriously spend and wast the Church goods, the Prince, by
whose authority they were given to the Church, may justly take from them their
superfluities, not leaving the Church destitute of sufficient maintenance. This
is notably proved by John Husse, in the defense of Wickliffes articles: And we
have seen the practice thereof in England, Fox. p. 457.
in the late suppression of Abbeyes: wherein (though some of those lands might
otherwise have been disposed of) yet the providence of God notably appeared in
bringing desolation upon those Cells of sin, and unclean cages of birds:
neither has this been an unusual and unaccustomed practice in the Church, for
Princes to correct the misdemeanour of Priests, by cutting them short of their
temporalties: for in Augustines time the Christian Emperors dispossessed the
Donatists of their Churches and possessions, and gave them to the Catholic
Bishops. And at that time the Donatists cried out, as the Papists do now, Quid
mihi est imperator? What has the Emperor, the King to do with our lands?
Augustine answers, Secundum ius ipsius possides terram: by the law of
Princes the Church enjoys her possessions: Recitemus leges imperatorum,
videamus si voluerint aliquid ab haereticis possideri: Tractat. in Iohann. 6.
Let us then rehearse the laws of Emperors, and see, whether they suffer
heretics to enjoy the Church possessions.

Secondly, concerning the second kind of maintenance, which arises by the
proper and peculiar inheritance, which Church ministers have: Bellarm. cap. 27.
we also yield our consent, that a Minister* to whom some inheritance is
befallen, is not bound to disclaim therefore the maintenance which he has of
the Church: for the Levites, beside the allotment of the tithes, had their
proper houses, which they might sell, and redeem again, Leuitic. 25.32. As
also that place 1. Timot. 3.2. will bear it, where the Apostle would have a
Bishop to be harberous, and given to hospitality: which he shall be much
better able to perform, having some help, beside the Church living, of his
own inheritance. So then it is not to be doubted, but that Ecclesiastical
persons may, together with spiritual livings, retain their own proper
inheritance: referring them both to one and the self same end, that is, to
countenance their Ministry, and to be the better able to perform the
external duties thereof, in releeuing the poor, helping the needy, and such
like.

Thirdly, as touching the proper maintenance, and reuenew of the Church, which
is by tithes: diverse points are agreed of and accorded between us. First, that
tithes due only to the Church, and cannot be alienated to any other use, nor
be turned to the maintenance of lay men: for there must be, where tithes are
paid, a matter of giving and receiving, Philipp. 4.15. We give spiritual, and
receive temporal: which because lay men do not perform, they have nothing to
do with the tithe: for not keeping the condition, they cannot claim the
covenant.

2 The people are bound in conscience, to give of their goods unto their
lawful Pastors, according to the determination of the Church, and the positive
laws of Princes made in that behalf, the which they are bound to obey: and
the tenth being the hire of the labourer and the wages of the Lords workman,
Math. 10.10: it shall be as great a sin to defraude the Minister of his
portion, as to keep back the meat or wages from the hireling and labourer,
Iam. 5.4.

3 We utterly deny also, and herein consent with our adversaries, that tithes
are not pure alms, as some have been of opinion in times past, Belarm. cap. 25.
but are a plain debt of the people to their Ministers. First, the wages or
reward of the labourer is no alms, but his due, and of right belonging to him:
but tithes are so unto Ministers who labor in the Lords harvest, 1. Timoth.
5.16. Ergo, no alms. Secondly, alms do always exceed the desert of the
almesman, they show the benevolence and free heart of the giver, not any
merit or worthiness in the receiver: but tithes and all other temporal gifts,
are far inferior to the labors of Ministers: for what are temporal things
to spiritual, 1. Cor. 9.11? Ergo, no alms. Thirdly, the tenth is the Lords
part, and by him it is assigned to his faithful Ministers, which in Gods stead
do teach us, 2. Cor. 5.20. But alms cannot be given unto God. Again, the
tenth is as an inheritance to the Church, and to be counted as the corn of
the barn, or the abundance of the winepresse, Numb. 18. verse. 26.27. It is
unto them as the fruit of the earth, and increase of the ground to the
husbandman: Therefore to be counted no alms from men, but the blessing of God
both upon the pastor and the people.

4 We also agree, that it is not meet that the maintenance of Ministers should
be voluntary, or left to the peoples choice: but that it is convenient, just,
equal, requisite, that both by laws of Princes, and constitutions of the
Church, provision should be made, as there is, for the necessary, certain,
and competent maintenance of the Church. First, the tenths in the law were
established by a perpetual ordinance: Ergo, the maintenance of Ministers ought
now also to be confirmed by positive laws, as then tithes were: the argument
follows: for if their Ministry deserved such assurance of their
maintenance, which did but serve at the Altar, much more now does the
Ministry of the Gospel deserve it. And the Apostle also seems so to reason,
1. Corint. 9.14.15. that as they which waited on the Altar were partakers of
the Altar: so God has ordained (says he) that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. That is, as then the people did not only give
tithes voluntarily, but were bound by law to do it: even so God has
ordained, that Ministers should live of the people: and by this ordinance of
God, the people may as well be bound unto it now, as they were then. Secondly,
if Ministers, bound in conscience to feed and instruct the people, may also be
enforced and urged by the constitutions of the Church and laws of Princes to
do that, which in conscience they are bound: why may not the people likewise be
constrained by public law, to perform that duty to their pastors, which
their own conscience does urge them unto? Thirdly, experience teaches, that
men are hardly (even living under a law) brought to pay their rights to the
Church, no not in those places where they can take no exception against their
pastors: how much more unwilling would they be (I speak of those which are not
yet won to a through liking of the Gospel) if they were left to their own
liberty?

5 We also acknowledge (as Bellarmine seems to grant, cap. 25.) that to pay
precisely the tenth, is not now commanded by the law of God: as though that
order could not be changed by any humane law, as the Canonists hold, but men
necessarily were bound to pay tithes: But thus far forth we hold, that it is
grounded upon Gods law: first, in respect of the equity of the law, in paying
of tithes, which is this, that the Ministers ought to live of the people, and
to have sufficient and competent maintenance by them: which equity and
substance of the law is moral, and ought always to continue, being grounded
upon the law of nature: Thou shall not musle the mouth of the ox that treads
out the corn. 1. Cor. 9.6
Secondly, in as much as the law of the land and of the Church does confirm
this ancient constitution of tithes, (which is left indifferent of itself) we
are bound to obey such laws, being agreeable to the word of God: And in this
sense also, tithes may be said to be due by the law of God, because Gods word
commands obedience to our Magistrates, in all lawful ordinances.

6 Though the law of tenths be not now necessary, as it was a ceremonious
duty: but it is lawful either to keep that or any other constitution, for
the sufficient maintenance of the Church, whether it be more or less then the
tenth part: yet we doubt not to say, that this provision for the Church
maintenance by paying of tithes, is the most safe, indifferent and surest way,
and no better can come in the place thereof. First, it is the most equal way,
to have every thing in the kind, according to the Apostles rule; Let him that
is taught make his teacher partaker of al his goods, Galath. 6.6. But this
cannot be so conveniently done any other way, as by erecting of a set stipend,
or such like, as by paying the tenth in the kind.

2 Whereas S. Paul requires, that the Pastor should be given to hospitality,
1. Timoth. 3.2. who sees not, that for the better and more convenient
maintenance of his house, it is the fittest course to receive the tenth in his
own nature and kind: being so more able to relieve the poor, having
sufficient provision and store of his own?

3 The tenth is as the corn of the barn, and the abundance of the winepresse,
Numb. 18.27. that is, it is more or less, as God gives increase to the
fruits of the earth: which is the most equal and indifferent way: for then
the Minister, as God blesses them, shall be partaker of the blessing, and if
they suffer loss, he likewise shall bear the burden with them.

4 This manner of tithe-paying is far more safe and sure, then any way can be
devised, because of the long custom and continuance, which without great
hazard of the Church cannot be broken: neither is it possible by any act of
parliament, to make stipends so certain, as this constitution of tithes is:
for the people will hardly yield to break their custom: and when an old
custom is broken, a new is not so soon received: nay, many years must run
to make a custom. Again, whatsoever may be objected against tithes, that they
breed much trouble, wrangling and contention, may be more justly feared, in the
collection, leuying, imposing, and demanding of stipends.

5 Hitherto we have showed, that it is most natural, that the Ministers
portion should be paid in the kind. Now, concerning the tenth, though it be
not necessary, yet that proportion being first appointed by the wisdom of
God, is verily thought to be most equal and indifferent between the pastor
and the people, as both affoording competent sustenance for the one, when he
lives of the tenth, rather the^ the fifteenth, or twentieth part, which were
too skant allowance, nor yet grieuing or oppressing the other, when the owner
has nine parts reserved to himself. And so if it be most meet, that things
should be answered in their kind, no proportion can serve better, then that
which was first devised by the Lord himself: yet we hold neither the one nor
the other to be necessary.

Hitherto for the most part we and our adversaries are agreed, both concerning
tithes, as also other maintenance of the Church: but we differ about tithes in
two points. First, there is a question between us and the Rhemists about the
necessity of paying of tithes: Secondly, concerning the right whereby the
Ministers of the Gospel may demand their duties, which they say, is by
reason of their Priesthood: of both these now briefly in their order.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE Payment of tithes be necessary.
The Papists.
Rhemist. annot. 7. Hebr. sect. 4.

1 Jacob vowed to pay tithes to God, before the law, Genes. 28. Ergo, it is a
perpetual law. Rhemist.

Ans. One Papist shall answer another at this time. Bellarmine proves by this
example the clean contrary, that the payment of tithes is not moral, because
it did not bind before the law of Moses: for Jacob made a voluntary vow to pay
his tithes, upon a condition: but if he had been bound absolutely to pay
tithes, they should have been paid without any such condition: It was
therefore a voluntary and a frank offering in Jacob.

2 Christ confirms the law of tithes, Math. 23.23. though he prefer the
works of mercy and judgment, yet he says that the other ought not to be
left undone, speaking of the paying of tithes, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. We must consider in what time our Savior Christ so spoke unto the
Pharisees: for as yet neither the law nor the ceremonies thereof were fully
abrogated: Christ was circumcised, and Mary his mother purified according to
the law, Luke 2.21.22. Our Savior also bids the Leper to show himself to
the Priest, and offer a gift as Moses commanded, Math. 8.4. Yet none of al
these ceremonies do now stand in force, though Christ did them at that time,
and bad them to be done. The same answer may serve also concerning his
iniunction to the Pharisees as touching their tithes.

The Protestants.
THe law of paying tithes did borrowe part of the moral, part of the
judicial, and part of the ceremonial law. The moral part therefore, is the
equity of the law, which is perpetual, that as the Levites then lived of the
tenth, so the Ministers at all times ought sufficiently to be provided and
cared for. The judicial part was in this, that as the Levites were not much
less in common account then the tenth part, being one of the tribes, (though
in proportion of number, they made welneere the thirtith part: for the rest of
the tribes were numbered to six hundred, three thousand, five hundred and
fifty persons, Numbers 1. the Levites made but two and twenty thousand, 603550
Numb. 3.) As I say the Levites made one whole tribe, and were not much less
then the tenth part in that account, being in number the thirteenth tribe, for
there were twelve beside. So it was thought reasonable that the tenth part of
their brethrens goods should be allotted unto them: which being a judicial and
politic constitution of that country, does neither necessarily bind
Christians now, neither is forbidden, but left in that respect indifferent.
Thirdly, the ceremony of the law was in this, because the tenth was due to
the priests and Levites for their service at the altar, and as belonging to
their priesthood: In which sense tithes are neither due now unto Ministers, nor
in any such respect can be challenged, seeing the Priesthood of the law is
gone, and all the ceremonies thereof: Whereof although it be a wise and
politic constitution, that the people should pay their tithes, and may
conveniently be retained, yet is it not now of necessity imposed upon
Christians, as though no other provision for the Church could serve but that.

1 Bellarmine thus reasons (for herein he is an adversary to our Rhemists)
(one Jesuit against another) If the law of tithes be moral, then the other
precept annexed to this law was moral also, that the Levites, because they
lived of the offerings and tithes, should have no patrimony or inheritance
beside. And by this reason every Minister now ought to resign such inheritance
and possessions, as are left him by his friends: which is not to be admitted.
Ergo, neither the other law stands necessarily in force, Bellarm. cap. 25.

2 Saint Paul says in flat words, If the priesthood be changed, of necessity
there must also be a change of the law, Heb. 7.12. But the priesthood of the
law is altered and changed, Ergo, also the law of the priesthood, and so
consequently the ceremonial duty of tithes.

3 In Augustines time, it was no general law nor custom in the Church, that
tithes should be paid. Praecidite and deputate aliquid fixum ex annuis fructib.
vel quotidianis quaestibus: defaulke, says he, and appoint some certain
portion, either of your yearly fruits, or your ordinary and daily gains. In
Psalm. 146
Decimas vis? decimas exime: Will you make choice to pay tithes? then let that
be the portion. And yet this is no great matter: for the Pharisees, whose
righteousness you ought to exceed, paid their tithes: Tu vix millesimam das:
Thou scarce payest the thousand part: Tamen non reprehendo, vel hoc fac, sic
sitio, vt ad istas micas gaudeam: Yet I find not fault: do so still: De
tempor. sermon. 205.
for I so thirst after your well-doing, that I refuse not your very crummes. We
see then, that then the payment of tithes was voluntary: Augustine refuses
not the ten hundred, that is, millesimam partem, the thousand part, which he
calls their crummes.

THE SECOND PART, BY WHAT RIGHT tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel.
The Papists.
COncerning tithes or their equivalent due to Christ and the priesthood of the
Rhemist. annot. Heb. 7.4. this then is their opinion, that the priesthood of
the Gospel being more excellent then the priesthood of the Law and their
sacrifice, which they offer up in the Mass, being of greater worthiness, they
may with better right challenge tithes, then the priests of the law did for
their service at the altar: So that tithes are due to the Church only because
of the priesthood, not for any other duty appertaining to that office, as
preaching the word, ministering the sacraments, or any such.

Abraham paid tithes, they say, to Melchisedech, which was the priest of the
most high God in offering the forms of bread and wine, wherein Melchisedech
did sacrifice: Ergo, tithes are now due to the priests of the Gospel and new
law, which are all after the order of Melchisedech, Rhemist. Hebr. 7. sect. 4.
and 8.

Answer: First, Melchisedechs priesthood consisted not in offering bread and
wine to God, but brought them forth to refresh Abraham: neither were they
forms of bread and wine only, as you imagine, but very material bread and
wine: for if Melchisedechs priesthood had consisted therein, the Apostle would
not have omitted the chief thing, wherein Christ's priesthood was showed forth,
as he does, making no mention at all of it. Heb. 7. Secondly, again it is
great blasphemy to say, that every popish priest is after the order of
Melchisedech, Rhemist. Heb. 7. sec. 8
nay that the proper act of Christ's priesthood consists in the perpetual
offering of his body and blood in the Church: for by this reason every impure
priest does more properly offer the body of Christ in the Mass, then it was
offered by himself upon the cross: the^ the which, what greater blasphemy can
be uttered? And yet they are not ashamed to speak it: yea the sacrifice of
Christ upon the cross, (say they) was after the order of Aaron; and not after
the order of Melchisdech, Fulk. Heb. 7. sect. 9 12
and so they prefer every popish priest offering in the Mass, before Jesus
Christ sacrificing himself upon the Cross: contrary to the scripture, which
makes this difference between the priesthood of Aaron and the priesthood of
Melchisedech; that the priests of the law were many, because they were taken
away by death: But Christ's priesthood is eternal, because he dies not, Heb.
7.23. But if there should be many priests after Melchisedechs order, there
should herein be no difference at all: Wherefore seeing Melchisedechs
priesthood only rests in Christ, and is not translated to any other; and
that there is now no sacrifice left but spiritual, of praise and thanksgiving,
Heb. 13.15. it follows that by Melchisedechs right no tithes are now due unto
the Church, neither in any such regard ought to be challenged.

The Protestants.
TIthes, or their equivalent are not due to the Church in respect of any
sacrificing priesthood, of which sort there is none in the new testament
ordained to continue: but for other pastoral duties, and principally the
preaching and dispensing of the word, and instructing of the people.

1 If there were any such priesthood, and tithes in that right did appertain
to the Church: it is most like that our Savior Christ and his Apostles would
have challenged them. But there is no one precept in the new testament
concerning paying of tithes, but only for a sufficient maintenance for the
ministers of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.14. Gal. 6.6. Fulk. Hebr. 7. sect. 4.

2 Saint Paul every where, so often as he shows the duty of Christians in
relieuing and mayntayning their pastors, makes only mention of sowing of
spiritual things, 1. Cor. 9.11. and of teaching and instructing, Gal. 6.6.
Ergo, tithes are due unto Pastors and Ministers only or especially for their
feeding and instructing, and sowing spiritual seed, which is the word of God.

3 There is no such sacrificing priesthood now in the Church, as we have
partly showed before, and shall of purpose more fully declare it afterward: for
every where in the new testament spiritual sacrifices are commanded: and all
Christians are made Kings and Priests unto God, Apocal. 1.6. Other priesthood
we read of none. Wherefore in that respect tithes cannot be due.

Lastly, Augustine says: Si mendicum non contemnis, quanto magis bonem, per
quem trituratur haec area: If thou despisest not a beggar, Psalm. 103. part. 2.
how much more ought thou to have regard of the ox that treads out the
corn on the floor: That is, the Minister that preaches the Gospel: for so
Saint Paul expounds it 1. Timoth. 5.17. The Elders, says he, that labor in
the word and doctrine are worthy double honor: and then it follows, verse.
8. for the scripture says, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the ox, that
treads out the corn. Sufficient maintenance therefore to the Ministers is
due for their labor and travail in the word.

THE SIXTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING THE SVPERSTITIOVS ORDERS AND SECTS OF
MONKS AND FRIARS.
Monks in Latin, called Monachi, derived of the Greek word, were such, as
lived solitarilie, and thereupon had they their name: And they were at the
beginning of three sorts: some were called Eremites that lived in woods and
deserts by themselves: there were other which were mued up and enclosed in cells
and walls, which had not so much liberty as Eremites had: but kept always in
their cages and closets, and so in misery spent their days: and these were
called Anchorites, that is, separated, set apart from all men and living by
themselves: There was a third sort called Coenobites, which lived in
companies, as it were in Colleges by them selves, and had all things common:
And these properly were called Monks, Bell. lib. 2. de monach. cap. 3. This
controversy has many questions.

1 Concerning the beginning and original of Monks, and of their diverse sects,
2. parts.

2 Concerning Counsels of perfection, whether they differ from Evangelical
precepts.

3 Concerning vows in general, three parts: First, whether it be lawful for
Christians to make vows. Secondly, in what things lawful vows consist.
Thirdly, whether voluntary vows are any part of the worship of God.

4 Concerning Monastical vows in particular, three parts: First, of the vow
of voluntary poverty: Secondly, the vow of obedience: Thirdly, the vow of
continency.

5 Concerning Monastical persons: First whether the younger sort ought to be
admitted to profess Monkerie. Secondly, whether children can profess without
consent of their parents. Thirdly, whether married persons may with mutual
consent. Fourthly, whether either of the parties, the marriage not consummate
may enter into profession.

6 Concerning the rules and discipline of Monastical life: First, of their
solitary and severe kind of life. Secondly, of their canonical hours.
Thirdly, their habit and apparel. Fourthly, of their maintenance, whether
they ought to live by begging, or labor of their hands: of these in order.

THE FIRST QVESTION OF THE BEGINning and original of Monks, and of their
diverse sects.
THis question has tow parts: First of their original. Secondly, of the
diversity of their sects.

THE FIRST PART OF THE Original of Monks.
The Papists.


1 Helias and Helizaeus were Eremites, and lived without wives, neither
possessed any riches: Ergo, this profession of life is most ancient, Bellarm.
cap. 5. Rhemist. annot. in Mark. 9.3.

Answer: First, the argument follows not: they had no wives, nor riches,
Ergo, were Eremites: for even amongst the papists themselves many were kept
from wives (as their priests) and yet were neither Monks nor Eremites.
Secondly, though we read not that Helisaeus was married, yet the sons of the
prophets were, that lived as it were in the same College with him, 2. King.
4.1. which Bellarmine makes a College of Monks and Eremites: and says very
untruly, that they all lived without wives, cap. 5. Thirdly, though Elias and
Elisaeus were sometime in the wilderness, yet they always remained not, neither
lived there, Fulk. annot. Mark. 9.3.

2 John Baptist a perfect pattern of Eremitical life, for living in the desert
and wilderness, for his rough apparel, for abstaining from all delicate meat,
Rhemist. annot. Math. 3.1.

Answer: First, John Baptists calling was singular and extraordinary, and
therefore cannot be made an author of any ordinary profession. Secondly, we
deny not but his life was austere, and that he made his abode in a solitary
place, yet there were houses and villages not far off: his apparel also was
course cloth, made of the hard hairs of Camels: his food was of locusts and
wild honey, the usual and common meat of that country: he was an
extraordinary preacher of repentance, and showed in him self an example of
austere life, as it became the forerunner of Christ: But being no minister of
the Gospel, but the last prophet of the law, he cannot be a pattern of an
ordinary profession under the Gospel, Fulk. annot. Matthew. 3. sect. 1.

3 Nay Bellarm. fetches his monkish order from a more ancient beginning, the^
from Elias, and John Baptist: yea from before the flood: for Enos, says he,
seems to have brought in some stricter kind of life, and peculiar manner of
worshipping God: whereas the text says, that he began to call upon the name of
God: that is, after another manner: for Adam, Seth, Abel, before this time
called upon the name of God. cap. 5.

Answer: First, who would have thought, that there had been Monks and Eremites
before the flood, if the Jesuit had not said it, or that this text, which he
alleges, could have proved it? The argument follows not: Enos brought in a
peculiar worship of God, therefore was founder of the Eremiticall life: for he
brought in the true worship of God: but the other is superstitious and
erroneous. Secondly, Tremellius reads more agreeably to the Hebrew, Tum nome^
Dei coeptum est inuocando profanari: then the name of God began to be profaned
in calling upon, that is, his worship began to be corrupted: for the Hebrew
word signifies, both to invoke and call upon God, as also to corrupt,
pollute, or profane. Thirdly, if we read as they do, The name of God began
to be called upon: it only shows a restoring and renewing of the true
worship of God, which was polluted by the posterity of Cain, whose stock and
family is set down in that chapter, Genesis 4.

The Protestants.
WE see then that this Monastical and solitary kind of life has no proof
nor ground out of the scriptures, either by precept or example: Nay this kind
of profession was not known in the Church, for diverse hundred years after
Christ; how could then the Apostles be the founders of this order? And though
the name of Monks be of some antiquity in the Church, yet they were far
unlike unto Popish Monks, that for these many years have pestered the Church.

1 It is certain, as Hierome witnesses, that Antonius, and his disciples
Amathas and Macarius, were the first beginners of Monkish profession, three
hundred year after Christ, Centur. 4. cap. 6. Fulk. annot. Mark. 9.3.

2 The beginning of Monks, was not for the more merit, and to do penance for
their own sins and the sins of the world, for Antonius the first Monk
confessed, that Christ only suffered for the sins of the world: but the
first occasion was given in the time of persecution, when as men were not
suffered to worship God aright publicly: Fulk. Matt- ^. sect. 3.
and therefore they fled into the wilderness: Rhemist. Math. 3. sect. 3. But now
seeing the Christian faith is openly professed, they have no such causes to
seek solitary and secret places.

3 The popish Monks are altogether unlike theirs: First, they lived in
solitary places, far from resort of people: but the popish Mock-monkes live
in Cities and the frequencie of the people, Fulk. annot. Math. 3. sect. 3.
Secondly, the Monks in times past labored with their hands: but the popish
fatbellies pampered themselves in idleness. Thirdly, they are altogether unlike
in life and doctrine as we shall see more at large afterward. Fulk. ibid.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the diverse sects of Monks and Friars.
The Papists.
Francis, Saint Benet, Saint Dominick, which has brought in diverse sects and
orders of Religious men, do tend all to the imitation of Christ, Rhemist.
annot. Philip. cap. 3. sect. 2.1. These. 1.2.

This their assertion they would ground upon the Apostles words, Philip. 3.17.
Be ye followers of me brethren: Rhemist.

Answer: First, Saint Paul would have them no otherwise to follow him, then he
did Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1. Neither gave any other rules to his followers, then
he had learned of Christ, as the patrons of the Monkish sects have done.
Secondly, Neither did Saint Paul erect a new order of Paulians, as Franciscus
did of Franciscanes, Dominick of Dominicans. Thirdly, Saint Paul was a
perswader of unity, not a maker of divisions among Christians: as the Monks
and Friars have done, one sort persecuting another for their opinions even to
death. Fulk. annot. 1 Thessalonians. 1. sect. 2. Fox. page 798.

The Protestants.
COntrariwise we affirm, that it is a great derogation to Christ when the
people shall say, I follow the religion of Augustine, the religon of Francis,
an other says, I hold of Dominick, another, I hold of Jesus, as the Jesuits
do: Fulk. Philip. 3. verse. 17.

1 Saint Paul reproves the Corinthians, because they made the like sects
amongst themselves: one said I am Paul's, another, I am Apolloes, and concludes
that therefore they were carnal, 1. Cor. 3.4. And further, he says, they
should not rejoice in men, for all things were theirs, whether Paul, Apollos,
or Cephas, ver. 21.22. That is, they were not masters of their faith, to
institute new religions and sects, but the Ministers and servants of the Lords
inheritance: If therefore it was not lawful to say, I hold of Paul, I hold of
Cephas: neither is it lawful to say, I hold of Dominick, I hold of Francis: I
hold of Jesus: for seeing they make their sects, and Jesus makes his, it is
evident, that they are not all referred to the imitation of Jesus: for then
they might all as well be called Jesuits.

2 The number of Monks and Friars was almost infinite, sects upon sects, and
new orders daily were devised, as Augustinians, Bernardines, Carmelites,
Carthusians, Dominicanes, Franciscanes, and a great sort more, to the number of
an hundred sects, as they are reckoned by Master Fox. page 260. and Tilmane
Heshus. sets down 65, several sects or rather schisms of Monks, loc. 25.
error 10. This yrksome rabble therefore of Monks is fitly shadowed forth by
the swarm of Locusts, which came up out of the bottomless pit, Apocal. 9.4.
And verily as the Locusts and Grasshoppers consume and devour the fruits of the
earth, so the begging-Friers, and idle Monks devoured the goods of the people,
and corrupted the doctrine of the Church.

3 Lastly, this division of Monkery into sects and sundry orders, is of no
great antiquity: they were not known in Augustines time, who knew no other
name of them, then Monks: for he wrote a book of purpose, de opere
Monachorum: of the labor of Monks: But other names of Carmelites,
Carthusians, Franciscanes, or such like were not heard of in the Church in
those days: but came in long after in the time of Innocentius 3. about anno
1212. many years after Augustine, Fox. page 259.

THE SECOND QVESTION CONCERning the Counsels of perfection.
The Papists.
THis they say is the very foundation of the Monastical life, which is the most
Bellarm. cap. 7. Rhemist. annot. Math. 19. sect. 9.

1 Matthew. 19. verse 21. Christ says, go and sell all thou have, if thou will
be perfect. This was a Counsel of perfection, not a precept given to all
Christians.

Answ. First, this was both a Counsel and precept, though not to al, yet to
this one man, to discover his hypocrisy and vain confidence which he had in
himself, as though he had kept the law, when he was far from it, Fulk.
Matthew. 19.9. Mark. 10.3. Secondly, it is a general precept unto all, to love
the Lord with all the heart, and to be content, when the Lord requires, for
Christ's sake to leave all we have, Calvin. Institut. 4. cap. 13. sect. 13.

2 Act. 2.44. They had all things common. This is not a rule or precept to all
Christian men to live in common, but a life of perfection and counsel followed
of the Religious, Rhemist.

Answer: This living in common among the brethren in the Apostles time, is the
same that ought always to be among all Christians, that no man account that to
be his own, which the necessity of his brother requires to be bestowed upon
him: this the rule of charity requires, which is one of the great
commandments. Fulk. in hunc locum.

3 1. Corinthians. 7.25. Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord,
but I give mine advice. A precept therefore is one thing, a Counsel of
perfection another, Bellarm. cap. 9.

Answer: First, Paul has no general commandment from God to impose the yoke
of continency upon any, because God had left marriage free, and therefore no
man is to be barred and kept from it: But the Apostles particular advice and
sentence (being moved by the spirit of God, verse. 40.) is not only a Counsel,
but a commandment, that both they which have the gift of continency, should
glorify God by that gift, verse. 7. and they which have it not, should marry
rather then burn, and so dishonor God, verse. 9. Therefore the Apostle says,
Let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God. verse. 24. If a man
be called to live single, he ought to obey his calling, having received the
gift: if a man be called to the married estate, he must not presume beyond his
strength, to live unmarried. Wherefore it is both Counsel and a precept, to
those that have received the gift of single life: for otherwise they disobey
Gods calling, which is sin. And our Savior says, he that is able to receive
it, let him receive it, Matthew. 19.12. He that has the gift, is commanded to
use it, for in leesing it he sins. And lastly, every man by commandment is
bound to the uttermost of his power to set forth Gods glory: But God is most
glorified by the single life of those, which are able to contain, and
therefore they ought in duty so to do.

The Protestants.
WE do truly affirm and according to the scriptures, that it is impossible
for any man to perform the law and commandments of GOD, much less to
fulfill more then is commanded: And therefore it is false, that beside the
precepts of Christ there are Counsels of perfection, which are at a man's choice
to do or not to do: for whatsoever is to the glory of God we are bound to
do: We acknowledge then no such euangelical Counsels, as they imagine, Calvin.

1 Math. 5.48. Our Savior says: Ye shall be perfect, as your heavenly father
is perfect. Therefore all Counsels tending to perfection, are commandments. If
there be any thing whereby we may more nearly attain unto perfection, that we
are bound and commanded to do: As if a man can better obtain this perfection
of godliness, by living single, if he have the gift, he ought to do it: for
having not the gift, and yet presuming, he burns in lust, and so is set
further back in the course of godliness, Calvin. argument.

2 We are bound to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all
our strength: Therefore whatsoever thing there is, whereby we may express the
love of God, we are bound by commandment to do it, it is not left to our own
will: for not to love God more then thou do, if it be in thy power, it is a
grievous sin, Martyris argument.

Bellarmine answers thus: Qui deum diligit super omnia, etiamsi eum non tam
ardenter amet, quam forte posset, vel non faciat pro eo omnia, quae posset,
ille habet deum pro summo bono, cap. 13. He that loves God above all things,
although he love him not so entirely, as perhaps he may, neither does all
things for his sake, that lie in his power, yet for all this, he esteems of
God as his chief good: I pray you see what contradictorie speeches these be:
The Jesuit says, a man may love God perfectly and above all, and yet not love
him so much as he is able, that is, imperfectly: so a man, by his Monkish
divinity, may love God above all, and yet not love him above all: for if he
did, he would refuse to do nothing for Gods love that is in his power.

3 Luke 17.10. When you have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, we are unprofitable servants, and did nothing but that which was our
duty to do: Ergo, we are bound to do all things that are to be done, and we
cannot do that which we ought, much less more then we ought to do, Martyris
argument.

Bellarmine answers: First, Christ says, when you have done all which I
commanded you, not which I counseled you. Cap. 13.


Ans. As though the argument follows not strongly: you cannot do the less,
that is, keep my commandments, therefore you cannot do the more, that is,
speaking now (as the Jesuit does) the Counsels of perfection, which are more
then the precepts: It is a precept of necessity to dispense our goods to the
use of the poor, it is a counsel of perfection, as they say, to give all away
to the poor: But if a man cannot perform the first, that is, keeping his
goods to use them aright, much less is he able with a resolute mind to give
them all away.

Secondly, he answers: Christ bids them to say so, as showing their
humility, not that they were indeed vprofitable servants. A poor shift, as
though Christ envied the good of his servants, or would obscure their
well-doing, and does not rather advance it to the uttermost, and make the most
of the serviceable works of his children, as we see, Matthew. 25.34. And Christ
being a faithful Prophet, would not surely deceive his Disciples, and tell
theme one thing, and himself know and think another. But these Frierlike
mists and smoke of Locusts, is not able to dim the clear light of this
scripture, which shows, that when we have done all we can do, we come
far short of our duty.

4 Augustine, though sometime he seem to make some difference between a
precept and a Counsel: Praeceptum est, says he, cui non obedire, peccatum est:
Consilium, quo si vti nolueris, minus boni adipisceris, non mali aliquid
perpetrabis. De virginit. cap. 15. A precept is that, which not to obey, is
sin: A Counsel is that, which if thou will not follow, thou do not commit
any evil, yet thou have the less good. Though he seem in words, I say, to
make difference, yet his meaning is this, That a precept is of things
necessary, as to follow virtue, to eschew vice: A Counsel is of things
indifferent, as to use or not to use, as to eat or not to eat flesh: But yet
the occasion may so serve, that even this counsel is necessary: for we ought
not to eat flesh to offend our brother. Multa facienda sunt non iubente lege,
sed libera charitate: Many things are to be done (says he) not by force of any
law, but by the rule of charity: that is, we have no particular law, but the
general rule of charity. A Counsel then is seen in things indifferent, which
are always lawful, but not always expedient: and it is nothing else but a
particular application of the general rule of charity: Charity wishes that
nothing should be done to offend our brethen, 1. Cor. 10.32. The scripture
likewise gives liberty to eat flesh, there is no general precept or
prohibitione yet the Apostle gives counsel, that is, according to the rule of
charity says, that although all things are clean: Malum tamen est homini,
qui per offensionem manducat: yet it is evil to the man that eats with
offense, Roman. 14.20. Here we see the transgression of an Apostolical Counsel
is sin: And though we be not bound by any particular precept, at this time or
that to abstain from flesh, yet, qua facienda sunt libera charitate, the
things that are to be done in the duty of love, do as well bind us, as if we
had a direct commandment: for love is the fulfilling of the commandments, yea
it is one of the great commandments to love one another. Yet the counsel or
liberty concerning indifferent things, remains in it own nature free still:
as the Apostle counsels to eat, not asking any question: in such a case it
is neither evil not to eat, nor good to eat: but if any man be present that
may take offense by our eating, then is it evil to eat. So Augustine
concludes: Multa mihi videntur licere and non expedire, quae per iustitia^,
quae coram deo est, permittuntur, sed propter offensione^ hominu^ vitanda sunt.
Many things are lawful, but not expedient, lawful before God, but not expedient
because of the offense of our brethen. De adulter. coniug. lib. 1. cap. 14.17.
Thus we see Augustine does nothing favor the popish distinction of precepts
and counsels: for by his sentence, even Counsels, that is, the liberty and
freedom of things indifferent, are restrained, and made necessary in the
external use, by the rule of charity.

THE THIRD QVESTION CONCERNING vows in general.
THis question has three parts: first, whether it be lawful for Christians
to make vows. Secondly, in what things lawful vows consist. Thirdly, whether
voluntary vows be any part of the worship and service of God.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER VOWS PERtayned only to the old law, and are not now
permitted unto Christians.
The Papists.
THey hold it as lawful, and as free a thing for Christians to bind themselves
by vows unto God, as it was used and practiced of the Jews in the time of the

1 Isay 19.21. They shall know the Lord in that day, and do sacrifice and
oblation, and vow vows unto God and perform them. This prophecy is
concerning Christians, which should in the time of the Gospel make vows unto
God, Bellarm. cap. 17.

Ans. The Prophet does, by the external service of God used in the Church at
that time, set forth the spiritual worship of God in the Church of Christ:
for Jewish vows shall be no more then in force, then their sacrifices and
oblations. Also verse. 19. the Prophet says, that an Altar shall be set up in
Egypt, and verse. 18. They shall speak the language of Canaan: But these
things were not literally, but mystically performed, neither is it necessary
the other should.

2 Psalm. 76.11. Vow unto God and perform: Ergo, vows now are lawful,
Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. It appears by the text, that it was a commandment unto the Jews, and
for that time: for it follows, Al ye that are round about him: that is, the
Levites and Priests that dwelt round about the temple. And bring presents to
him that ought to be feared: but now Christians bring no such external
presents and gifts, therefore it cannot be properly understood of them.

The Protestants.
WE do not condemn al vows, neither deny, but that a Christian in some cases
may vow, as presently it follows to be showed: But Jewish vows are utterly
unlawful, such as the vows of the Nazarites were, Numb. 6. as to abstain
from wine and strong drink, not to shave their hair, and such like: if we
place religion in such vows.

1 Their vows were ceremonious, and consisted in external rites, which were
shadows and significations of spiritual things: as not to cut their hair,
not to touch any dead thing, to abstain from wine and strong drink: But all
shadows are now gone and abolished: and such external vsages are
unprofitable, as were those precepts of the false Apostles, Touch not, taste
not, handle not: which all perish with the using, and are the commandments of
men, as S. Paul says, Coloss. 2.21.22. Such precepts notwithstanding, Monks
and Friars at this day do bind themselves unto: for it is not lawful for
them to touch silver nor to taste flesh, according to the strict and
superstitious rules of their Patrones.

2 The Nazarites were by their vows separated unto God, Numb. 6.2. that is,
were counted as more holy, during their vows, and better accepted of before
God. But now God is not pleased by any such external rites, or bodily
services: In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that works by love, Galath. 5.6.

3 S. Paul says, He that is circumcised is bound to keep the whole law,
Galath. 5.3. He that keeps any one ceremony of the law, does make himself
a servant to the whole law: for if after the profession of the Nazarites, they
will vow not to drink wine, not to shave their heads, hereby the better to
please God: why are they not also purified, and bring an offering according to
the law, as Paul did, who because of the infirmity of the Jews, was agreed
with four other men which had a vow, to be purified according to the law? But
this S. Paul did being amongst the Jews, who cried out against him as a
breaker of the law, lest he should be scandalous unto them.

Augustine thus notably writes concerning this matter: Sicut defuncta corpora
necessariorum officijs deducenda erant quodammodo ad sepulchrum, non deserenda
continuo, vel sicut canibus proijcienda. The ceremonies of the law (says he)
were not presently to be cast off, but as dead bodies must be brought to the
grave with some seemly pomp of their friends, and not to be cast unto dogs.
Thus he says, that in the Apostles time all Jewish ceremonies were not in act
abolished, though they were already as dead carcasses, that is, by right
deprived of life: yet they required some space to be honorably laid down,
and as it were buried. But whosoever would now go about to renew the Jewish
ceremonies again (says he) Tanquam sopitos cineres eruens, non erit pius
deductor vel baiulus corporis, sed impius sepulturae violator: He should as it
were rake in dead men's ashes, and not be a seemly bringer of the body to the
ground, but a wicked violator of Christian burial: Even so Augustine makes it
as wicked a part, to bring in use any Jewish rites, as to pull one, honestly
buried, out of his grave.

THE SECOND PART, WHAT THINGS MAY lawfully be vowed by Christians.
The Papists.
THey hold that the proper vows of Christians are voluntary, not of such

1 Deuteron. 23. When thou shall vow a vow unto God, thou shall not be slack
to pay it, it should be sin unto thee, but when thou abstainest from vowing,
it shall be no sin unto thee. By this the Jesuit proves, that the vows of
Christians are voluntary, and not of necessary duties, for it were sin to
leave any thing undone, that we are in duty bound unto, cap. 19.

Ans. First: We deny not but that the Jews had voluntary vows, and might
bind themselves by vow to perform many things, which being not vowed, it was
no sin to leave undone: As the Nazarites vows concerning abstinence from
wine and strong drink: which things other might lawfully use without sin, if
they were not professed Nazarites. But these ceremonial laws do nothing
appertain to Christians.

Secondly, it may also be understood of necessary vows, which we are bound
unto of duty, and then the sense is this: If you abstain from vowing ye
sin not, that is, not so hainously as after the vow made; as Pagans and
Infidels do sin in transgressing Gods law: but a Christian sins more
after public profession and promise made of obedience unto Gods commandments.

The Protestants.
WE hold that to vow is not a thing simply forbidden Christians: but our vows
are limited and restrained: for they are either such, as directly or immediately
are referred to the worship of God, whereby we bind our selves more
straightly to serve him: and such vows are only of such things as are
commanded and necessarily to be done: and in this sense there is but one common
vow of all Christians, and that is our solemn promise made in baptism, which
the Papists deny properly to be a vow, Bellarmin, cap 19. There is another
kind of vows, that directly concerns not the worship of God, which may be of
things not commanded, of the which we will entreat in the next section. Now
we are to prove, that Baptism is the only proper vow of Christians, which
directly touches the service and worship of God.

1 Circumcision was a general vow of the Jews, for thereby they bound
themselves to keep the whole law, Galath. 5.3. Ergo, Baptism is the vow of
Christians, which comes in the place of circumcision. And again, it
appears by this, that because Christians transgressing, do deserve greater
punishment, then Jews or Gentiles, that they are more straightly obliged and
bound by their covenant unto God then the other: and not only, as the Jesuit
says, because they have tasted more of the goodness of God, and so are more
unthankful: for there are two parts of the covenant between God and us: The
Lord says, Thou art my people, and so enricheth them with knowledge, and every
good thing: The people say, Thou art my God, Hosh. 2.23. And thus as the Lord
does covenant with them, so they do bind themselves unto God: The breach of
which covenant, is that which stirs up principally the anger of God against
us.

2 Augustine upon the 75 Psalm writes thus: Vouete and reddite domino de^
vestro omnes communiter: Quid debemus vouere? credere in illum, sperare ab illo
vitam aeternam, been viuere, secundum communem modum: Make your vows and pay
them unto God generally altogether. What must we vow? to believe in him, to
hope for eternal life, to live honestly, not to steal, not to commit
adultery. These then are the common and general duties of Christians: no
other then we promised and vowed in baptism.

THE THIRD PART, CONCERNING VOLVNTArie vows, whether they be any part of the
worship of God.
The Papists.
Bellar. cap. 16.

1 Jacob vowed to pay tithes, Genes. 28. David to build a temple unto God,
Psalm. 131.2. But neither of these two were commanded them, and yet they were
properly referred to the service of God.

Ans. First, we deny not, as we have said, but that in the law and before
there might be such voluntary vows, yet it follows not, that there should
be any such now. Secondly, both those duties were necessary, and commanded
in general, though not in particular. As first, Jacobs vow was that the Lord
should be his God, verse. 21. No man can deny, but this was necessary, and a
commandment: Then seeing the Lord is his God, it is also necessary that he
should acknowledge him by some external worship, as by appointing the Lord an
house in that place, and bringing oblations unto his altars: these are but
particular duties, that do follow that general commandment.

Secondly, David did vow that, he was bound to do being King of Israel,
namely, to have a care of the temple of God: for thus he says to Nathan the
Prophet, I dwell in an house of Cedar trees: but the Ark of God remains
within the curtains, 2. Sam. 7.2. This belonged to the King of duty, as it
was generally commanded all Israel, Hagg. 1.4. but that David was discharged of
this care, by the especial warrant of God by the Prophet.

2 Hebr. 13.16. To do good and to destribute forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is pleased. Intelligitur (says Bellarmine) de eleemosyna non
praeceptae: it must be understood of alms which is not commanded.

Ans. As though all kind of alms and releeuing of the poor be not commanded:
for the works of charity, and to do good are always enjoined us. Again,
this place serves nothing at al for vows: It seems he was hard bestead,
that had no better choice of places.

The Protestants.
WE grant that there are other kind of vows then before we spoke of, which do
not directly concern the worship of God, neither are of things commanded us,
nor yet is God thereby the better pleased: but they serve only as helps, to
make us more fit unto Christian duties: As a man that sees he is by nature
given to dronkennes, does vow that he will take no strong drink, lest he
should offend that way: Another purposes to fast, thereby to tame his flesh,
and the more fervently to pray: As Job made a covenant with his eyes not to
look upon a maid, 31.1. But these things of themselves, by the outward act,
are not the more acceptable unto God, neither is God by eating or not eating,
or looking or not looking, the better worshipped, as these things are
considered in themselves. Wherefore by the word of God we condemn all
voluntary and superstitious vows of men, invented to serve God by, as vows of
chastity, of going in pilgrimage, offering to Images, and such like.

1 S. Paul conde^neth al voluntary worship of God which is invented by man, as
unprofitable, though it have a show of wisdom in humblenes of mind, and not
sparing the body, Coloss. 2.23. As such are the ordinances of the world in
worshipping of Angels, and in abstinence, Touch not, taste not, handle not. But
such are all popish vows, a voluntary service of God, even in the same things
which the Apostle takes exception against, for they make vows to Angels, to
Saints, vows to keep days holy, and to fast in them: Ergo, they are
unlawful.

2 Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, that is, grounded upon
knowledge out of the word: Ergo, all voluntary vows made to serve God by are
to be abandoned, because they have no warrant out of Gods word. Bellarmine
answers, that the place is not so to be understood, but rather, by faith, is
meant the conscience of man, and so whatsoever is done against the conscience
is sin.

Ans. By faith, is not understood any conscience, but the assurance of a right
conscience, which must needs be builded upon the word: for verse. 22. S. Paul
says, If thou have faith, have it with God: This cannot be spoken of a corrupt
conscience which is not able to abide Gods trial, but a right conscience
established out of the word.

3 Let us hear Augustines judgment: Sunt multi, qui vouent, alius pallium,
alius oleum, alius ceream ad luminaria noctis, alius vt vinum non bibat per
aliquot annos, alius vt ieiunia certo te^pore faciat, alius vt carnes non
comedat. Non est istud votum optimum neque perfectum, adhuc melius volo: non
eligit Deus nec speciem tuam, nec oleum tuum, nec ieiunium tuum, sed hoc, quod
hodie redemit, ipsum offer, hoc est, animam tuam. There are many that vow, one
a cloak, another oil, another a wax candle, another that he will drink no
wine, another that he will fast, another that he will eat no flesh. This is
not the best kind of vowing: God neither cares for thy comely apparel, nor
for thy oil, nor for thy fasting: but offer that unto him, which he has
redeemed, that is, thy soul, De tempor. ser. 7. We see by this, what account
Augustine makes of superstitious voluntary vows, made with an intent to
please God thereby.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION CONCERNING Monastical vows in particular.
THere are three kinds of vows which belong unto Monkerie: the first is the
vow of voluntary poverty: the second, the vow of obedience unto the
Monastical presidents and governors: the third is the vow of continency: of
these three in order.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING THE vow of voluntary poverty.
The Papists.
THey say it is an acceptable service unto GOD, for a man to give all he has

1 Math. 18.21. Christ faith, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou
have, and give it to the poor, and come and follow me. This is properly to
follow Christ, to lack propriety and live in common: and thus the Apostles
followed Christ, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, This is a precept not general to all, but given to this one man
to discover his hypocrisy, and vain confidence that he had in himself, as
though he had kept the law, which he came far short of. Secondly, the
Apostles themselves had propriety: Peter had a house: John had to provide for
the virgin Marie, whom Christ commended unto him: Matthew made a feast of his
own goods, Fulk. ibid.

2 Act. 2.44. They had all things common: and Act. 5. Ananias and Sapphira,
after their profession of common life, deteining some part proper to
themselves, were reproved and judged of the Apostles: Ergo, it is acceptable to
God to live in common, Rhemist. ibid. Bellarm. cap. 20.

Answer: First, that community, used then amongst the brethren, ought always
to be among Christians, no man to count that his own which the necessity of
his brother requires to be bestowed upon him: every man was not then bound to
give up the propriety of their goods: for they distributed to every man as
they had need, Act. 4.35. But if they had given up all the propriety of their
goods, then all should have needed alike: And Peter says not the contrary, but
that Ananias might have kept the propriety of his goods, if he had not made
public profession to the contrary, Act. 5.4.

2 Concerning Ananias, we do not read that he made any vow to give his goods
to the Church: nay the contrary appears, in that Saint Peter says, While it
remained with thee, appertained it not to thee? But if his vow were past
before, the goods, though not yet sold, could not appertain unto him. Again,
the principal and chief cause, why Peter proceeded against him, was his lying
and hypocrisy, not for breaking his vow: for it cannot be proved that he
promised all, but that he affirmed that he brought all, whereas he withdrew
part.

The Protestants.
Voluntary, or rather wilful poverty, for a man, having no urgent cause, to
leave all he has, and bequeath himself to a poor and needy life, only for
opinion of greater merit, and hope thereby better to please God, is neither a
thing acceptable nor commendable before God, nor any where commanded in the
scriptures.

1 1. Timoth. 6.17. Saint Paul giving Counsel to rich men, bids them not to
cast away their riches: but Charge them, says he, that they be not high
minded, nor put their trust in uncertain riches: Surely it had been a more
compe^dious way to wish them at once to leave their riches, so they should not
be in danger, either of pride, or vain confidence: But the Apostle says no
such thing. Again, God gives us abundantly al things to enjoy: riches are the
gift of God, we ought not to be weary of Gods blessing. And as Job says, The
Lord gives, the Lord takes: therefore a man ought not to make himself poor,
because he made not himself rich, but to wait upon God.

Further it follows, verse. 18. that they do good, and be rich in good works:
he that can use riches well, may be rich in good works; but he that is poor
wants occasion and means to do good, as the rich man endued with grace may:
Wherefore he is an enemy to the glory of God, that changes his rich estate,
wherein he may more glorify God, for a poor.

Again, if it were so acceptable a thing to God, and so meritorious to live in
poverty, what made the Prophet to pray against it? Give me not poverty nor
riches, but feed me with food convenient, Prouer. 30. verse. 8.

2 What better argument can we have against them, then their own practice? for,
though in words they much commend voluntary poverty, yet it is a rare thing,
to find it amongst them: for not one among a thousand of them, if they have
lands, do give them to the poor, but to their own kinsfolks, or else to
the Abbeyes, where they know they shall be wealthily maintained. The Pope also is
good to many, and grants them capacities to possess temporal goods contrary
to their former vow. Fulk. annot. Mark. 10. sect. 3.

3 Augustine says, Diuitiae seculares si desint, non per opera mala quarantur
in mundo: Si autem adsunt, per opera bona seruentur in coelo: Epist. 1.
posteriorum. If secular riches be wanting, let not a man seek to get them by
evil doing in the world: but if he have them, labor, by well doing, to store
them up in heaven. He counsels not men to cast away their riches: It was the
heresy of the Pelagians to persuade rich men to cast away their goods, August.
epistol. 106. and of the Manichees likewise, August. cont. Faustum. lib. 5.
cap. 10.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the vow of obedience.
The Papists.
Franciscanes follow Saint Francis rule, who in stead of a girdle, put a cord
about him, went bare-foote, in winter season covered his flesh with ice and
snow. Fox. p. 259.
It is acceptable, and grateful service, say they, unto God, to be thus
obedient to their fathers and governors.

1 Ierem. 35. The sons of Ionadab are commended, for being obedient to their
father, who enjoined them to drink no wine, nor to sow their fields, nor build
houses but dwell in tents: See, they obeyed their father in things not
commanded of God: Ergo, so ought religious Monks to do. Bellarm. cap. 21.

Answer. First you cannot show, that your monkish Abbots have such authority
over their Monks, as the father has over his children: for Coloss. 3. and in
many other places, children are commanded to be obedient to their parents: But
they have neither authority nor calling out of the word. Secondly, Ionadab
enjoined nothing contrary to the law of the Nazarites, Numb. 6. and if you
say, that it was not the custom of the Nazarites to dwell in tents: you shall
find that the Rechabites did not so straightly observe this, as the other,
namely not to drink wine: for Ierem. 35.11. they came up for fear of the
Caldeans that were in the land, and dwelt at Jerusalem: they dispensed with the
voluntary iniunction of their father, for dwelling in their tents, but kept
the other vow of abstaining from wine still, because it was after the law.
Wherefore this example makes not for monkish obedience, seeing they are
enjoined things not commanded by God, nay contrary to his commandments.

The Protestants.
NO obedience to any ruler either spiritual or temporal is to be yielded unto,
but for the Lords sake, and in such matters, wherein we have the warrant of
Gods word for our obedience.

1 Coloss. 3.23. Servants be obedient to your masters, and whatsoever you do,
do it heartily as to the Lord: But if any thing be enjoined us which is not
warranted by the word of God, we cannot with a good conscience obey as before
the Lord. Again, Saint Paul says, Coloss. 2.18. Let no man at his pleasure
bear rule over you, or beguile you, or as the Rhemists translate, seduce you
wilfully: Ergo, no man must impose rules of life beside the Gospel, for this
were to rule over men at their pleasure.

2 Augustine says, Cum homo conster anima and corpore, oportet nos ex ea
part, quae ad hanc vitam pertinet, subditos esse potestatibu^: ex illa part,
qua credimus deo, and ad eius regnum vocamur, non oportet nos cuiqua^ esse
subditos: Seeing a man does consist both of body and soul; in regard of that
part, which the affairs of this life concern, we ought to be subject to the
higher powers: but in respect of that part whereby we believe, and are called
to the kingdom of God, we must be obedient to none, August. in 13. ad Romans
Therefore no man may impose any new religion upon us, which altogether touches
the conscience.

THE THIRD PART CONCERNING THE vow of continency or chastity.
The Papists.
THe vow of chaste and continent life is commendable and meritorious, they say,
in all that do take it upon them, and after the vow made, they are sure
Rhemist. annot. 1. Corinthians. 7. ver. 7. But whosoever marries after the vow
made, sins damnably, and turns back after Satan. Rhemist. annot. 1. Tim.
5. sect. 12.

1 Math. 19.12. Some have made themselves chaste, or as the Rhemists do very
homely translate it, have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven: this
proves the vows of chastity to be both lawful and meritorious, Rhemist. in
hunc locum.

Ans. This is meant only of those that have the gift of continency, who, if
they be sure they have received it, may vow and purpose single life: but
without such assurance no man can vow continency lawfully. Secondly, but as
for meriting, it comes neither by being married or unmarried, but is the free
gift of God through Christ. Fulk. ibid.

2 1. Timoth. 5.12. Having damnation because they have cast away their first
faith: that is, the vow of continency, which they made to Christ: it cannot be
meant of the first faith in baptism, for that is not lost by marriage, Rhemist.
And again, verse. 15. They are turned back after satan: we may here learn,
for those to marry which are professed, is to turn back after Satan.
Rhemist. in eum locum.

Answer: First, Saint Paul speaks not here of widows already chosen, but to
be chosen: he would have younger widows to be chosen, because they would
wax wanton, and marry: and therefore it is not like, that by the first faith
here is meant the vow of chastity, seeing there is no cause that these
younger widows should make any vow, being excluded by the Apostle from
Church services. Secondly, verse. 14. Saint Paul himself Counsels the
younger widows to marry, therefore it is not like they were votaries.
Thirdly, by the first faith is understood the Christian faith, which the
younger widows waxing wanton, and lascivious, nor carrying to match with
Infidels, were in danger to break, as the Apostle tells them of some that
had done so already, and were turned back after Satan. Fourthly, we say not
that the faith of baptism is broken by all marriage, but with joining with
Infidels. Fifthly, it appears what breach of faith Paul means, when he
says, They wax wanton, and idle, and are busybodies, go from house to
house, and speak things uncomely, verse 13. Which is a sliding back from the
Christian faith, when our life iarreth with our profession: not a breach of any
vow of continency, Fulk. 1. Timoth. 5. sect. 10.12.

The Protestants.
Our sentence then appears to be this: that the vow of continency cannot
lawfully be made of all, neither is indifferently to be required of them,
seeing all are not endued with that gift, Fulk. Math. 19.6. And that it is
better even for vowed persons, having rashly presumed beyond their strength, to
marry, rather then to burn. Fulk. 1. Cor. 7. sect. 8.

1 The scripture every where commands such to use the benefit of marriage,
Argum.
that have not the gift to live single, 1. Cor. 7.2. For avoiding of
fornication let every man have his wife: and ver. 9. If they cannot abstain
let them marry. Wherefore they transgress the commandment of God, and
presume rashly, that having not this gift, do vow virginity.

Bellarmin. Answer. First, Saint Paul wishes men to marry, not for every
temptation of lust, but when they are ready to fall into external works of
uncleanness, as into fornication: and therefore he says, For avoiding of
fornication let every one have his wife: For Saint Paul felt the prick of the
flesh, that is, the lust of concupiscence, and was buffeted of it, yet married
not for all that cap. 30. Rhemist. annot. 1. Corinthians. 7. sect. 8.

Answer: First, we say not that for every light temptation, which by resisting
may be overcome, in those that have the gift of continency, a man is to desire
marriage, but when he is continually enflamed with lust, so that the will does
consent: though he be not yet so overcome, that he fall in outward uncleanness:
and this is the Apostles meaning, when he says, It is better to marry then
to burn, that is, with inward lust when his mind is disquieted: And such a
man as does burn with secret concupiscence, still wrestling with that fire,
and not being able to quench it, if he refuse to use the lawful remedy of
marriage, is in danger also to fall into outward fornication.

2 Concerning Paul's example: First, the place is not so to be understood of
the lust of concupiscence: for it is not like, that the Apostle being kept
under, with hunger, cold, imprisonment, should be so greatly tempted that
way. But either it may be understood of the particular temptation to pride and
vainglorie, as he him self expounds it, verse. 7. lest I should be exalted
out of measure through the abundance of revelations: Or else generally Saint
Paul understands by flesh, the whole mass of corruption and whatsoever was
in him that resisted the spirit: In this sense he cries out, Roman. 7. Who
shall deliver me from this body of death! Calvin.

2 Though we yield that Saint Paul was tempted of his concupiscence, yet he
overcame and subdued it, obtaining from God, after some striving, grace and
power to quench the secret fire: And so we deny not, but that men ought by
fasting and prayer to labor for that precious gift. But if they feel the fire
to burn within them still, then are they to use the remedy prescribed by
Saint Paul, that is, to marry.

Secondly, says Bellarmine, Saint Paul gives liberty of marriage only to
those which were free and had not vowed continency, cap. 31.

Answer: First, the Apostles words are general: Let every man have his wife:
I, say the Rhemists, he speaks of those that were married before their
conversion, that they might still use and keep their wives. Yea but Saint Paul
speaks of all unmarried, in the verse next before, It is good not to touch a
woman: I trow he means not, it is good for a man that is married not to touch
his wife. Secondly, it is a general liberty, which he grants to all, ver.
9. If they cannot contain, let them marry: but many votaries cannot contain,
as it may appear by the unchaste lives of your Monkish rabble: therefore having
the disease, they may use the remedy, that is, marry.

Argum. 2. Virginity, and continent life is only to be required of those
which have the gift of continency: But all have not that gift: Ergo, the vow
of Virginity is not indifferently to be made by any. That the gift of
continency cannot be had or obtained of all, neither rests in our free will,
it is plain by scripture.

1 Math. 19.12. He that is able to receive this gift, let him receive it: Ergo,
all are notable to receive it.

Bellarmin. First, though they are not able to receive it yet, yet they may if
they will, and ask for it by prayer: for the text is, Some have made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of God: whereby it appears that it is in
the will of man, cap. 31. Answer. He speaks clean contrary to the text: for
Christ says, None receive it but to whom it is given, and the words are, qui
capere potest, not, qui velit, he that can receive, not he that will receive.
And they are said to make themselves chaste, not because it is in their own
choice, but being enabled of God, and having received power over their will,
they are said to make themselves chaste, having received power by the spirit of
God: So our Savior says, Come unto me all ye that are laden, Math. 11. and
yet no man comes to Christ, but his father first draws him, John 6.44.
Wherefore it being a peculiar gift of God, all cannot have it, neither are sure
to obtain it, though they ask it by prayer, because we have no promise to
be heard.

Rhemist. When a man is bound to abstain by vow, or other necessary occasion,
as imprisonment, banishment, sickness, no doubt, if he labor for the gift of
continency, he may have it. Ans. They that bind themselves to a rash vow,
have no promise to be heard praying for continency. Secondly, they that are
driven unto any such necessity as you speak of, which they are not a cause of
themselves, neither can avoid, as in long and perpetual sickness, it is
certain that God will give the gift being sought by lawful means: But as for
banishment and imprisonment, they are not of such necessity, but that the
husband is bound to follow the wife, and the wife her husband, Fulk. 1. Cor.
7.6.

Neither are many of those means commendable, which were used in Monkerie: for
some of them were superstitious and unlawful, as they used Physic and
medicine to correct or slake, and extinguish nature in them: Francis was wont
to cover his body with ice and snow, others did whip themselves: This was not
to subdue and tame the body, but to destroy and kill the body, and make it
unfit for other duties. The scripture prescribes no other means but prayer
and fasting, and labor in our vocation. Some of them again used external
exercise of their body, as by fasting, by lying hard, by watching, which in
themselves were not amiss: but they leave the chief and principal, which is
the spiritual means: for the outward ex^rcise of the flesh without this, is
little worth, Coloss. 2.23.

Bellarmin. To believe is no less the gift of God, then to live chaste, yet we
exhort all men to believe, and they do vow and promise it in baptism: why
may they not as well vow continency, although it be a peculiar gift? cap. 31.

Ans. They are both indeed the gifts of God, but one is necessary to
salvation, namely, to believe, and is promised to all that will seek for it:
But the other gift is not necessary, neither has any such promise.

Secondly, Saint Paul calls this a proper gift: But if all men were capable
of it, how could it be called a proper gift? One after this manner, another
after that, says the Apostle. But if every man might attain to that one gift
of continency, they should not all have their proper gift, but all one gift,
and after the same manner. And though Saint Paul should mean, that to live
chastely in wedlock be also a proper gift of God, as Bellarmine urges, and we
deny not: yet it remains still, that the other is a more singular and proper
gift, and is not therefore commonly, and indifferently bestowed upon all.

Thirdly, Saint Paul says, that a man may marry his Virgin if need so
require, 1. Corinthians. 7.37. But if every one, laboring for the gift of
continency, might obtain it, there should then be no necessity of marriage:
which the Apostle here affirms.

Lastly, the Rhemists say, that the marriage of those that have vowed, is the
worst sort of incontinencie and fornication, 1. Corinthians. 7. sect. 8.

Augustine says clean contrary: Non ipsae nuptiae talium damnandae
iudicantur, sed damnatur propositi fraus, damnatur fracta votifides: postremo
damnantur tales, non quia coniugalem fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia
continentiaa primam fide^ irritam fecerunt: de bono viduitat. cap. 9. The
marriages of such are not condemned, but the violating of their vow is
condemned, not because they afterward entered into the league of marriage, but
because they did break the first faith of continency: Augustine says not,
that such marriages are no marriages, but plain adultery and fornication: But
makes the marriage lawful, and reproves their rashness before in making, and
their unsteadfastness now in breaking their vows.

THE FIFTH QVESTION CONCERNING Monastical persons, which do enter into that
profession.
THere are four sorts of people which the papists do offer great wrong unto,
in drawing them to the profession of monkery: First, unto the younger sort,
which have liberty to marry. Secondly, to the children and sons, whom they
make Monks without consent of their parents. Thirdly, they say, married persons,
by mutual consent, may betake themselves to a Monks habit. Fourthly, if
marriage be contracted, not consummate or finished, they may one leave another
without consent first had.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE younger sort are to be admitted to profess
Monkerie.
The Papists.
IF they be come to the years of discretion, they may, men or women at any
Bellarm. cap. 35.

1 Math. 19.14. Suffer little children to come unto me: Ergo, young men and
mayds may become Monks. Bellarm.

Answ. First, the text speaks of little children: but by your confession,
they must be of years of discretion that should enter into your profession: so
are not little children. 2. As though none could come to Christ, but through a
Monks cowle: Nay, I would, they of all men, did not go furthest off from
Christ. It follows also in the text, Of such is the kingdom of heaven: so
by this reason, heaven gates should be open only to Monks and Friars: and
this is the right heresy of the Pelagians, and Manichees, that promised the
kingdom of God not one, but those that cast a way their riches.

2 John Baptist lived from a child in the wilderness: Ergo, lawful for young
ones to profess Monkerie.

Answer: First, John's example is extraordinary, as his office and calling was
singular, and therefore is no more to be imitated and followed in his solitary
life, then in his diet of Locusts and wild honey: He sprang also in his
mothers womb: so, I think, all Monks and Eremites do not. Secondly, it is not
certain at what years John entered into the Wilderness: for he was thirty
year old when he came and preached in the Wilderness, as Matthew writes,
3.1.

The Protestants.
THough we should grant, that a Monastical life were in some persons, and at
some times tolerable among Christians, yet of all other the younger sort, in
whom lust does reign, were most unfit, and not to be admitted unto that kind
of life.

1 Saint Paul would have no widow to be chosen under 60. years, 1. Timoth.
5.9. and I will the younger to marry, verse. 16. Ergo, it is contrary to Saint
Paul's rule, to suffer any such to make vows of continency.

Rhemist. answer. First, it was but a rule for that time, when as yet there
were no Monasteries nor discipline, but young widows, wandered up and down
idly. Answ. First, the same cause that young women had to marry then, they
have now, and therefore the rule is general. Secondly, as though the walls of
Monasteries were able to keep in Virginity: no, it is notoriously known,
that unchaste life has scaled the walls of Nunneries, crept in at windows, and
found muses in the ground.

2 Saint Paul, say they, counsels young widows to marry, not young
Virgins, which having not experience of lust, are not so greatly tempted. Ans.
How chaste your cloister women have been, and free from these tentations, the
stories of former times make mention: and the examples of so many unchaste
milch-Nunnes, and filthy Monks and Friars, are a sufficient proof, Fulk. 1.
Timoth. 5. sect. 11. But all these shifts notwithstanding Saint Paul's rule must
stand, that no widows must be admitted under 60. year old.

2 The Manichees took occasion hereby to insult against the Catholics, because
they admitted so many Virgins to the profession of single life: Certatim ad
hanc professionem ^asincitatis suasionibu^vestris, vt iam pene mayor in
Ecclesijs omnibus virginum apud vos, quam mulierum numerositas habeatur,
August. cor. Faustum. 30.4. Ye labor (say the Manichees) to draw women of
every hand to this profession by your persuasions, that now in your Churches,
the number of professed virgins exceeds the number of women. And hereby the
Manichees that extolled virginity, and condemned marriage, were induced to
think that the Catholic Bishops also were of their opinion.

Likewise Augustine, epistol. 169. makes mention of one Priuius, that because
while he lived among the Catholics, he could not enjoy the speech and company
of two young Nuns, he ran away with them to the Donatists. Thus we see what
good comes to shut young men and women into cloisters.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER CHILdren may enter into profession of Monkerie
without their Parents consent.
The Papists.
IF they be of sufficient age, as the men of 14. year at the least, the women

1 God said to Abraham, get thee out of thy country and from thy fathers
house: Genes. 12. and Christ Math. 10. whosoever loves father or mother more
then me, is not worthy of me. Ergo, children may become Monks, without their
fathers leave, Bellarm. cap. 36.

Answ. First, who would have thought that Abraham was a Monk, but that the
Jesuit says it? Secondly, by the same reason a man may not leave his parents
only, but go out of his country. Thirdly, Abraham was 75. year old at that
time, when he went out of Haran, verse 4. Ergo, we will conclude that none
ought to be made Monks before those years. Fourthly, When God calls any man
to a Monkish life, as Abraham had an especial calling of God, we will give him
good leave to go.

Concerning the other saying of our Savior, it makes nothing for you. First,
Christ speaks of persecution, when a man ought not for love of his friends to
deny Christ: but, I trow you will not grant, that your Monkish life is
persecution: and yet it is after a sort* for the Locusts, which are none other
but Monks and Friars, Apocal. 9. do bite and sting like serpents, that is, do
secretly wound men's consciences. Secondly, a man may leave his parents, as
Christ commands, though he dwell in the same house with them: that is, by
setting his love and affection on heavenly things. Thirdly, do all go to
Christ that come into your Monasteries? nay, I would they went not from Christ:
for they live after another rule, then Christ's: Francis your great founder
erected a new sect of Monkerie, and found out a new rule for them, which he
called regulam Euangelicam, the rule of the Gospel: as though Christ's rule
were not sufficient*

The Protestants.
CHildren ought not by the law of God to make any vow of single and continent
life without the consent and liking of their parents. Luther. Pet. Martyr, Lib.
de caelibat. et votis.

1. By the law of Moses the father had power to disallow the vows which the
daughter made being in his house, Numb. 30.6. Which law was not ceremonious:
for it was grounded upon the Moral law, which commanded all obedience and
duty of the children to the Parents: And that it is not abrogate, it
appears, because the same law is renewed by S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 7. ver.
36.37. Where the Apostle refers the whole matter of keeping a virgin, or
placing of her in marriage to the will of the father, yet so, that he must have
regard unto the necessity, the estate and condition of his virgin. Both these
places do apertly prove, that neither the child can be bestowed in marriage,
nor vowed to virginity, without the consent and determination of the parents.

2. Let us hear what authority Augustine yields to the father over his
children: Agite vicem nostram in domibus vestris: Episcopus inde appellatus est
quia superintendit: vnusquisque ergo in domosua, si caput est domui suae, debet
ad eum pertinere episcopatus officiu^. de Sanct. Ser. 51. You (says Augustine
their Bishop) must supplye our stead in your houses: a Bishop or
Superintendent, is so called because he ouerseeth: therefore every householder,
being the head of his house, ought to play the Bishop in his house. The father
then is a Bishop over his children: shall any man then dare to take any out of
his house, that is his Bishoprike, or any sheep out of his fold, without the
Bishop and sheepheardes consent?

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER Married persons may with mutual consent become
votaries.
The Papists.
WIth mutual consent the man and the wife may separate the^ selves and vow
Bellarm. Cap. 37.

Marie and Joseph were perfitely man and wife, yet by mutual consent they
lived continently all their days: Ergo, it is lawful for married couples to
separate themselves for ever, both agreeing thereunto. Bellarm. cap. 37.

Answ. 1. It appears by the text, that there was no such thing purposed by
Joseph, before he was admonished by the Angel in a dream, but that, as she
was already betrothed: so there was an intent on Joseph's part, that they
should come together. Math. 1.18. But that in the mean time Marie was found
with child by the holy ghost: and so from that time Joseph being a just man
never knew his wife: there was no such purpose or vow before.

2. That this was an extraordinary example, who sees it not? When any man
shall be admonished by an Angel as Joseph was, and shall have the like cause
as Joseph had to abstain, which shall never be, he may be bold to do as
Joseph did.

The Protestants.
THey that are once joined together in marriage, and have made a covenant each
to other before God, can not separate them selves though they both consent,
there being no other cause, but a purpose of single life for more holiness sake.

1. It is flat contrary to S. Paul's rule. 1. Corinthians. 7.5. Defraud not your
selves, except it be with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to
fasting and prayer, and again come together, lest Satan tempt you for your
incontinencie. First the Apostle says directly: they should but separate
themselves for a time. Secondly, we do thus reason out of his words: there is
no cause of separation, but to be given to fasting and prayer: but this may be
done by a separation for a time: neither is it necessary we should always be
given to fasting and prayer, but upon special occasion: therefore perpetual
separation is not needful. 3. They that are long separated, are subject to
fall into tentation: the same cause therefore that moved them first to marry,
for avoiding of incontinencie, ought to move them to come together again:
Therefore it is not good nor lawful they should separat them selves for ever.

2. That which God has coupled, no man ought to put asunder: but they that are
married have made a covenant to God. Pro. 2.17. as well as to themselves, and
are joined by Gods law together: Ergo, they can not dissolve their marriage by
their own power and will, the Lord having an interest therein.

Augustine Thus writes, Non licet excepta causa fornicationis coniugem a
coniuge dirimi, nec sterilem coniugem fas est relinquere, vt faecunda ducatur,
de nupt. and concupiscen. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. It is not lawful for married
couples, one to be separat from another, unless it be for fornication: nor to
leave a barren wife to marry a fruitful. Therefore if fornication only be a
just cause of final separation, there can be no other: If there were any
other, it is most like it should be for procreation of children: But neither
for that cause is a man to leave his wife, Ergo for no other. Therefore, not
for any vow of continency is marriage to be dissolved, or any separation to be
admitted. Bellarm. says, that by their separation, Marriage is not dissolved.
Auns. It is as much dissolved, as by your law in cases of divorce. 1. For these
are your words: for aduoutrie one may dismiss another, but neither party can
marry again, for any cause during life. Rhemist. Math. 19. Sect. 4. So ye
allow only a kind of dismission in the case of adultery, and so you do in
the vowing of continency: And thus you make this cause as forceable as the
other, to break off the Matrimonial duty, which is contrary to the gospel.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER Marriage contracted not consummate, may without
consent be broken for the vow of continency.
The Papists.
cap. 38. Bellarm.

His reason is, because it is lawful for a man to pass from a less perfect
state of life to a more perfect, if it may be done without detriment, as this
may be: for yet they have no children, and the party may as well be married to
another. Bellarm.

Answ. First, a single life is not always the perfecter state, nor to all, as
it is not to them that have not the gift to contain, as it is most like he
has not, that is contracted, and has made promise of marriage: for then all
this needed not. Secondly, though there be none of those impediments named, yet
there is a greater: namely, their faith and promise made each to other before
God, which they ought not to violate. Thirdly, Saint Paul says, If thou be
bound to a wife, seek not to be loosed, 1. Corinthians. 7.27. But they that are
espoused one to the other, are bound, unless you will say, that the covenant
made by them unto God Prouer. 2.17. binds not.

The Protestants.
Matrimony whether ratified only by lawful contract or espousals, or
consummate, ought not any way to be broken with consent or without, for
Monastical profession.

1 Our reason is, because it is perfect marriage already in substance and before
God, which is ratified by contract only and solemn vow and covenant made
each to other: And being thus betrothed, the one gives power of their body to
the other, and now they are no more free. That this marriage is perfect before
God, and in substance, it appears by the law of Moses, by the which a man
defiling a maid betrothed, was to suffer death, as well, as if he had
committed uncleanness with a woman already married. Deuteron. 22. verse 22.23.
And Math. 1.18. Marie that was but betrothed to Joseph, is by the Angel called
his wife, verse. 20.

2 August. says, Coninges fidem sibi pariter debent: Cui fidei tantum
iuristribuit Apostolus, vt eam potestatem appellaret dicens, Mulier non habet
potestate^ sui corporis sed vir, etc. Married couples do owe faith and troth
one to the other: which mutual troth the Apos. makes such account of, that he
gives it ye name of power: saying, The woman has not power of her own body,
but the man, and likewise the man, etc. Augustine says, that by the very
plighting of their troth each to other, they receive mutual power and interest
one of another body. But this troth was plighted before the consummation of
their marriage, Ergo, they had one interest in another then, and can do nothing
one without the consent of the other: de bon. coniugal. cap. 3.

THE SIXTH QVESTION CONCERNING the rules and discipline of Monastical life.
THis question has four parts. First, of the solitary and severe kind of
life in Monks and Eremites. Secondly, of their canonical hours appointed for
prayer. Thirdly, of their habit and apparel. Fourthly, of their maintenance,
whether it ought to come by their labor.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING THE solitary and austere life of Monks.
The Papists.
TO live in solitary places, to wear sackcloth, to be given continually to

1 John Baptist lived in the desert, fared coursely, and was barely apparelled,
he ate Locusts and wild honey, and ware a garment of Camels hair: he was a
right pattern of true Eremites, Bellarm. cap. 39. lib. 2. de Monach.

Answer. First, John's life was not so austere, as they make it: for the place
where he lived was not so solitary, but that there were villages and houses
not far off, as it may appear by the peoples resort unto him: his apparel was
of Camels hair, and was somewhat course, yet no such thing as sackcloth, Fulk
Matt. 3. sect. 1.
or haire-cloth, for of the finest of the Camels hair Chamblets and Grograines
are made that are had in price amongst us: his diet also in eating Locusts and
wild honey was usual in that country. Secondly, we deny not but John lived
an austere life, because he was a preacher of repentance, and had a singular
office to prepare men for the coming of Christ: Therefore his calling being
extraordinary, he cannot be an author of an ordinary calling among Christians.
Thirdly, seeing Christ came eating and drinking, lived amongst men, and was
apparelled as others were, why should Christians rather choose to imitate the
Baptist, who had no office or ministry in the Gospel, Math. 11.11. then our
Savior Christ, whose life and doctrine is for our imitation?

The Protestants.
THat the solitary life of Eremites, in flying the comfortable society of
men, and their rigorous manner in the unnatural chastising of their bodies, is
contrary to the rule of the Gospel, thus we show it.

1 Heb. 10.24.25. Let us consider one another, and provoke one another to good
works, not forsaking the assemblies of our selves together, as the manner of
some is, but exhorting one another: here the Apostle speaks manifestly
against those that shun the society and company of their brethren, because
they must needs fail in the duties of charity, as in exhorting one another,
and provoking to good works: these duties Eremites can not perform, therefore
their life is unlawful: and Math. 24, it is a note of false prophets and false
Christ's to live in the deserts. Again, they that love solitary places, do
offer themselves to tentation, and fall into the snares of the devil: God saw
it was not good for Adam, no not in Paradise, to live alone: but I think their
deserts are far unlike to Paradise: Christ to be tempted of the devil was
lead into the Wilderness: Therefore such places are fit for Satan's working. The
preacher says, Two are better then one, for if one overcome him, two shall
stand against him, Eccles. 4.12. We are better able being aided by our brethren
to resist Satan then being alone: We ought not then to tempt God, and not
knowing our own strength, to go forth into solitary places, and as it were
provoke Satan to the Combat.

2 That cruel and inhumane kind of chastising their bodies by fasting and other
discipline utterly is unlawful. The Monks called Grandimo^tenses, did wear
shirts of maile next their bodies, the Charter Monks, haire-cloth: the Monks
Flagellants went bare-foote in linen shirts, leaving an open place in the
back where they did daily whip themselves before the people, till the blood
followed. Moses a certain Abbot did so afflict his body with fasting and
watching, that for 2. or 3. days together many times he had no appetite at all
to his meat, neither could sleep. An other Eremite (as Cassianus writes) did
purpose with himself not to eat meat, unless he had some guest or stranger
with him, and so was constrained to abstain sometime five days together: two
other Monastical brethren, trauayling in the desert of Thebaide, did vow not
to take any sustenance, but such as God should send them: and as they went, a
certain wild people, Fox. p. 154.
contrary to their custom, offered them meat, the one took it as sent of
God, the other refused it, because he thought it to be sent rather of man then
of God, and so died.

Basilius magnus, and Gregor. Nazianzene, did so pluck down themselves by
immoderate fasting, that when they were called to be Bishops they were not
able to sustain the labor thereof.

Where in all the scriptures learned these men, thus to punish their bodies?
this is not with Saint Paul to subdue and bring under the flesh: but to kill
and destroy it: contrary to that saying of Saint Paul* No man ever yet hated
his own flesh, Ephe. 5.29.
but loves and cherishes it: see I pray you, how these men loved and
cherished their bodies?

Let us hear what Aug. says, Tudeseris res humanas, and segregas te, vt nemo
te videat: Cui proderis? tu ad hoc peruenisses, si nemo tibi profuisset? In
Psalm. 49.
An quia veloces pedes tibi videris habuisse ad transeundum, praecisurus es
pontem? Thou leauest the care of humane things, and separatest thy self that
no man should see thee: to whom do thou good in so do doing? Had thou
come to this perfection thy self if no man had done thee good? because thou
have quickly passed over, will thou cut off the bridge, that no man else should
pass? See then Augustine makes the heremiticall life altogether unprofitable
to men.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the habit and shauing of Monks.
The Papists.
BOth these superstitious customs, for Monks to be known by their coules and
Bellarm. cap. 40. Our Rhem. use the same reason for shaven crowns, that it is a
note of distinction between the Clergy and laymen, annot. 1. Pet. 5. sect. 2.
And for priestlike garnents, they allege out of Apocal. 1. verse. 13. how
Christ appeared to John vested in a priestlike garment.

Ans. 1. We deny not, but that it is convenient for Ministers to be discerned
from others even in their apparel: which may be done by the gravity and
modesty thereof in color, in plainnes, not necessary to bring in strange and
ridiculous fashions of attire, such as Monks coules are: yet Ministers are
better discerned by other things, then their apparel, as they are described by
S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3. But as for any such distinction of monks we allow not: for
the very calling it self ought to be abolished. As for shaven crowns and
beards, they are but tokens of Baals priests, make the best of them you can.

2 Christ appeared in a long garment down to the feet: which they translate a
priestlike garment, as though Christ were then going to Mass: The word is,
poderes, which signifies a long vesture, down to the feet, which was one of
the high priests garments, and hereby is signified the priesthood of Christ:
but what is this to the attire of Monks or priests? We deny not but long
garments for their comlines are fit for Ministers, according to the fashion of
the country, but not as necessary, representing more holiness: for in the
East countries, short garments were grave and comely enough: as the prophets
had their mantles: and S. Paul makes mention of his cloak. 2. Tim. 4.13.

The Protestants.
WE condemn both the habit and shauing of the Monks as superstitious, even
as their whole life and profession is.

1 There is no one precept in the new testament concerning forms and fashions
of apparel to be used by Clergy men, but only in general terms, that they
should be modest and sober, and grave in their behavior, 1. Tim. 3. The
Levites and priests indeed in the law, had rules and precepts set them both
for their vestures in the temple, and their ordinary apparel, Numb. 15.39.
that it should be made with fringes in remembrance of the commandments. But
who sees not that such significations of apparel were Leuitical, and merely
ceremonious? such is the habit of Monks: for their coules, says the Jesuit,
signify their innocence, like unto children that are covered with vailes like
unto coules. But to place any religion or holiness in apparel, as they did,
(for it was thought a great privilege to be buried in a Monks coule) is
abominable superstition: for such Monkish superstition our Savior rebuked the
Pharisees, Math. 23.5. All their works they do, to be seen of men: for they
make their Phylacteries broad, and make long the fringes of their garments. If
the Pharisees did abuse to vain-glorie and superstition, that kind of apparel
which the law commanded: there can be no good use of Monkish habites, which
the Gospel neither commends nor commands.

As for shaven crowns: they were directly forbidden by the law of Moses, not
only to round the tufts of their beard, as the Gentiles did, Leu. 19.27. but
not to shave their beard, or make bald their head, Leuit. 21.5. And then it was
a sign of holiness not to cut the hair, as in the Nazarites it appears, Number.
6. It was then the custom of the heathen and of their Idolatrous priests to
shave themselves: How then dare the papists make that a sign of holiness now,
which was a sign of prophanenes, and heathennes then? And is their religion so
beggarly, that they must needs borrow their ceremonies of the heathen?

2 The great variety of their habits, and foolish significations of their
shauings, do show what beginning they had. The Monks of Basiles order went in
white, of Benets rule in black, the Cistercians had white rotchets upon a black
coat: the Grandimo^tenses a coat of mailes, Fox. p. 154.
with a black cloak upon. Some starred Monks: some Jesuits, with a white
girdle, and a russet coule: some Celestines all in blew, both cloak, coule and
cap. The Franciscanes did wear ropes for girdles and treen shoes.

They render also diverse reasons of their shaven crowns: some say, it
resembles Christ's crown of thorns: some by shauing the hair, do signify
the mortifiyng of the affections, as cutting of things that are superfluous:
some by baring of the head, the simplicity and plainnes of life. Bellarm.
says, it is a sign of repentance and conversion. Is not here good stuff,
think you? Such rites, such ceremonies, such significations, such humane
traditions, I think the Pharisees would have abhorred. For these are worse then
their washing of tables, brazen vessels, pots, cups, and such like: And yet our
Savior says of them, that they did lay the commandment of God apart, to
establish their own traditions, Mark. 7.8.

Lastly, let August. speak: Concerning the habit of ecclesiastical persons,
thus he writes: Aeque laicis patet coeli palatium dei mandata seruantibus quam
sanctimoniali* habitu praeditis sacerdotibus. De salutar. docum. cap. 8. The
heavenly palace is as well open for Lay men, keeping the commandments of God,
as for Priests in their holy attire. What profits it then, I pray you, to be
buried in a Monks coule? Again, Augustine found fault with certain dissolute
Monks in that time, that suffered their hair to grow long: Against whom he
urges the saying of S. Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11.14. Does not nature it self teach
you, that it is a shame for a man to have long hair? And so he concludes: Hoc
quo pertinet, quaeso, tam aperte contra Apostoli praecepta comari? What meaning
have you in this, to suffer your hair to grow, contrary to the precept of the
Apostle? But this precept did no more belong to Monks, then all other
Christians. Concerning the shauing of Monks, Augustine has not one word at
all, but of polling, and clipping the hair: he speaks only against certain
crinitos fratres, that nourished their hair and suffered it to grow of length.

Nay, our Rhemists love shauing so well, that they defend the shauing of
Nuns, and would prove it out of Hierome, who indeed speaks of the cutting
of their hair, not for any religion, but to avoid certain little beasts that
bred between the skin and the hair, (you know what beasts they are)
because they used not the bathes, nor oil, as other women did, Fulk. 2.
Thessal. 3. sect. 2. But whatsoever Hierome says, it is flat contrary to
Saint Paul's rule, who says, It is a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven,
1. Cor. 14.6.

THE THIRD PART OF THE MONKS Canonical hours.
The Papists.
THe 3.6.9. hours, they say, are consecrated and devoted to prayer, which they
call their Canonical hours: at the 3. hour the holy Ghost descended: at Peter
went up to the top of the house: and at the 9. hour Peter and John went up to
pray in the temple, Act. 3.1. And Daniel used to pray thrice in the day, Dan.
6.10. Ergo, those times ought to be consecrate to prayer, Rhemist. Act. 10.
sect. 6.

Ans. First, we deny that it can be gathered by any of those places, that
these hours only ought to be set apart for prayer. Peter and John went up at
the 9. hour, which was the time of the evening sacrifice, when the religious
Jews went up to pray. Secondly, Daniel prayed three times a day, but at what
hours the text speaks not: yet by this example, and by the other proofs
alleged, we do gather, that at the 3.6.9. hour, that is not precisely at
any of these times, but in the morning, when men rise up to their labors, at
noone before their repast, and at night when they go to rest, it is meet and
convenient that men should make their prayers unto God, and at other times also
when they find themselves fit. Thirdly, the popish service has nothing but
the names of these hours: for they are all finished in the forenoone, they
have their Nocturnes at midnight, their Prime early in the morning, whereas the
sixth hour is at high noone, the ninth hour is the third hour before the
Suns set, Fulk. ibid.

The Protestants.
WE deny not but that set times of public prayer are commendable, as we have
our forenoone, and afternoon service: But at unseasonable hours, as at
midnight, or the rising of the Sun, to call the people together, when they
cannot conveniently be assembled, is but a superstitious custom. Again, it is
profitable for men in the morning, noone, evening, though not precisely at any
set hours, to direct their prayers unto God: but so to stint men's prayers, as
that they ought of necessity to keep their hours, as though their prayers
were then more available, it has no ground out of scripture.

1 S. Paul says, Pray continually, 1. Thessal. 5.17. Ergo, it is lawful to
pray at all times, and one time as fit for prayer as another, if a man be
prepared. Again, the same Apostle says: I will that the men every where lift
up pure hands without wrath and doubting, 1. Timoth. 2.8. Out of these words we
gather two arguments: First, prayers are no more bound to times, then to
places: a man may pray every where, Ergo, at every time. Secondly, a man ought
not to pray but when he is void of wrath, and is otherwise prepared: but it may
be that at the stinted hours, of the 3.6.9. a man may be in wrath, and
otherwise not fit, therefore he is not necessarily to be tied to those hours.

2 Augustine thus writes: Cum quisque orationem quaerit, collocat membra sicut
ei occurrerit. Cum autem non quaeritur, sed infertur appetitus orandi: hoc est,
cum repent aliquid venit in mentem, quocumque modo inuenerit hominem, non est
vtique differenda oration. Lib. 2. ad Simplician. quaest. 4. When any man
desires to pray, let him dispose his body as he thinks best: But when as it
comes not of his desire and seeking, but suddenly his affection is stirred up
to pray, howsoever prayer finds him (that is, whether standing or sitting) he
must not in any case defer it and put it off to another time. This then is
Augustines mind, that a man should pray so often as he has a disposition
thereunto, and not defer his prayer, as they do, which bind themselves to
Canonical hours.

THE FOVRTH PART, CONCERNING THE maintenance of Monks.
The Papists.
Bellarm. cap. 41.42. Rhemists, Thessal. 2.3. sect. 2. But they may either live
of the lands given to their houses, or else by their religious begging, cap. 44.

1 Monks are not now bound to work, having wherewithal to live beside of
lands given unto them, because most of them are Priests, and do serve at the
Altar, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, we grant that Ministers of the Gospel laboring in the word and
Sacraments, ought to be maintained by the Gospel: But such are few or none of
your Monks, who being fit for no other service either in the Church or
commonwealth, are thrust into Monasteries by their friends: they are idolatrous
Priests, and serve little better then at Baals altar. If any of them be fit for
the Ministry, as we deny not but some have come out of your Cloisters, as
Luther, Bucer, P. Martyr, by whom the Church of God has received much good:
but they must come first out of your Dens, and relinquish their Monkish life,
and labor amongst the people: so shall they be no more regular, but secular
priests, as you term them. Secondly, the lands which were bestowed upon them,
were first given upon an evil intent, that by their prayers they should
redeem the souls of their founders, who most of them had committed some
notable sin, and so pro remedio animaru^, to help their souls, they built
Monasteries: So King Ethelstane for killing his brother Edwin, built two
Monasteries, Middleton and Michelney for his soul, Fox. page 152. King Offa
for killing Ethelbert a good Prince, who came peaceably for the despousage of
Atheldred his daughter, being pricked in conscience, gave the first Peter pence
to Rome, page 114. Those lands therefore being given first for ungodly
purposes, and continued by them for idolatrous uses, ought clean to be taken
from them, and to be bestowed upon better uses, neither is it lawful for them
in that sort to enjoy them.

2 They prove the impudent begging of Friars, which they call religious
begging, to be lawful and commendable, by the example of Christ, who had not a
place where to put his head, Luke 9. and of his Apostles, that were charged not
to possess gold or silver in their purses, Math. 10. Bellarm. cap. 45.

Ans. First, I pray you where ever did you read that Christ went a begging? he
lived not of alms, but gave alms, and Judas was the almesman, though he played
his part but evil. Augustine flatly denies that you avouch: He says that
Christ's bag was as Fiscus regis, even as the Kings Exchequer: and that what
was given him, was as due as tribute money to the Prince: But the King, I trow,
is not a beggar. Nisi putetis, (says he) quia dominus petebat and indigebat,
cui seruiebant angeli, qui de quinque panibus tot millia pauit. Unless you
think (says he) that Christ begged, and wanted, whom the Angels served, and
who fed with five loaves not a few thousands, in Psalm. 146. Secondly, if the
Apostles were beggars, then they lived of alms, but that is untrue: for Christ
says, The labourer is worthy of his hire: but the laborers wages is earned
and deserved, it is no alms.

The Protestants.
FIrst we say, that no idle persons ought to be maintained in a Christian
commonwealth, but they that have not any other necessary calling, should labor
with their hands, and therefore Monks that are fit for no other service in the
Church, ought to labor and work.

1 Saint Paul gives a general rule: He that will not work, let him not eat,
2. Thessal. 3.10. speaking of those that have no necessary calling in the
Church: Ergo, Monks must work, or else by S. Paul's rule, not eat. The
Rhemists answer, that this is but a natural admonition or counsel. Nay, it is
a precept and commandment, that all in their several places and callings
should labor, none live idly: for S. Paul says not, this I counseled you,
but this I warned you of, or denounced unto you, and he calls those that
followed not this rule, inordinate walkers.

2 Again, if you will needs have Monks, let them be as they were in times
past: for then they were lay men and labored with their hands, till anno. 606.
when Boniface made a decree that Monks might use the office of preaching and
Christening: but before that, Monks were forbidden by the general Council of
Chalcedon, not to entermeddle with matters Ecclesiastical, Fox. page 154. But
perhaps they will say, as they do, that some of them work, as their Nuns:
And I pray you, why not their Monks too? I think their great bellies hinder
them. Neither are their Monks altogether idle; for some of them in painting,
caruing, grauing, and garnishing their Idols, are very cunning. But, according
to the saying, they might better be idle then ill occupied, and as good never a
whit, as never the better.

3. Neither is it to be permitted, that Friars should get their living by
begging: for what are they else but valiant beggars? First, there ought to be no
beggars in the commonwealth: as Deuteron. 15. Though the Lord say, that they
should never be without poor or beggars, which should want their help, verse.
11. Yet verse. 5. this charge is given, that by them, that is, their default,
there should not be a beggar in Israel: they should so provide for the poor,
that they need not go a begging. There are also positive laws, to restrain
the number of beggars, and therefore there is no reason, that by a number of
idle vagrant persons, belli-god Friars, that begging order should be enlarged.
Secondly, but seeing it can not be chosen, but there must needs be some
beggars: they ought not to be young sturdie lubbers, that are able to work,
as most of the Friars were, but such as are described, Luke 14.21. where the
King says to his servants, Go out quickly, and bring hither the poor, the
maimed, the halt, the blind: Ergo, such lusty fellows ought to live by the
sweat of their brows, not to eat up the bread of the poor. Lastly, in the
sermons, Ad fratres in eremo, which are ascribed to Augustine, thus we read:
Eia fratres mei, semper boni aliquid facite, quem tadet orare, Sermon. 16.
vel psallere non desistat, quem taedet orare, vel psallere, manibus laborare
non desistat. My brethren, always be ye doing of some good; if you be weary
of praying, sing, if of singing, then labor with your hands. And in the same
place, old men only of 80. year old are exempted from working. And in another
place Augustine shows, that the Monks in his time did so plye their work,
Vsque adeo, vt etiam naues oneratas in ea loca mittant, qua inopes incolunt:
that they sent ships laden with necessaries, unto those places where the
poor inhabited. De morib. eccles. cap. 32. Ergo, in Augustines time Monks
lived not by begging, but with labor of their hands.

Thus by Gods goodness we have finished this question, and this whole
Controversy: One other question remains: whether the Monastical life be
meritorious or not: which we have referred to another place, when we shall come
to the question of Virginity in general and the privileges thereof.

THE SEVENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE.
MAny things, which Bellarmine in this controversy labors to prove, are
agreed upon between us and our adversaries, and therefore we will spend no
time in them.

1 We teach, as well as they, that there ought to be Magistrates, Princes and
governors amongst Christians, contrary to that which the Anabaptists hold,
that there ought to be equality among Christians: The holy Ghost, Judge. 17.6.
and 19.1. makes this the cause of al disorder, At that time in Israel there
was no King amongst them, but every man did that which seemed good in his own
eyes.

2 We do hold, that even wicked Kings and Tyrants have power over the goods
and lives of men, neither that it is lawful to disobey them, but in matters
only belonging to our conscience, where it is better to obey God then men,
Jeremy 27.6. I have given, says the Lord, all these lands to Nabuchadnezzar.

3 Concerning the power of Princes, we grant, that they may make laws and
ordinances to govern the people by, Prou. 8.15. that they may punish the
offenders of their laws, Romans 13. They do not bear the sword for naught:
That it is lawful for Christian Princes, upon just occasion, to wage battle,
Luke 3.14. John Baptist does not condemn the calling of Soldiers, but
teaches them to use it aright.

These things then being agreed upon on both sides: the several questions,
wherein we differ from them, and they from the truth, are these.

1 Concerning the authority of the Prince in Ecclesiastical matters, three
parts of the question. First, whether he have power over persons
Ecclesiastical. Secondly, whether over their goods. Thirdly, whether in
Ecclesiastical causes.

2 Whether the civil Magistrate may prosecute heretics to death: and whether
he ought to be the Judge of heretics, with other like questions.

3 Whether the positive and civil laws of Princes do bind their subjects
and oblige them simply in conscience. This matter we have discussed before,
Controuer. 4. quaest. 7. part. 1.

4 Whether the Pope ought or may excommunicate the Prince, or Emperor, or
otherwise has any temporal jurisdiction above him: this question also is
handled before, Controu. 4. quaest. 8. part. 1.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERNING THE AVthoritie of the Prince in Ecclesiastical
matters.
THis question has three parts. First, whether he have power over the persons
Ecclesiastical. Secondly, whether over their goods. Thirdly, whether the
Prince be chief in causes Ecclesiastical.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING THE AVTHOritie of the civil Magistrate over
Ecclesiastical persons.
The Papists.
THe Clergy is not bound to keep and observe the civil and positive laws
Bellarm. de Clericis, cap. 28.

It is absurd (says the Jesuit) that the sheep should judge the shepherd,
Bellarm. And the Apostle wills all men to obey their Bishops and overseers,
Heb. 13.17. and to submit themselves unto them, from which rule neither Kings
nor Emperors are exe^pted: Prelates must be obeyed, Ergo, not obey Rhemist.
ibid.

Ans. First, the obedience here required we acknowledge, that it ought to be
yielded by Kings and Emperors to those that have the oversight of their
souls: for the Prince is bound to receive and believe all true doctrine which
is taught by the Pastors and Bishops of the Church, agreeable to the word of
God, under pain of damnation: and the Pastors are bound under the like pain
to obey the Princes laws, made according to the word of God. Secondly,
wherefore the spiritual obedience of the civil Magistrate to the word of God,
taught by the Pastors of the Church, is no exemption of them from their civil
obedience: for every soul is subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. Fulk.
annot. 13. Heb. sect. 9

The Protestants.
THat Ecclesiastical persons are subject to temporal governors, and are to
be judged by their laws, the scriptures speak plainly.

1 Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: Ergo, Bishops,
yea the Pope himself, if he have a soul. The like says S. Peter, 1.2.13.
Submit your selves to all manner ordinance. Solomon removed Abiathar from the
Priesthood, and put in Sadock. Paul appealed, and submitted himself to Caesar.
Again, if Priests offend and commit any grievous sin, as of murder, theft,
who shall punish them? The civil Magistrate only bears the sword: They must
either grant, that priests are no evil doers, which were to too gross: or if
they be, that they are under the civil Magistrates power: for he is the
Minister of God to take vengeance upon every evil doer, Romans 13.4.

In Augustines time, the controversies between the Catholic and Donatist
Bishops, were committed to the judgment of the Emperor. Ait quidam, Epistol.
162
says he, Non debuit Episcopus proconsulari iudicio purgari: Quasi vero ipse
sibi hoc comparauerit, ac non Imperator ita quaeri iusserat, ad cuius curam, de
qua rationem deo red liturus est res illa maxim pertinebat. But, says one, a
Bishop ought not to have been purged before the Proconsul, or civil
Magistrate: As though (says Augustine) the Proconsul did of himself
intermeddle in this matter, and was not commanded rather of the Emperor so to
do: unto whose charge that matter principally appertained, and whereof he
shall make account unto God: Ergo, by his sentence, the cause of the Bishop
principally was to be judged by the Emperor.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER THE PRINCE have power over Ecclesiastical goods.
The Papists.
THe goods of the Clergy both secular and Ecclesiastical, are and ought to
Rhemist. annot. Romans 13. sect. 5. Bellarm. de Clericis. cap. 28.

Genes. 47.22. and 27. The lands of the Priests were exempted from paying
tribute: Ergo, it seems that this custom is grounded upon the law of nature,
Bellarm.

Ans. First, the Hebrew word signifies rather Presidents, such as were the
Kings officers, not Priests, as Tremellius shows: who were maintained by the
Kings provision, being officers of his household: for Genes. 41.45. Joseph is
said to marry the daughter of Potyphar prince, not priest of On. The same word
Cohen is there used: for it is not like that Joseph would match himself with
an idolatrous priests daughter. Secondly, but be it granted, this was but a
politic constitution for that country: other Princes are not bound to Pharao
his law. Thirdly, they gain nothing by this, but that it is an humane
constitution.

The Protestants.
THat Princes have authority to punish Ecclesiastical persons offending in
their goods; either by displacing them, or by converting the Church possessions
by them abused, to better uses, we have showed before, Contr. 5. quest. 6.
part. 1. And that their goods ought to pay tribute, subsidy, tax, unto the
prince, thus now it is proved.

1 Our Savior Christ paid poll money, Math. 17.25. Romans 13. Every soul ought
to be subject to the higher powers, and there verse. 5. paying of tribute is
made a part of subjection: the argument therefore thus follows: Clergy men
are subject to Princes, therefore they ought to pay tribute.

2 Ex concessis, we reason thus from their own confession: That which Princes
gave to the Church, upon good cause they may take away: but this immunitie, not
to pay tribute, was first granted, as they confess, to the Church, by Kings
and Princes: Ergo, they have the same right, having just occasion, to take it
from them again. What Augustines judgment is, we have seen in the place
before alleged.

THE THIRD PART, CONCERNING THE PRINCES authority in causes Ecclesiastical.
The Papists.
Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 14.16. Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 1. cap. 7.

Argum.
1 Kings and Princes may in their own persons execute if they will, whatsoever
their inferior officers do, as to hear and determine causes, as the Judges
and other Magistrates do: but the Prince cannot execute any Ecclesiastical
function, as to preach, baptize: Ergo, he has no authority in causes
Ecclesiastical: for how can the Prince impart that to others, whereof he is
himself incapable, as to give Bishops and Pastors power to ordain, to preach,
and such like, Bellarm. Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, the authority of civil Magistrates does not give any thing to
Ecclesiastical Ministers, which appertains to their office, as to ordain,
preach, baptize, neither is the Prince to deal in these offices: yet may the
civil Magistrates command them to execute their charge and duties according
to the word of God. Wherefore it follows not, Princes cannot execute the
pastoral duties themselves: Ergo, they ought not to see them executed. David,
Solomon, Iehosophat, Ezechia, commanded the Priests to execute their office
according to the law of God, though it was not lawful for them, neither did
they execute any thing proper to the Priests office in their own persons;
neither does any Christian Prince challenge any such right in Ecclesiastical
functions: wherefore it is an impudent slander of Bellarmine, which he gives
forth of our Queen, Iam re ipsa Caluinistis in Anglia mulier quaedam summus
pontifex. And now (says he) in England the Caluinists have a certain woman
for their chief Bishop. De notis eccles. lib. 4. cap. 9.

2 It does not follow, that the Prince might as well execute Ecclesiastical
offices, as he may civil in his own person, if he have authority over both:
No more then it follows, that because Ecclesiastical persons do teach both
civil Magistrates and Church officers their duties, and may in their own
persons execute the one, that is, spiritual duties, that they may as well
intermeddle in the other: But these two offices of Civil and Ecclesiastical
government are distinguished, and must not be confounded. The Prince, though he
have authority to command Ecclesiastical persons, yet being a civil
Magistrate, is not to deal with the execution of spiritual duties. Bishops
and pastors likewise have a spiritual charge over kings and princes, to show
the^ their duties out of Gods word, yet because they are persons
Ecclesiastical, they ought not to meddle with mere Civil duties. The Prince
has the sovereignty of external government in all causes and over all
persons, yet not alike, for Civil offices he may both command and execute;
Ecclesiastical duties he commands only: Bishops and pastors have also a
spiritual charge over all, prescribing out of Gods word as well the duty of
Magistrates, as of Ministers, but not alike, for the one they may fully
execute, so may they not the other. The head in the natural body, resembles
the Prince in the commonwealth, in some sense: the head gives moving to the
whole body and all the parts thereof: but to the principal parts in the head
the eyes, tongue, ears, it gives beside the faculty of moving, the sense
also of seeing, tasting, hearing: So in the commonwealth, by the Princes
authority all persons are kept in order, and urged to look to their charge,
both civil officers and spiritual, as all the parts of the body receive
moving from the head: But the civil officers receive power and authority
beside, and their very offices of the King, as the parts in the head, receive
sense from their fountain: but Ecclesiastical Ministers receive not their
offices from the Prince, or any mortal man, but they have their calling
according to the order of the Church of God.

Argum. 2. For the space of 300. years the Church after Christ had no
Christian governors, but all Heathen and Idol worshippers, yet then the
Church was established, and prevailed: Ergo, Civil Magistrates ought not to
deal in Ecclesiastical affairs, Bellarmine.

Ans. 1. Even then also, the Heathen Emperors had authority in Church
matters, and if they had commanded any thing agreeable to true religion, they
should have been obeyed: as Cyrus in the law which he made for building the
temple, Ezra. 1. Darius the Median, for worshipping the true God, Dan. 6. Fulk.
Romans 13. sect. 3. The heathen Emperors then had the same power, but they knew
not how to use it: Christian Princes do succeed them in the same office, but
are better taught by the word of God how to exercise the sword. Secondly, we
deny not but that in the time of persecution all things necessary for the
spiritual building thereof may be had, without the Magistrate, as a Vineyard
may bring forth fruit without an hedge, but it cannot enjoy peace, nor be in a
perfect estate, in respect of the external government, but under good
Magistrates, as the Vineyard may soon be spoiled, the wild bore and the beasts
of the field may break in upon it having no hedge. The child being in the
womb, though it have as yet small use of the head, but is fed by the navel,
which is in steed of the mouth, has in it self the lineaments and proportion
of a humane body, yet it wants the perfect beauty, till it be borne and
come forth, and the head receive his office: So may the Church have a being in
persecution, and the want of the civil head may be otherwise supplied, but it
is not beautiful till the head be set up, and the sword put into the Christian
Magistrates hand.

Argum. 3. Princes have no cure nor charge of souls: Ergo, they are not to
meddle with Ecclesiastical laws, Rhemist. annot. 1. Corinthians. 14. sect. 16.

Ans. Parents have charge over the souls of their children, for they are
charged to bring them up in the instruction and information of the Lord, Ephesians.
6.4. Therefore Princes also have directly charge of the souls of their
subjects according to their place and calling, by providing and making good
Ecclesiastical laws, and compelling them to the true service of God: As the
Ecclesiastical Ministers in another kind, and more properly are said to have
the cure of souls, in feeding and instructing the people, Fulk. ibid.

The Protestants.
THe civil Magistrate, by the word of God, has power to make and constitute
Ecclesiastical laws, and to establish true religion, and see that all persons
under their government do faithfully execute their charge: To say therefore
that the Church officers are to devise laws concerning religion, and the
Prince only to execute them, is to make the Prince their servant, and does
derogate too much from the princely authority: Neither do we give unto the
Prince absolute power to make Ecclesiastical laws: for first, the Prince is
not to prescribe what laws he lists to the Church, Fulk. Hebr. 13.9.
but such as only may require the true worship of God. Secondly, that it is
expedient and meet, according to the commendable custom of this land, that
the godly learned of the Clergy should be consulted withal, in establishing
of Ecclesiastical ordinances, unless it be in such a corrupt time, when the
Church governors are enemies to religion, for then the Prince, not staying
upon their judgment, ought to reform religion according to the word of God,
as we see it was lawfully and godly practiced by King Henry the 8. Thirdly, we
do make exception of all such Ecclesiastical canons and ordinances, the
making whereof does properly belong to the office of Bishops and governors of
the Church: for our meaning is not, that it is not lawful for Ecclesiastical
Ministers, to make Ecclesiastical decrees, which do properly concern their
office, as concerning the censures of the Church, excommunication, suspension,
absoluing, binding, loosing, and such like, which things are incident to their
pastoral office: and yet we grant, that the Prince has even in these cases an
ouerruling hand, to see that none abuse their pastoral office. But that any
laws ought to be made without the authority of the prince, which the prince
is bound, to execute, we utterly deny: And so we conclude, that the civil
Magistrate has power over all persons and in all causes, both temporal and
ecclesiastical, in such manner as we have said.

1 S. Paul wills, that prayers should be made for Kings and Princes, that
under them we may lead a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1. Tim.
2.2. Ergo, it is their duty as well to procure religion by their authority,
as civil honesty. Again, He bears not the sword for naught, Romans 13.4. He
has power to punish al evil doers: therefore also to correct evil ministers,
and to make Ecclesiastical laws: for otherwise he should have no full power to
correct the transgressors thereof.

2 We read that Joshua, David, Solomon, Iosia, did deal in ecclesiastical
matters, which concerned religion and the worship of God. Bellarm. They did it
by an extraordinary authority, not as Kings, but as Prophets. Nay, it was an
ordinary power: for all the good kings of Judah beside, as Iehosaphat,
Hezekiah, and others, did take care of religion: and this was so properly
annexed to the kingly office, that idolatrous kings also took upon them to
command false religion, as Jeroboam set up two golden calves, and Ahaz king of
Judah commanded Vriah the high Priest to make an Altar according to the
pattern which he sent from Damascus, 2. King. 16.11. This power also was
afterward exercised by Christian Kings and Emperors: as Constantinus,
Theodosius, Martianus, made laws for the Church, Fulk. annot. 1. Cor. 14.
sect. 16. Iustinianus the Emperor decreed many things concerning Church
affairs: as how excommunication should be used, how Bishops and Priests should
be ordained, concerning the order and manner of funerals: that the holy
mysteries should not be done in private houses. Carolus magnus decreed, that
only the Canonical books of scripture should be read in the Church: he
charge all Bishops and priests to preach the word. Lodouicus Pius his son,
and Emperor after him, ordained that no entry should be made into the Church
by Simonie: Fox. page 7.
that Bishops should be chosen by the free election of the Clergy and the
people. All these Emperors did lawfully exercise their princely authority in
Ecclesiastical matters: Ergo, other princes may do the same still.

3 Augustine says, Epistol. 50. Quis mente sobrius etc? Who in his right wits
would say to the King, It pertains not to you, who in your kingdom is
religious or sacrilegious, to whom it cannot be said, let it not pertain unto
you, who in your kingdom will be chaste or unchaste? And in another place, Ad
fratres in erem. sermon. 14. Tunc iustitia dicitur gladius ex vtraque part
acutus, quia hominis defendit corpus ab exterioribus iniurijs, and animam a
spiritualibus molestijs. Then justice is rightly called a sword with a double
edge, because it does both defend the body from external and corporal
wrongs, and the soul from spiritual vexation: That is, the sword of the
Magistrate serves as well to prune the Church, and to cut off all errors and
heresies in religion, as to destroy the vices and corruptions in manners.

AN APPENDIX OR FOVRTH PART OF THE QVEstion, whether the Prince in any good
sense may be called the head of his kingdom, and consequently of the Church in
his kingdom.
The Papists.
THey do appropriate this title, to be called heads of the universal Church,
to the Pope of Rome, most blasphemouslie: for there can be no head of the
universal body but Christ: But for Princes to be called the head, that is,
chief governors of the Churches in their kingdoms, they do abhor it.
Whereupon Bellarmine is so saucie as to check and control King Henry the 8.
because he was called the head of the English Church.

1 The heathen Emperors were not heads of the Church, being not so much as
members thereof: therefore neither Christian Magistrates, which do succeed
them in that authority, Rhemist. annot. 1. Pet. 2. sect. 6.

Ans. 1. The argument follows not: they were no true members of the Church,
therefore could not be heads, that is, have the sovereignty of the external
government: for wicked kings and princes do keep their magistracy and
government still: who though they be not true members of the Catholic Church,
yet ought to be obeyed as princes. 2. Though the metaphorical name of head
agreed not unto them, yet were they by Gods ordinance appointed to be heads and
governors of his people and protectors of his Church, and should have been, if
they had not abused their authority. 3. Christian princes, though they have
the same authority, which they had, yet now exercising the sword according to
Gods law, and being Nurses of the Church, may use and retain those princely
titles in deed, to be called Patrones and defenders of the faith, and head,
that is, chief governors and protectors of the Church: which by right had
been due unto the other, if they had used their authority as they should.

2 Christian princes are members of the Church, Ergo, not heads: for if they
were heads, how could the Church stand without them, as it did in the time of
persecution?

Ans. First, as though the head is not a member and part of the body, though a
principal one: so the Prince is a member of the Church, but a principal and
chief member, not of the invisible Church, for so Christ is only head, but of
a particular visible Church. Secondly, we deny not but that the invisible and
spiritual Church may consist without the Magistrate, but a visible,
flourishing, and wel-gouerned Church cannot want a head or chief governor,
that is as a wall or hedge unto it.

The Protestants.
TO be head of the universal Church is proper only to Christ, and in that
sense is not communicable to any creature: for he is to his Church, as the head
to the natural body, giving unto it influence of grace, spirit and life: he
is therefore the only mystical head of the universal Church: But in another
sense the Prince may be said to be the head and chief governor of his
kingdom, and of that particular visible Church, where he is king: We make him
neither the mystical head, which is only Christ, (far be that blasphemy
from us) nor a ministerial head, as they make the Pope to be as Christ's
Vicegerent in the Church; but a political head, to keep and preserve the
peace of the Church, and to see that every member do his office and duty.
But this name we confess is improperly given to the Prince, neither were we
the first inuentors of it: for the papists first gave it to Henry the 8. And
there are other titles which do sufficiently express the office of the
Prince, and may be more safely used. If any man think it too high a name for
any mortal man, and so not to be given to any, we will not greatly contend
about it: But if any deny it to the Prince, as thereby to abridge her of her
power in Ecclesiastical matters, we do stand stiffely for it; and are bold to
affirm, that with much better right is this title attributed to the civil
Magistrate then it was to the Pope: yea, and that it has been of old given in
a modest and sober sense to Kings and Princes, and may with a favorable
exposition be still: and Princes also may receive this honor and title at
their subjects hands, with protestation of their Christian meaning herein.

1 This phrase, for the King to be called the head, is not unusual in
scripture, 1. Sam. 15.17. Saul is said to be the head of the tribes. Psalm.
18.43. David the head of the nations: Isay. 9.15. The Prince or honorable man
the head of the people: yea Princes are called Gods, Psalm. 82.2. which is a
name of greater Sovereignty, then to be called heads. Bellarmine answers:
Princes do rule over their subjects as men, not as Christians, and Kings are
set over the people not as they are Christians, but politic persons: so the
Prince is head of the kingdom, not of the Church, De pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap.
7.

Ans. Stephen Gardener takes away this cavil very sufficiently, we will set
one Papist against another. It is all one (says he) to call the Prince head of
the Church of England, and head of the Realm of England: for if all Englishmen
be his subjects, why are they not his subjects, as they are Christians? If the
wife or servant be subject to the master or husband being infidels, does their
conversion, or name of Christians make them less subject, Fox. p. 1059
then they were before? Haec ille. Again, how far is this, I pray you, from
Anabaptistrie, to say, that subjects, only as men, not as Christians, are in
subjection to Princes? for does it not follow hereupon, that as Christians
they ought to have no superior or Magistrate?

2 It is sufficient for us, that this title more fitly and properly belongs
to every Prince in his own kingdom, the^ to the Pope, for the Pope can in no
wise be head of the Church: he is not the mystical head, neither dare they say
so: for Christ only is the head in that manner: neither can he be the
Ministerial head of the universal Church: for the Catholic Church is a body
mystical, and must needs have a mystical head: neither is he the political
head of any particular Church: for no Bishop can be a political head: because
he that is the head and chief must have a coactiue power, to bind his
subjects to obedience: so has not any Bishop: The Prince only bears the
sword, and enforces obedience. Again, in a far diverse sense is the Prince
called the head, then the Pope was: for first the Pope challenged to be head of
the universal Church: but the prince is chief only in his own kingdom.
Secondly, the Pope would be an absolute head, to do all upon earth that Christ
did, yea and more to, to bind and loose at his pleasure, to depose Kings, to
dispense with the word of God, to constitute and make laws at his pleasure: in
so much that one of his clawback flatterers is not ashamed to say of him,
Christus and Papa vnum faciunt consistorium, and excepto peccato potest Papa,
quasi omnia facere, quae potest Deus: Christ and the Pope make but one
Consistory, Panormitan.
and keep but one court; and sin only excepted, the Pope in a manner can
do all things that God can do. But we do limit the power of the Prince: who
is not to impose any laws upon the Church, but such as are agreeable to the
word of God: neither do we make him a spiritual officer, as the Pope would
be, but a civil governor, who by positive laws is to provide for the peace
and welfare of the Church.

Lastly, S. Peter says, Submit your selves to the King as the chief, (...),
or most excelling: 1. Pet. 2.13.
what is this else, but as to the head? what is it to be chief but to be head?
But we will not much contend for the name, so they will grant us the thing:
namely, that the Prince is a commander even in Ecclesiastical matters, as
Augustine says: In hoc reges Deo seruiunt, si mala prohibeant, no^ solum quae
pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam, quae ad diuinam religionem. Cont.
Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 5. In this Kings do good service to God, if they forbid
evil to be done, not only in matters pertaining to humane society, but in
things concerning religion. As for the title, to be called head, let them
cease to call their chief Bishop so who has no right unto it, and we will
promise also to lay it down, though in good sense we might use it, though the
Pope had never laid claim thereunto.

THE SECOND QVESTION, CONCERNING THE authority of the Prince in punishing
heretics.
WE do willingly grant, that obstinate heretics and peruerters of the faith,
if they persist in their damnable opinions, and remain incorrigible, may, and
ought to be cut off and punished by death, to make others to fear: so Seruetus
at Geneua, and one Valentinus at Berne, both monstrous heretics, not amongst
the Papists, but by the Protestants were worthily put to death. In this
therefore we and our adversaries agree, that heretics may be punished by death
by the civil Magistrate. If Luther, or any other have held any private opinion
to the contrary, let them answer for themselves: but although we vary not in
the principal, yet there are certain circumstances and accessaries greatly
material, wherein they both dissent from us, and from the truth.

Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 1 cap. 7.
1 They would have the Magistrate only to be their executioner, the judgment
of heresy they say belongs to the Church: for they cited, examined, judged,
disgraded, condemned heretics, and then gave them over to the secular

But we hold, that the hearing, judgment, sentence and condemnation of
heretics belongs to the civil Magistrate, as well as the execution: because
these actions are proper to the civil sword, which the Magistrate bears,
Romans 13. and Deuteronomy. 17.5. The false Prophets and Idolaters were brought to the
gates of the city where the civil Magistrate was wont to sit. Augustine is of
the same mind, Cur in veneficos, vigore^ legu^ exerceri just fatentur, in
haereticos and schismaticos nolunt fateri? Cont. epist. Parmen. 1.7. Why do
they grant, that the vigor of the law may justly be executed upon witches, and
not as well upon heretics and schismatikes? But the causes of witches are
heard, judged, and handled before the civil Magistrate: Ergo, also the cause
of heretics. Augustines reason is out of the 5. Galath. 20. The works of the
flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft,
and heresies are also reckoned up amongst: All these are works of the flesh,
Ergo, the Magistrate being appointed to punish evil doers, has as full right
to deal against them all, as some.

2 We differ about the way and means to try an heretic by: They affirm, that
he is an heretic only that is so judged by a general Council, or the
sentence Annot. Tit. 3. sect. 2. Rhemist.

We say, that an heretic is to be convicted by the scriptures, and that he
that holds any opinion obstinately against the manifest authority of
scripture, may be judged an heretic without a general Council: So Augustine
writes, answering the Pelagians, who objected that they were condemned without
a Synod. Ac si congregatione synodi opus erat, vt aperta pernicies damnaretur,
quasi nulla haeresis aliquando, nisi synodi congregatione damnata sit. As
though a Synod need to be congregate or called, to condemn such open
wickedness, as if never any heresy had been condemned but in a Synod or
Council: Cont. 2. epistol. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 12. This is that heretical
opinion, as they call it, which the Council of Constance condemned in John
Husse, and him together with it, because he said, That an heretic, whatsoever
he be, ought first to be instructed, and taught with Christian love, and
gentleness by the holy scriptures, and by reasons drawn out of the same, before
he suffer corporal or bodily punishment: Fox. page 610. articul. 18. Which his
saying is grounded upon that rule of the Gospel, Math. 18.15. That if we see
one offend, we should first tell him privately; then before 2. or 3. lastly
declare it to the Church: and if he will not hear the Church, that is, by
scripture conuincing him, then continuing obstinate, let him be as a publicane.
This rule the papists kept not in their bloody persecutions here in England:
They put many hundreds to death, and were not able to convince any one of
heresy: but in disputation were themselves put to silence and made ashamed:
Their only arguments were the fire and faggot.

3 Again, they used unlawful ways and unjust, in sifting and examining, by
John Brown Martyr appearing before Warrham and Fisher, two bloudsuckers, was
burned with hot coals, his bare feet being set upon the^: Fox. p. 1292.
Cutbert Symsons fingers were grated with an arrow, and he himself piteously
racked, to be made betray his innocent brethren, p. 2032. Tomkins hand was
burned by Bonner, till the sinews sparkled again, page 1533. And these were
the witnesses and accusers that were brought against them.

This was clean contrary to the law of Moses: At the mouth of two or three
witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death dye, Deuteron. 17.6. Augustine
says, Quis iudex accusantis sumat personam? etc. What Judge would take upon
him to be an accuser? Quaest. ex vtroque mix. 102
Our Lord Christ knew Judas to be a thief (says he:) yet because he was not
accused, he did not cast him off. He counts it a very unnatural thing for
the Judge to be an accuser, and to proceed without witnesses: which although
in some criminal cases is more tolerable, yet in the cases of life and death
ought in no wise to be used. The same judgment also Augustine gives of that
cruel custom of tormenting men, to convince them by their own mouth, which
was invented by the heathen, but never more cruelly practiced, then among the
papists: Hoc intolerabile est (says he) and rigandum fontibus lacrymarum, cum
propterea torqueat iudex accusatum, ne occidat nesciens innocentem, and fit per
ignorantiam, vt and tortum and innocentem occidat, quem ne innocentem
occideret, torserat: How intolerable a thing is it, and to be much lamented,
that while the Judge tormenteth the party accused, lest unwittingly he should
put an innocent man to death; it falls out that he adiudgeth to death a man
both innocent, and beside tormented, whom, lest he should slay as an innocent,
he before put to torment. His meaning is, that when a man is put to the rack,
or otherwise tortured, that he might confess the truth, and clear himself;
it comes to pass, that through extremity of the pain, he makes himself
guilty, and so the innocent is both wrongfully tormented, and unjustly put to
death. Which kind of forcing men by torture, though in some dangerous cases, as
of high treason, and such like, where there is great peril in the concealing
of the truth, and no other way to sift it out, may be admitted: yet to use it
as an ordinary course as the papists did, and in causes of religion, it is to
too shameful, and of all Christians to be abhorred.

4 Where have they learned so hotly and fiercely to pursue simple men and women
to death, for none or very small offenses, which they notwithstanding James
Brewster to hear one Sweeting to read many good things out of a certain
book: or for the same Sweeting, when as the said James should say, Now the
son of the living God help us, to answer, Now almighty God so do? yet for
these heresies were they both condemned and burnt in Smithfield, Anno. 1511.
Fox. page 818.

A woman of Auspurge had like to have been burned, for asking a priest that
carried the Host to a sick man with Taper-light, what he meant to go with a
light at noone day, Fox. p. 894.
if Mary the Emperors sister had not made suit for her, Anno. 1550.

Anno 1525. a Monk burned in France, because he had forsaken his abominable
order and married a wife, page 896.

Johannes de Cadurco, being at a feast, where it was agreed that every one
should bring forth this posie or sentence, because he brought forth this:
Christ reign in our hearts, and prosecuted it out of the scriptures, was
burned, Anno. 1533. page 897.

A Tailour burned at Paris anno. 1549. for working upon an holy day: ex Johan.
Crispin. Fox p. 903.

Ralfe Hare constrained to abjure for saying before the Bishop of Winchester:
The Lord is my witness, It is Symbolum Haereticorum, says Winchester, a mark
to know heretics by, to say the Lord, the Lord, page 1225.

One Thomas Sanpaulinus Matyr, because he rebuked a man for swearing, was
thereupon suspected to be a Lutheran, examined, condemned and burned at Paris,
anno. 1551. pa. 904. Many such like examples might be produced of holy
Martyrs, which for these and such other great heresies were put to death.

And as the offenses were very small, as we see, so their manner of proceeding
was most cruel, void of all humanity. They spared not women with child: We
have not forgotten that famous example of their cruelty, which shall be
remembered to their perpetual shame and infamy: How they burned 3. simple
women in the Isle of Garnsey, anno 1556. which had submitted themselves to
their mercy, one of the three was great with child, which brast out of her
womb in the midst of the fire, and was thrown in again. pa. 1944.

They had no compassion of the tender age of children: In the town of
Byrbroke, while Richard Chapman did pennaunce in the Church, being enjoined to
kneel barefoote, and bare legged all the sermon while upon the cold steps of
the Church: a little boy for giving him his hat to kneel upon, was had into
the vestrie and piteously scourged. pa. 1047. Cruel Bonner burned Richard
M^kins a child of 15. years, for speaking against the sacrament of the
altar, who notwithstanding at the stake was taught to speak much good of the
B. of London, and so did, pa. 1202. John F^ttie his child being of 8. year
oulde, for saying to one of the Bishops Chaplens, that he had Balaams mark,
was scourged so cruelly, that within 14 days he died.

Nay such was their cruelty, they condemned to death men that were bestraught
of their wits: as Collins and Cowbridge were burned being both frantic, see
their story. page 1131.

Where is now that lenity and compassion, which ought to be in the Ministers
of the Gospel? Such cruelty was not heard of, no not amongst the heathen. Yea
they break their own law: which suffers a man once to abjure his heresy,
but if afterward he be detected, he dies without mercy. Fox. Anno. 1511.
William Carder and Agnes Grebil were condemned, though they submitted
themselves, and promised to be conformable to their religion. page 1277.

Yet this law of theirs is most unjust, and contrary to the gospel, which
faieth, that if thy brother sin against thee 7. times in a day, and 7. times
in a day turn again, and say, It repents me, thou shall forgive him. Luke
17.4. Yet these men will forgive but once, and not that neither: But S. Paul
says, Tit. 3.10.
An heretic after once or twice admonition reject. Bellarm. his best answer is
by denying the text, saying, that it was not so red in former times: but thus,
after once admonition. de laicis. cap. 22.

There was more clemency used in Augustines time: for then Bishops did not
provoke the Magistrate to execute whom they had condemned, but did entreat the
Magistrate to show compassion unto Heretics, not straight ways to punish them
with death: Ne sic vitam istam finiant (says Augustine) per supplicium, vt ea
finita non possint finire supplicium, Least they should so end this life by
punishment, that the life being ended, they should never end their punishment.
Epist. 54. And in another place, sic eorum peceata compesce, vt sint, quos
poeniteat peccasse, Epist. 159. So restrain their sins, that they may yet
remain to repent them of their sins: In those days therefore, men were not
by and by punished with death to prevent their repentance, as in time of
popery, but their repentance was expected, to deliver them from the sentence
of death. Thus much of this question, as likewise of the whole controversy:
and thus far also concerning such controversies, as are moved about the Church
militant, here upon earth: which we have hitherto prosequuted by the Lords
gracious assistaunce: In the next place we are to deal in those controversies,
which concern the other part of the Church triumphant in heaven.

1. Timoth. 6.16. Soli Deo immortali Patri, Filio, cum spiritu sancto sit honor
and imperium sempiternum.

THE SECOND BOOK OR CENTVRIE, CONTAINING AN OTHER LARGE HVNDRETH OF POPISH
errors, and many of them foul heresies, divided into six several
Controversies: CONCERNING THE ESTATE OF THE CHVRCH TRIVMPHANT IN Heaven, and
the Sacraments of the Church Militant upon earth.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man. 1592.

ILLVSTRISSIMO ET INclytissimo Domino Comiti Essexio, non tam generis
claritate, quam virtute sua nobili de re literaria, studiosisque omnibus semper
optime merito, Dominoque mihi multis nominibus colendissimo.
Site illud (Nobilissime Comes) ab Epicharmo olim dictum perhibetur: (...).

Qua sententia monet, neruos atque artus esse sapientiae, no^ temere credere:
Idque pulchre depingi solet oculatae manus effigy: vt ne vel manu contrectare,
vel pugillo premere, id est, mentis consensu and iudicio approbare audeamus,
quod no^ prius penitus exploratu^ habuerimus. Hoc sequi co^siliu^ si nostrates
voluissent, (papicolas volo, et pontificiae haerese^s sectatores Anglos) si
singula ad trutinam expe^dissent prius, ad quae postea admouerunt manus, non
tam temere and imprudenter callidis doctoribus aurem praebuissent, nec tam
facile and cito a sana doctrina desciuissent.

Multi enim apud nos sunt imperiti homunciones, and indoctae mulierculae
(quanquam and doctos etiam aliquos, et satis cordatos viros ex isto genere
agnouerim) qui nec scientia armati, nec animi proposito stabiles, nescientes
lethale, non minutim and guttatim, sorbillarunt, sed pleno gutture hauserunt
venenum: dum nihil probantes, vel examinantes, se papisticae superstitionis
astutijs illaqueari passi sunt. Haec dum meeum serio cogito, and altius tanquam
ex animi specula prospiciens contueor; non ex alijs initijs, qua^ temeritatis,
and ignorantiae, hoc ta^ magnum malum enatum and exortum video. Jgnorantiae
est, quod veritate spreta and neglecta, errores sponte and libere imbiberu^t
and amplexati sunt: temeritatis vero, quod se, nullo delectu habito, seditiosis
and impijs magistris in disciplinam tradere voluerunt. Qui non Epicharmi
philosophi humanum, sed Pauli Apostoli diuinum consilium respuunt: 1. These 5.21.
qui sic monet, Omnia probate, and quod bonum est tenete. Contra istos etiam
satis nos cautos dedit dominus Christus, Math. 7.15.
sic praemonens, Cauete a Prophetis mendacibus, qui veniunt ad vos in
vestimentis ouium, sed intrinsecus sunt lupi rapaces. Cum igitur multos
quoru^da^ insidijs deceptos in fraudem illici, and in errores toto impetu
praecipitari cernerem, idque non alij principio, qua^ ipsorum ignorantiae
tribuendum esse: operae precium facturum duxi, si quis papisticae
superstitionis capita in synopsin quandam co^ijcere studeret, et passim verae
fidei ex scripturis adhibens antidotum, vniuersam doctrinam pontificiam vno
intuitu conspiciendam proponeret. Hoc opus tam necessarium; cum diu
expectassem, dum aggrederentur, alij, cum neminem huc animum applicasse, aut id
in animo habere perspexeram: Ego tandem prodij e multis millibus ad hoc onus
sustinendum minime omnium idoneus. Qui me operam meam non perditurum, sed
aliquid Ecclesiae commodi allaturam mihi persuaseram, si in isto opere
desudare^, vt haberent nostrates, quo aduersus haeresin pontificiam
instructiores esse possint.

Numeru^ si quis quaerat haerese^n, quas Romana ecclesia orbi nostro
propinauit, mensuram omnem and modum superant, and ad immensam molem
excrescunt: Trecentos ego, and plures hoc opere percurri errores pontificios,
nec omnes tamen complexus sum. De ciuitat. Dei. lib. 19. ca. 2.
Varro scriptor ille copiosus, and vir multae lectionis (vt scribit August.)
philosophorum sectas vsque ad ducentas octoginta octo numerauit et rece^suit.
Sed a papistis huius seculi erroru^ varietate and multitudine veteres illi
superantur. Scripsit non multis abhinc annis libellum Tilemannus quida^
Heshusius, qui sic inscribitur: Sexcenti errores pontificij: Geminauit ille and
duplum effecit numeru^ hunc, quem nos secuti sumus. Trecentos nos malumus, quam
sexcentos ponere: Non quod non putem, tot vitijs and corruptelis superstitionem
pontificiam scatere: vel non posse tot colligi illius synagogae errores: Sed id
feci ia^ partim, quia praecipua capita maxim prose^ui cupiebam, caetera missa
faciens (quanquam credo paucissima sint, quae me in hoc opere subterfugerint)
partim, quia distinctius ille interdum eorum sententias profert, quam opus
habuit, in diuersa loca dispertiens, quae commode ad vnam classem referri
poterant. Breuiter a me omnia tractata, and tanquam per saltum decursa sunt: ad
amussim enim singula expendere, and omnes rimari angulos, longioris esset
operis, and viribus meis maioris. Atque cu^ ego Enchiridion potius conficere
volui, quod (vt eleganter Aug.) manibus possit adstringi, no^ quod armaria
possit onerare, vt fusius iam and vberius singula explicentur, no^ breui
Enchiridio (vt idem ait) manus debuit impleri, sed grandi studio pectus
accendi. Enchirid. cap. 5.


Tuo vero Honori (Nobilissime Comes) hanc mediam istius operis parte^
consecratam volui: Primo vt munusculo hoc prioris doni tenuitatem compensarem:
vt libelli illius, quem tuo honor indignum, tuo tamen nomine in publicum
emittere ausus sum, secundae nostrae lucubrationes indignitatem praestare^t.
Jterum verae te religionis and professionis Euangelicae, non fautorem solum,
sed patronum eximium norimus omnes, and libenter vereque agnoscimus. Nobili
enim vestrae familiae id insitum credo est. Jn te enim auita virtus repullulat,
and patris resplendet imago: Qui non tam Euangelio ornamento, cum viueret, quam
Euangelium ipsi honori fuit.

Titulus etiam vester id indicat: Quantum enim Essexiorum Comitum studio
Euangelij negotium promotum sit, ignorare non possunt, qui Cromwelli
Nobilissimi Comitis Essexij meminisse velint. Quid vero nomen? Nonne auspicato
tibi obtigisse videtur? vt omnes iam ad superbos Euangelij hosts deuorandos,
natum nobilem Deuorosum intelligant? Cui ergo iustiori titulo hanc operis
partem nuncuparem, quam tibi, facile non occurrebat quispiam. Tertio denique
vestro patrocinio opusculum hoc commendatum volui, vt tui nominis and
nobilitatis veluti alis and vmbra tectum, facilius linguarum vel vitaret
asperitatem vel minus pertimesceret. Si quis enim leuiter in nos insultans
verborum telis nostra haec appetere gestit: Augustini illud responsum a
meferet. Nunc ergo (ait) ne tui stomachi follis indigesta maledictoru^
cruditate rumpatur, Cont. Julian. Pelagia^. lib. 2.
in hunc euome, si audes calu^niosas tuas vanitates, vestra scilicet virtus
(Optime Comes) haec nostra in tutela^ suscipiens, de iniustis hominum querelis
and contumelijs aut penitus securum, aut minus sollicitum dabit: Quibus ego sic
exorsus dicerem, agite boni viri, in nobilem hunc tela vestra conijcite: nisi
per illius latus, causa nostra non perfoditur: Et sic tandem coeptis
desisterent, ne du^ nostra conuitijs conuellere^t, tuo honori vim attulisse
viderentur. Valeat, viuat, vigeat Nobilitas tua: Et pergas adhuc illustrissime
Domine, quod etiamnum facis, bonos fouere, virtutem amare, religionem colere:
Et te vicissim amet, foueat, seruet incolumem Deus optim. Max. in perpetuum.

Tuo Honori addictissim. Andr. Willet.

HERE FOLLOW THE controversies concerning the Church Triumphant.
THey are two in number: The first is as touching the condition, office and
Ministry of Angels: The second of and concerning the Saints departed.

THE EIGHT CONTROVERSY concerning Angels.
THis controversy contains 3. questions. First, of the Hierarchy and holy
degrees of Angels: Secondly, of their ministry and office: Thirdly, of the
worship and invocation of Angels.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERning the Celestial Hierarchye, or degrees of
Angels.
THis question has like wise two parts: First, how many degrees there be of
Angels, Secondly, whether Michael be the Prince of the Angels.

THE FIRST PART OF THE DIVERSE orders and degrees of Angels.
The Papists.
THey do boldly affirm, that there are nine orders of Angels, and those
that do doubt of it, they charge with infidelity and blasphemy: There are
first principalities, then potestates. 3. powers. 4. dominations: Ephesians. 1.21. 5.
there are thrones. Coloss. 1.16. unto these ad 4. other, Cherubim, Seraphim,
Angels, Archangels: so have we nine in all. Rhemist. annot. Ephe. 1 sect. 4.

The Protestants.
AS of the diversity of names we gather, that there are diverse orders, so to
it is a point not only of foolish curiosity, but also of ungodly and
dangerous rashness, ex Caluino. Fulk. ibid.

Augustine says, Quid inter se distent quatuor illa vocabula, throni,
dominationes, principatus, potestates, dicant qui possunt, si tamen possunt
probare quod dicunt, ego me ista ignorare confiteor. What difference there is
between these four words, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, let
them tell us, that be able, so they can prove that they tell us: for my part, I
confess I know it not. August. Enchiridion. cap. 58. With Augustine therefore
we confess, that as it appears by these several names, there are distinct
orders of Angels: so how many there be, and how they are distinguished, the
scripture has not revealed unto us: and it were curiosity for us to enquire:
We shall then know, when we shall be like unto the Angels.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER MICHAEL be the prince of the Angels.
The Papists.
Michael the prince of the Angels: which place the devil had in the beginning
before his fall. For as the scripture says, the devil and his angels,
meaning, that all evil angels are subject unto him: so by Michael and his
angels, we understand all good angels, that are likewise subject to him,
Apocal. 12.7. Rhemist. Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 1. cap. 9.

The Protestants.
FIrst, Michael in that place signifies Christ, who is Lord of the angels; for
the angels cannot be said to be any other Michaels angels, but only the angels
of God and Christ: Fulk. ibid. This is also proved by the text, verse. 10. Now
is come salvation, the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for
the accuser of the brethren is cast out. Here he is called Christ, which before
is named Michael. Augustine also so expounds it, Michaelem intellige
Christum: By Michael understand Christ: Homil. 9. in Apocalypse.

Secondly, it follows not, that as there is a chief and captain of the
evil angels, so amongst the good there should be a chief angel above the
rest, beside Christ: for it is sufficient that there is one Lord and prince of
the angels, even Christ. Secondly, neither is it proved out of scripture, that
amongst the devils there is one captain and great devil to whom the rest were
subjects: for whereas the Pharisees objected, that Christ cast out devils
through Beelzebub the prince of the devils, Mark. 3. if either the Pharisees
did then so mean, or any shall now gather upon their words, that there is a
great master devil that rules and commands the rest, it was in them but a
pharisaicall dream, and in the other a popish collection. We deny not, but
that there may be degrees in power and angelical gifts both among the good and
bad angels, as there shall be degrees in glory among the Saints: yet the
Saints shall not be princes one over the other, no more are the angels now.
Thirdly, mark the answer of our Savior in that place, If Satan cast out
Satan, Mark. 3. Here Satan is made a common name to all evil spirits. But
Apocalypse. 12. where mention is made of the devil and his angels, the text
says, The great dragon, the old serpent, called the Devil and Sathanas, verse.
9. Here the name Sathanas, is given to the prince of the devils: so there is
not one Sathanas, but many. And where our Savior calls the devil the prince
of the world, John 14. S. Paul calls them all principalities and powers,
worldly governors, and princes of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12. So
there is not one prince of the devils, but they are all princes. Thus Augustine
expounds that place, Draco pugnauit and angeli eius: id est, diabolus and
homines voluntati eius obtemperantes: The dragon fought and his angels, that
is, wicked men obeying his will, Apocalypse. Hom. 9. So by Augustines sentence
the devils are not subjects to the great devil, but they are all princes and
commanders of wicked men.

THE SECOND QVESTION OF THE Ministry and function of Angels.
THis question has two parts: first, of the external ministry of angels, in
the protection, and defense of the Church. Secondly, of their spiritual office
about the prayers of Gods servants.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING the defense and protection of Angels.
The Papists.
MIchael (say they) is the protector and keeper of the whole Church of Christ,
Dan. 10.21. And as earthly kingdoms have their special angels for their
protectors, so also have particular Churches, Dan. 10. Rhemist. annot. 1.
Apocal. sect. 9.

The Protestants.
THE whole Church has Christ himself, who is the true Michael, Fulk. ibid.
for her protector and defender: And so is that place in Daniel to be
understood. Augustine also by Michael understands Christ: the name also
signifies as much: Michael, that is, one like unto God: see more of this
before: Controv. 4. quaest. 1. The scripture says. All power is given to
Christ, and he is with his Church to the end of the world: Math. 28.18.20. He
therefore is the chief patron and protector of his Church.

Secondly, It cannot be proved out of scripture, that kingdoms have their
special Angels protectors, for Dan. 10. The Princes of the Persians and
Grecians, were not Angels but earthly princes: for Angels do not resist
Christ and his Angels defenders of the Church, as the Prince of Percia did*
ver. 13 Fulk. ibid. but all the Angels of heaven are ready to serve the Lord
at his pleasure, for the defense of his Church, without any limitation of
place, Zachar. 1.10. These are they whom the Lord has sent, to go through
the world. The Angels execute their message, not in several countries but
in the whole world.

The Papist.
Genesis 48.16. Jacob says, The Angel that has kept me from my youth up. Acts
12.15. It is his Angel. Rhemist. ibid. Math. 18.10. Their Angels behold the
face of my Father. Ergo, every man has his proper Angel.

Answ. 1. Jacob by the Angel understands Christ, to whom it is proper to
bless Gods children: the Angel bless thy children says he, Genesis 48.16. This
Angel appeared unto him in Bethel, and is called the God of Bethel. Genesis
31.13. with this Angel Jacob wrestled, 32. which was God, as it appears by the
name of Jacob, he is called Jsrael, because he had prevailed with God, and the
place is called Peniel, I have seen God face to face: Other proper Angel
Jacob had none, for all the Angels of God were appointed for his defense.
Genesis 32.1. He met an host of Gods Angels, and accordingly called the place
Mahanaim.

2. Neither of the other places prove that men have proper Angels. Math. 18.
The children of God are said to have their Angels: not theirs, as every man his
proper Angel, but theirs in common, because they were deputed for their
defense. Act. 12. Peter at that time was delivered by one Angel, but it
follows not, that therefore he was his proper Angel.

The Protestants.
WE nothing doubt of the protection of Gods Angels: but that every one has a
proper Angel appointed for his protection from his nativity, out of scripture
it is not proved.

1. Sometime one Angel has the charge of a multitude. Exodus 23.20. The Lord
says to all the people of Israel, I send mine Angel before thee, to keep
thee in thy way.

2. Sometime many Angels are ready for the defense of one man: Genesis 32.1. an
host of Angels met Jacob. Psa. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee al in thy ways: Ergo, every man has not his particular
proper Angel.

3 Luke 16.22. The poor man is said, being dead, to be carried not by one
Angel, but by the Angels, into the bosom of Abraham. But if he had one Angel
appointed to be the president of his life from his nativity, it had been also
part of that Angels charge, to have conveyed his soul into Heaven. So
Augustine writes: Si been vixerimus, vbi a carnis vinculo anima liberata
fuerit, mox in occursum nostrum Angelorum chorus occurret. De salutarib.
document. cap. 39. If we lived well here, when as the soul is gone from the
body, the holy company of the Angels are ready to meet us, he says not one
Angel, but the whole chore or company.

THE SECOND PART, WHAT OFFICE the Angels have about our prayers.
The Papists.
THeir opinion is, that the Angels do offer up our prayers unto God. Haeres.
5.
And they would prove it by that place Apocalypse. 8.2. An Angel stood by the
Altar, with a golden censer, and much incense was given unto him to offer with
the prayers of the saints. Rhemist. in hunc locum.

Ans. Augustine upon this place says, that this Angel is Christ, Thuribulum
aureum est corpus eius sanctum, the golden censer is his body, ex quo Deus
^dorem suauitatis accepit, out of the which God smelt a sweet savor. Homil.
in Apocalyp. 6. And in another place he says, Vt altar sanctificat dona, sic
Christus preces nostras, as the altar sanctifies the gift, so Christ does our
prayers* quaest. in Euangel. 34. First therefore this place is understood of
Christ, not of any Angel.

2. If this place might be understood of Angels, that they have some ministry
about our prayers, it makes nothing notwithstanding for popish invocation of
Angels: for the Angel here commends not the prayers of the Saints by his
merit, but by the much incense given unto him, to ad to the prayers of the
Saints to make them acceptable, which is the sweet smell and savor of the
precious death and merits of Christ. Fulk. in hunc locum. Augustine indeed
sometime ascribes such an office unto the Angels to carry up our prayers to
Heaven, as their charge is to carry up our souls: not as mediators or
intercessors, but as the Lords messengers and agents here upon earth, to
report unto him our affairs: dicuntur Angeli preces nostras, and vota Deo
offerre, non vt deum doceant, qui omnia antequam fiant, nouit, sed vt super his
dei voluntatem consulant. The Angels are said to offer up our prayers and
vows unto God, not to inform or instruct the Lord, but only to consult and
know his pleasure: tom. 9. de dilection. Cap. 3. and in Psalm. 74. for the
Angels have two offices, the one, to execute the commandment of God in the
world, and to attend upon him to receive their charge, Math. 18.10. the other,
to return unto God as faithful messengers the success of their business in
the world. Zechar. 1.10. Now whether the Angels be appointed of God to
report unto him our sayings and doings, Fulk. Apo. ^. sect. 2.
as other affairs of our life, the scripture no where evidently shows.
Neither, if it were granted, would it any thing help their popish invocation
of Angels.

Rhemist. allege Tob. 12.12. to prove the offering of our prayers by
Angels. Answer, It is neither canonical Scripture, nor agreeable unto it:
Fulk. annot. Coloss. 2. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
THe scripture always makes Christ our only Mediator, neither Angels nor
Saints, by whom our prayers and all other spiritual sacrifices are offered
unto God. Fulk ibid.

1 Hebrew. 13.15. Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise always to God.
1. Peter. 2.5. You are an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. Ergo, Christ Jesus is our only Mediator.

Secondly, Galatian. 3.19. The Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator. Ergo, the Angels are one office, and the Mediator another.
Augustine says: Quod non aliquem ex Angelis dicit Mediatorem, 1. Tim. 2.
sed ipsum Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum habes alio loco: vnus (inquit) Deus,
and vnus mediator Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus. That the Apostle
calls not any of the Angels, but only Jesus Christ our Lord, Mediator, we
have in another place: There is one God, says he, and one Mediator of God and
man, the Man Jesus Christ.

AN APPENDIX OR THIRD PART of this question, whether Angels or Saints know
our hearts.
The Papists.
THe Angels and other Celestial spirits do know our hearts and inward
repentance: Haeres. 6.
And between the Angels and the blessed souls of Saints, there is no
difference in this case, the one being as highly exalted, and near God, as the
other, in whom and by whom only they see and know our affairs. Luke 15.10.
There is joy in heaven* in the presence of the Angels over one sinner that
repents. Ergo, they know our repentance. Rhemist. Lu. 15. Sect. 2.

Ans. 1 Our hearts and inward repentance are not known to the Angels, but
by the fruits, and true effects thereof.

2 Although the elect, after the resurrection shall be like in glory to the
Angels, yet it follows not, that they shall be like in all things, much
less that their souls now in heaven, be in all things like unto the
Angels, whose presence and Ministry God uses in the preservation of his
chosen.

3 That all things done in the world may be seen in God, as in a glass, is
but a profane speculation, and the devise of an idle brain. Fulk. ibid.

Argum. 2 Abraham had knowledge of things in earth, which were not in his time,
as that they had Moses and the Prophets books, which he never saw. Luke
16. ver. 29. Rhemist.

Answer: First, In this narration many things are spoken parabolically, out
of the which we must not ground any doctrine not taught else where in scripture:
for you may as well say that souls have fingers and tounges, and that
elementall water will quench hell fire, as that Abraham knew what books were
written after his death.

Secondly, Haeres. 5.
Albeit that the doctrine of the Church comprehended in the scriptures, might
be revealed to Abraham after his death, yet it follows not, that he knew all
things, as you affirm the saints do, by beholding the Majesty of God.
Fulk. annot. ibid.

The saints therefore in heaven know so much as the Lord thinks good to
reveal unto them, they know not all things.

The Protestants.
WE deny not, but that as Prophets and holy men in this life, may know many
secret things revealed unto them by the spirit of God, as Peter found out the
secret fraud of Ananias, and Sapphirae: Eliseus being absent found out Gehezi
his corruption: yea, he could tell what was done in the King of Syria his
chamber: so the Lord may reveal unto the saints in heaven at his pleasure,
some things done upon earth. But that they received any such gift of God, to
know all things done upon earth, it is a great untruth, and clean contrary
to the scriptures.

1. Solomon says in his prayer unto God: Hear thou in heaven, in thy
dwelling place, and give unto every man according to his ways, as thou know
his heart, for thou only know the hearts of all the children of men. 1.
King. 8.39. Out of this place we thus reason, he only knows the heart, that
is the Judge of all men, and a rewarder of them according to their ways: But
the Lord only is judge. Ergo. Again, the words themselves be plain, that
God only knows the heart: so that what knowledge of secrets the Saints
have, it is by revelation, not by searching the heart.

Again S. Paul says: No man knows the things of man save the spirit of man
which is in him: so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God.
1. Corinthians. 1.11. the Rhemist. answer that no man knows the secrets of the
heart naturally, but by extraordinary gift he may, as the Prophets did. Ans. No
man ever had or can have a general gift to know the heart, but when God sees
it good to reveal it: for otherwise the comparison holds not: The spirit of
God only knows the things of God: which also is given to men to know, but
not by receiving any gift, to search and look into the nature and heart as it
were of God (for then should they know all the secrets of God, which never any
did:) but only by revelation of the spirit, which opens Gods secrets unto
them, so far as it is convenient and needful.

Even after the same manner the spirit of God may reveal the secrets of the
heart of man, not by giving them a general gift them selves to look into the
heart, as into a glass, but by revealing such things, when the Lord sees it
expedient.

Neither had the prophets an inherent gift and dwelling in them, to know
secrets, but the word of God was inspired into them at times, as they had
need, as we see in Nathan 2. Sam. 7.3.4. in Elisha. 2. King. 2.15. in Isaiah.
2. Kin. 20.4. And though Paul was taken up into heaven, and saw many secrets,
yet he knew not all: for thus he says of him self, If I knew all secrets: 1. Corinthians. 13.2. Ergo, no man ever received this gift, to search the heart: but
it is proper unto God, who will not give his honor to another.

2. Augustine says, Nescire mortuos quid hic agatur dum hic agitur: that the
dead know not what is done here, while it is in doing. But they understand
either by relation of those that depart this world, or else by the Angels: Non
quidem omnia, sed quae sinuntur indicare: sicut Prophetae, nec hic omnia
cognoscebant. sed quae illis essereuelanda dei prouidentia iudicarat. de cura
pro mortuis. cap. 15. Neither do they know all things, but what God suffers
to be known, as neither did the Prophets know al things while they lived, but
what God in his divine providence thought good to reveal unto them. I note out
of this saying of Augustine, three things.

FIRST, What great uncertainty of opinion here is: How the dead should come
by the knowledge of humane affairs, the Papists think they have it by Gods
gift: otherwhile they say, they see all things in God, as in a clear glass.
Augustine says, they know them by the Angels, or by men newly departed
this life: so that it appears to be but a mere conceit and imagination, that
they have any such knowledge, whereof there is no surer ground. Secondly,
Augustine says, they know not things presently done, but afterward, contrary
to the Papists. Thirdly, they know not all things, as the Prophets also did
not, but what the Lord reuealeth unto them: wherein also he is contrary to our
adversaries.

THE THIRD QVESTION CONCERNING THE worship of Angels, first in general, then
in particular, of invocation.
The Papists.
THey say that the divine honor and adoration due unto God alone, Haeres. 7.
is not to be given to Angels: But there is a religious reverence, honor and
adoration, which is not to be denied to Angels and Saints, Rhemist. annot.
Apocalypse. 19. sect. 4.

1 Joshua fell down before the Angel and worshipped, Joshua 5. Rhemist.

Ans. He worshipped not an Angel, but the Lord Christ himself the captain of
the Lords army: for it was a divine worship: He is bid to put off his shoes,
as Moses was, when God appeared out of the fiery bush, Exodus 3. But a divine
worship (by your own confession) is due only to God, Fulk. annot. Coloss. 2.3.

2. 1. Timoth. 2.21. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
his elect Angels, that thou observe these things: Ergo, Angels may be adored
and reverenced, Rhemist.

Ans. Saint Paul makes here the Angels witnesses of his weighty charge: so
Moses calls heaven and earth to witness, Deuteronomy. 30.19. may we therefore
conclude, that he yielded any religious worship to heaven and earth? Fulk. ibid.

The Protestants.
AS for due reverence, which is of love, not of any service, there is no
question, but we ought to yield it unto the Angels. But all religious service
or worship is due only to God, and whosoever man or Angel requires, or
receives any religious worship or service, usurps that which is due unto
God, Fulk. Apocal. 19. sect. 4.

1 Apocal. 19.10. and 22.9. John fell down to worship the Angel: but the Angel
suffered him not: See thou do it not, (says he) for I am thy fellow servant,
and of thy brethren, worship God: Ergo, Angels are not to be adored with any
religious worship.

Rhemist. First, he forbids him only to worship him with divine adoration.

Ans. The words are general: he says not worship God, with this kind of
service: but worship God.

Rhemist. Secondly, you say, that John so worthy an Apostle was not ignorant
of that point, that Angels were not to be worshipped as God: we may replye
also, that if John had known that this other kind of service was unlawful, he
would not have done it.

Ans. John sinned not of ignorance, but of forgetfulness, in this ecstasy of his
mind, while he beheld the glory of the Angel, as likewise through his
frailenes and forgetfulness he commits the like again, cap. 22. which John
would not have done, being once before admonished, had he not presently
forgotten himself: But the other error of worshipping the creature for the
Creator, was too gross an error for the Apostle.

Rhemist. Thirdly, he was deceived in the person, taking the Angel for Christ,
and therefore was not culpable at all in this fact, in giving divine honor to
the Angel, for he sinned only materially, not formally.

Ans. First, John was not ignorant, that he was an Angel, and not Christ, for
he says, he was one of the seven Angels that had the seven vials. Secondly,
though he sinned of ignorance, yet was it a sin: for the Prophet, which
believed the old Prophet, sinned grievously, as it appeared by his punishment,
though he did it ignorantly, 1. King. 13. Wherefore it is a gross error of
your Schoolmen, that say, a man sins not, if he worship the devil in the
shape of an Angel ignorantly.

Rhemist. Fourthly, the Angel would not receive this worship at John's hand,
whom he knew to be in great favor with God, and greater then some Angel.

Ans. First, though hereafter the children of God shall be made equal to the
Angels in glory, yet in this mortal life they must needs be inferior,
seeing Christ himself, in respect of his passion, was inferior to the Angels,
Heb. 2.9. Secondly, the Angel would not have taken this homage at any other
man's hands, beside John: for he gives a reason, that he is not only his fellow
servant, but also of his brethren. So for all their shifts and cauils, we
strongly conclude by this example, that no religious honor ought to be given
to Angels.

2 Honoramus Angelos, charitate non seruitute (says Augustine) nec eis templa
construimus: We honor Angels with the duty of love, not of service, neither
do we build temples unto them. Quod ergo colit summus Angelus, id colendum
etiam est ab homine vltimo. That therefore which is worshipped of the highest
Angel, the man of lowest degree ought also to worship, De vera religion. cap.
55. Ergo, no worship due unto Angels, but all unto God.

THE SECOND PART OF THE INVOcation of Angels.
The Papists.
Haeres. 8.
THey hold, that it is lawful to direct our prayers unto Angels, Rhemist.
Coloss. 2. sect. 3. Yea, and because they pray for us, and deal with God to
procure mercy for us, they may justly be called our advocates.

Angels are deputed for our protection (which is nothing but aduocation) Dan.
10.23. Math. 18.10. Rhemist. annot. 1. John 2. sect. 5.

Ans. First, the argument follows not: for the Angels at the appointment of
God, may serve for our protection and defense, though they be not advocates for
us, to obtain remission of our sins. Secondly, the places alleged prove no
such aduocation of Angels, but only defense and protection. Dan. 10.23. The
Angel was ready at the first prayers of Daniel, but he was let a while.
This proves, that angels may know our prayers when it pleases God, and be
ministers of his help unto us, which we deny not: not that they are our
advocates.

The Protestants.
THat angels are not to be worshipped, nor inuocated, as mediators,
intercessors, or advocates, the scripture speaks evidently.

1 Coloss. 2.18. Let no man beguile you in the humblenes and worshipping of
Angels: Ergo, not lawful to pray unto them, or to worship them.

Rhemist. The Apostle speaks here against the wicked doctrine of Simon
Magus, that affirmed that the angels both ill and good, were mediators for us
unto God, and against the superstition of the Jews, that worshipped the angels
by whom the law was given.

Ans. The Apostle condemns both these superstitions, as likewise the popish
invocation of angels: because all will worship is forbidden, which is not after
the prescript of Gods word, Coloss. 2.23. Fulk. in hunc locum.

2 If any man sin, (says the Apostle) we have an advocate with the father,
Jesus Christ the Just, he is the propitiation for our sins, John 2.2. Ergo,
Christ only is our advocate.

Rhemist. Christ is our advocate in the highest degree, because by himself,
and his own merits, without the assistance of any other, he obtains pardon
for us. The other, as angels and Saints are as secondary intercessors, that
obtain not any thing by their own merits, but only through Christ.

Ans. First, he only and properly is an advocate that can plead the justice
of his clients cause, which every one that prays for us cannot do: for
though the angels and Saints departed should pray for us (which we know not by
the scriptures) as our brethren upon earth do, yet should they not be
mediators and advocates, but petitioners and intreators for us, Fulk. ibid.

Secondly, we gather many strong arguments out of this place, for the sole
sufficient aduocation of Christ. First, the Son is the best and only
sufficient advocate with the father, therefore where we may have free and bold
access to the Son, Heb. 4.16. what need have we of the servants help? 2. He
is the only advocate that is just and righteous before God: so only is Christ,
the angels are imperfect in his sight, Job. 4.18. Ergo. Thirdly, he must be our
advocate that is also the propitiation for our sins, Ergo, only Christ.

Augustine says, Dicitis, angelos nos colimus: vtinam illos coleretis, facile
ab illis disceretis, illos non colere: But ye will say, ye worship not images
but Angels: I would you did truly worship and reverence them: for you should
soon learn of the Angels, not to worship the Angels, in Psalm. 96.

THE NINTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING SAINTS DEPARTED.
THis Controversy has two parts: first, of those that being departed suffer
some punishment after this life. Secondly, of those that are straight received
to joy in heaven. The first part has two questions: first, of the place of
darkness, where the faithful remained till the coming of Christ, as the
Papists imagine. Secondly, of Purgatory.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF LIMBVS PATRVM, where the Patriarchs were imagined to be.
The Papists.
Haeres. 9.
THey have devised and imagined in their foolish conceit four infernal and
subterrestrial places: Hell, Purgatory, Limbus infantium, where children
remain dying without baptism, and Limbus Patrum, where the Fathers were
before Christ's coming. These places they distinguish three ways: first by the
situation: Hell is lowest, Purgatory is next, Limbus infantium in the third
place, Limbus Patrum uppermost. Secondly, they differ in measure of punishment,
some of them have poenam damni, and poenam sensus, a double punishment, both of
loss, in that they are excluded heaven, and of pain also, as Hell, and
Purgatory: the other two Limbi, are but dungeons of darkness only, where they
suffer no other smart or pain, but are only absent from God. Thirdly, they
differ in time and continuance, say they, Hell and the dungeon of children
shall abide for ever: but Purgatory and the dungeon of the fathers are
temporal: the one, that is, Limbus Patrum is many years ago dissolved: and
Purgatory also shall cease, say they, at the coming of Christ, Ballarm. de
purgat. lib. 2. cap. 6.

This then is their opinion, that the Patriarchs and Prophets before Christ's
coming were not in heaven, but were kept in an infernal place of darkness,
yet without pain, and were delivered by Christ's descending into hell, Bellarm.
de Christi anima. lib. 4. cap. 11. Rhemist. Heb. 9.8.

Argum. First, Heb. 11.40. God providing a better thing for us, that they
without us should not be perfect: That is, (say the Rhemists) the Fathers of
the law could not be admitted to the joys of heaven, till the Apostles and
other of the new law, were associate with them, and a way made into heaven by
the death and ascension of Christ, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, by this reason the Patriarchs could not enter into heaven before
the death of the Apostles, if there were no entrance found, unless they were
associate with them. Secondly, if the way were not opened before Christ's
ascension, then the Patriarchs could not ascend before: where were they then al
those 40. days? for they were delivered out of Limbus Patrum before Christ's
resurrection. Thirdly, there is therefore no such meaning of this place: but it
is to be understood of the resurrection, when as all the elect shall be
consummate together, and enter body and soul into heaven. Fulk.

2 Zachar. 9.11. I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, where there is no
water; That is out of Limbus Patrum, Bellarm. de Christi anima. lib. 4. cap. 11.

Ans. Augustine gives a clean contrary sense of the place, by the pit
without water he understands, Humanae miseriae siccam profunditatem and
sterilem, vbi non sunt fluenta iustitiae, sed iniquitatis lutum: De ciuitat.
dei. lib. 18. cap. 35.
The dry and barren dungeon of humane misery, where there are no springs of
justice, but the puddle and mire of iniquity: That is, the Prophet speaks of
the deliverance of the people from their cruel and unjust bondage and
captivity.

3 1. Pet. 3.19. In the which spirit he also went and preached unto the spirits
that were in prison, which sometime had been disobedient in the days of Noe.
This place proves evidently (says Bellarm.) that Christ descended into hell,
and delivered the fathers from thence, De Christi anima. lib. 4.13.

Ans. The place can have no such meaning: First, by the spirit here the humane
soul of Christ cannot be understood, but is divine power: for he was not
quickened or restored to life by his humane soul, but by his divine power his
soul was joined again to his body. Augustine also gives another reason, why
he cannot be said to be quickened or made alive in spirit, that is, in his
soul: for then he must have died before in soul. But, Mors animae peccatum
est, a quo ille immunis fuit: But the death of the soul is sin, from the
which Christ was free.

2 The Apostle speaks only of those which were incredulous and disobedient,
not of the faithful, such as the Patriarchs were and Prophets. Yea (says
Bellarm.) they might be unbelievers at the first, but after repented before
they dyed.

Ans. Then the Apostles comparison could not hold, if any were saved without
the Arc: for as then eight persons only were saved, all without the Arc
perished: so now without baptism and faith of the Church (for by baptism he
understands not the washing of water, but the inward grace of the spirit)
none can be saved. If then any were saved out of the Arc, there may now also
be salvation out of the Church. Augustine also says, Ii modo, qui non
crediderunt Euangelio illis intelligantur esse similes, qui tunc non
crediderunt, cum fabricaretur arca. They which now believe not the Gospel, are
like to them which believed not then while the Arc was in making. And they
which do now believe and are baptized, are like to those which then were saved
in the Arc. Augustine thinks therefore, that they were incredulous persons,
and utterly perished both body and soul: And so is our opinion.

3 The text says not, he went and delivered, but went and preached: for
Augustine calls it an absurd thing to think, that the Gospel was preached
to them that were dead, which in their life time were incredulous: for if the
Gospel be preached in Hell (says he) it would follow that it is not
necessary it should be preached here in the world, if men when they are dead,
may hear it, and be converted. And again, it would ensue (says he) that
there should be a Church in hell: for where the word is preached, there is a
Church. Wherefore he concludes, that it must needs be understood of Noah his
preaching in the spirit and power of Christ: Arcae fabricatio, praedicatio
quaedam fuit. The building of the Arc was a kind of preaching, Epistol. 99.
So also he expounds that 1. Pet. 4.6. The Gospel was preached to the dead:
Ex circumstantia loci apparet, eum intelligere eos, qui nunc mortui sunt, sed
olim in vita Euangelium audiuerunt. Commentar* in epistol. ad Roman.

4 The text is not, that were in prison, but does better bear this sense, that
are: So the Apostles meaning is this, that they which were incredulous and
disobedient in time past, when Noah in the spirit of Christ, or Christ by his
spirit in Noah preached to the world, were then destroyed in the flood, and now
for their increduliti^ are punished in the prison of hell.

The Protestants.
THat the holy Patriarchs, Fathers and Prophets dyed in the same faith before
the coming of Christ, which all true Christians do now hold, and were
presently received into the joys of heaven, and not kept in any infernal
place or dungeon of darkness: thus it is proved.

1 They had all faith, and believed in Christ: yea, the same faith that is now
preached: as it is defined by the Apostle, Heb. 11.1. They also by this faith
obtained remission of sins, Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, as it is alleged out of the Psalm: Ergo, they were blessed: but
out of the kingdom of God there was no blessedness to be found: therefore
they also went to heaven.

2 If the heavens were not opened before Christ's ascension, as the Rhemists
affirm: then none went to heaven before Christ ascended. But that is false:
Henoch and Elias by their own confession were taken up into Paradise: so was
the soul of the thief upon the Cross. But Paradise is heaven, yea the third
and the highest heaven, as S. Paul calls it, 2. Corinthians. 12.4. And so
Augustine expounds that place, Voluit Deus Apostolo demonstrare vitam, in qua
post hanc vitam viuendum est in aeternu^. The Lord would show unto the Apostle
that life, wherein, after this life, we shall live and remain for ever: De
Gene. lib. 12.28. These three therefore went to Paradise, which is no infernal
or place of darkness, but a Celestial habitation of joy, light, and
felicity: They were not then in Limbo Patrum, in the dungeon of the Fathers.
Wherefore we conclude, there was access to heaven before the ascension of
Christ.

3 The Fathers and Patriarchs, before Christ's coming, were in Abraham's bosom:
but that was no infernal place or prison, such as they imagine Limbus Patrum
to be. Augustine proves, that it could not be membrum, or pars inferorum, a
member or part of Hell, or any infernal* place, as the Jesuits hold: First,
the text says, there is magnum chaos, a great gulf, a great distance
between, Luke 16.26. and verse. 23. The rich man saw Abraham a far off:
wherefore it is not like, that both those places should be infernal. Secondly,
Abraham's bosom, was quietis habitatio, and faelicitatis sinus, a place of rest
and bliss: but so is not any infernal place, where there is horror, and
darkness. Thirdly, the place where the rich man was, is called Hell, or
infernal: there is no such thing said of Lazarus, that he was in any lower
place: but above in some high and far distant place: for the rich man is said
to lift up his eyes. Augustine then concludes: Ne ipsos quidem inferos vspiam
scripturarum locis in bono appellatos reperire potui. Epistol. 99. I do not
find that this word infernal, is taken any where in the scriptures in the
good part. And therefore the bosom of Abraham, being a place of rest, says
he, cannot be any infernal place.

AN APPENDIX OR APPERTINANCE OF THIS question, concerning the apparition of
Samuel.
The Papists.
THey hold opinion, that it was the very soul of Samuel that appeared at the
Endor unto Saul: and use it as an argument, to prove that the souls of the
Patriarchs were not in heaven, but in some infernal place, before Christ's
coming, because Samuel ascended out of the earth, Bellarm. De Christ. anim.
lib. 411.

Argum. 1. Because he that appeared to Saul, is called Samuel in the text.
Augustine answers: that the Images of things, are called by the names of the
things themselves: as Genes. 41. Pharao said, he saw ears of corn, and fat
and lean kine in his dream, when they were but the images of such things: So
the devil because he appeared in the shape of Samuel, Samuel himself is said
to be seen: Ad Simplicianum lib. 2. quaest. 3.

Argum. 2. Ecclesiastic. 46: It is set down as a commendation of Samuel, that
he prophesied being dead, Ergo, it was Samuel indeed, Bellarm. De Purgat. lib.
2. cap. 6.

Augustine answers, that this book was not received into the Canon of the
scriptures: It is not Canonical, De cura pro mortuis. cap. 15.

Arg. 3. He tells Saul things to come, as how the next day he should be
overcome, and slain. But the devil knows not things to come, Bellar. ibid.

Augustine answers, Facile est and non incongruum: It is an easy matter with
God, and not unlikely, that some things should be revealed to evil spirits,
for the greater punishment of the wicked: for otherwise we might marvel:
Quomodo daemones agnouerint Christum, quem Iudaei non agnoscebant: How the
devils knew Christ, whom the Jews did not acknowledge: Ad Simplician. lib. 2.
quaest. 3.

The Protestants.
THat it was not the soul of Samuel which appeared, who was now at rest; but
the devil in the likeness of Samuel, who also can transform himself into an
Angel of light: Augustine proves by these four arguments.

Argum. 1. Because the Witch or Pythonist used enchantments, unto the which the
soul of so holy a prophet was not subject, Daemoniacis incantationibus vti
videtur. De mirabilib. scriptur. 2. cap. 11. Bellarmine answers: that Samuel
prevented her enchantment, and came up voluntarily.

Ans. The text is contrary, verse. 11. for the woman first asks Saul, whom
she should bring up, that is, by her charms and incantations: and he said,
bring me up Samuel.

Argum. 2. Quomodo Saul etc. How could Saul obtain to hear a Prophet speak
from the dead, whom God vouchsafed not to answer by Prophets alive? The text
is, that God gave him no answer neither by Prophets, nor by dreams, therefore
I have called for thee, verse. 15. Ergo, it was not Samuel, for then God should
have given him answer by Prophets.

Argum. 3. If it had been Samuel, he would not have told a lie unto Saul,
saying, to morrow thou shall be with me: Magno quippe interuallo separari bonos
a malis legimus: for we read that the good are separated from the bad by a
great distance after this life, as it appears in the story of Dives and
Lazarus. August. ad Simplician. ibid.

Bellarm. He says as much, as you shall be dead: noting the general
condition, not the particular state of the dead.

Ans. This phrase in scripture imports, and implies also the particular
state of those that are departed, as 2. Sam. 12.23. David says of his child, I
shall go to him, he shall not come to me: And Luke 23.43. Christ says, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: In both places it signifies to be in
rest and joy, in the same place, where they are, with whom they are said, they
shall be: Ergo, it must be so taken here.

Argum. 4. If it had been Samuel: Vtique vir iustus non permisisset se adorari,
The just man would not have suffered himself to be adored and worshipped: as
the devil does take it at Saules hands, to be worshipped of him. For the text
says, he inclined his face toward the ground, and bowed himself, or
worshipped: August. quaest. ex veteri. testam. 27.

THE SECOND QVESTION CONCERNING Purgatory.
THe question has three parts: first, whether there be any Purgatory for
souls to be purged and cleansed in after this life. Secondly, of other
circumstances and matters that do belong thereunto. Thirdly, of prayer for the
dead.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THERE BE any Purgatory after this life.
The Papists.
THere is (they say) a certain infernal place in the earth, called
Purgatory, Haeres* 11.
in the which, as in a prison house, the souls which were not fully purged in
this life, are there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be received
into heaven: Bellarm. de Purgator. lib. 1.1. lib. 2.6. Rhemist. Matthew. 12.
sect. 6.

Argum. 1. Zachar. 9.11. Thou have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit where
was no water. Psalm. 66.12. We went through fire and water. These and such like
places the Jesuit understands of Purgatory, Lib. 1. de Purgator. cap. 3.

Ans. First, the Jesuit brought this place before, to prove that there was
Limbus Patrum, and now he makes it serve for Purgatory: thus they can make
the scripture to speak what they list themselves. But Purgatory and Limbus
Patrum, are two diverse, yea and contrary things: for the Limbus was only for
those that lived before Christ: Purgatory began since: the Limbus was void of
pain and punishment, so is not Purgatory: wherefore if the Lake or pit in
Zachary signify Purgatory, it makes nothing for Limbus: and if it serve for
Limbus, then they miss of a place for Purgatory. But indeed it signifies no
such thing: but is taken only in that place for the affliction and misery of
this life, as we showed out of Augustine. And so does he also expound such and
the like places out of the Psalms: as Psalm. 86.13. Thou have delivered my
soul from the lowest grave. Quid (says he) est lacus infimus, nisi
profundissima miseria, qua non sit profundior? What else (says he) is the
lowest pit or grave, but the lowest degree of misery, then the which there can
be no greater?

Argum. 2. Luke 8.55. Her spirit came again and she arose. Christ raised the
rulers daughter to life. This evidently shows that there is a third place
beside Heaven and Hell: for the souls that are there cannot return again,
Rhemist.

Ans. Surely a goodly argument, the spirits of Lazarus and of the Maid
returned: Ergo, there is a third place: and why may you not think, that their
souls were, whereas the souls of other righteous are? And why may not the
Lord bring at his pleasure, if it pleases him, the souls at rest into their
bodies again? Fulk. 8. sect. 5.

Argum. 3. Of all other they most insult, and bear themselves bold upon that
place of Saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 3. which being rightly understood, does not
help them anything at al: verse. 13. The fire shall try every man's work. verse.
15. if any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe
himself, yet as it were through the fire. Bellarm. Rhemist. by fire here
understand the flames of Purgatory; by wood, stubble, straw; venial sins,
which must be purged by that fire, Rhemist. 1. Cor. 3. sect. 3.

Ans. First, by the precious matter here, as of gold, silver, are not the
works of charity understood, but the preaching of sound doctrine: by straw,
and stubble, and wood, and other combustible matter, the affectation of
eloquence, and corrupt teaching of the truth, yet holding the foundation: not
venial sins, as the Rhemists affirm: and this Bellarmine also grants.

Secondly, fire is here taken allegorically, as the rest of the words are of
gold, silver, stubble: neither can it be taken for their Purgatory fire;
because it tries the works only, not the persons, and all must be tried by
this fire, as well those that build gold and silver, as the other: but all
shall not pass through Purgatory, by their own confession. They are driven
to this shift, to grant, that verse. 13. the fire is taken in one sense,
namely, for the sentence and judgment of God, and verse. 15. in another, that
is, for the flames of Purgatory. But who sees not how absurd a thing this is,
that in an allegory the same word, and in the same place, should be so
diversely taken?

Thirdly, The day shall reveal it, that is, says Bellarmine, the day of the
Lord at the coming of Christ: the Rhemists understand the particular day of
every man's death; so well they agree together. But it is apparent, that this is
the meaning, that the day, that is, the time shall declare it: for God has
appointed a time to examine every man's doctrine by fire: which is nothing else
but the judgment of God by the fire of his word, whereby every man, in the day
of his calling and conversion, shall know whether he has preached aright or
not: Fulk.

The Protestants.
THat there is no such place of Purgatory after this life, but that here only
is the place of repentance, and to be reconciled unto God: and that the souls
departed are presently either received up to heaven, or thrust down to hell:
thus it is proved out of the scriptures.

Argum. 1. The scripture makes but two kinds of works, either good or evil,
Ecclesiastes 12.14. But two sorts of men, he that believes shall be saved, he
that believes not, shall be condemned. Mark. 16.16. But two places, heaven and
hell: Math. 25. Christ has but two flocks, one of sheep at the right hand,
another of goats at the left: and he says to the one, Come ye blessed: to the
other, Go ye cursed. There are but two sorts of men, therefore but two places:
Ergo, no Purgatory.

Bellarm. There shall be indeed at the coming of Christ but two places,
heaven and hell: Purgatory shall have an end.

Ans. First, you say your selves that there shall be two infernal places for
ever, Hell for the wicked, and a Limbus for infants that dye unbaptized, and
heaven that makes three, and now you say there shall be but two. Secondly,
there are but two places now, because there are but two sorts of men, for the
believers are already passed from death to life, John 5.24. The unbelievers
are already condemned, John 3.18. Thirdly, Augustine consents with us, Non
est vlli vllus medius locus, vt possit esse nisi cum diabolo, qui non est cum
Christo: There is no middle or third place, but he must needs be with the
devil, that is not with Christ. De peccator. remiss. and merit. lib. 1. cap.
28. And again, Tertium locum penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in scripturis
sanctis inuenimus: The third place beside heaven and hell, we are utterly
ignorant of, nay we find not in scripture that there is any.

Arg. 2. S. Paul says, that every man shall receive the works of his body,
according to that which he has done either good or evil, 2. Cor. 5.10.
Therefore there is no place to cleanse and purge the souls of men after this
life: for then they should not receive according to the works done in their
flesh.

Bellarmine says, that even they whose sins are remitted after death, do
receive nothing but that which was done in the flesh, for they deserved in
their life time to be helped after death.

Ans. First, as for desert, we will show elsewhere, that it has no place
before God neither in this life, nor the life to come: for the scripture says,
Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin: not who deserves remission
of sins, Romans 4.6. Secondly, this devised and frivolous distinction, does not
stand with the Apostles meaning: for he speaks of things actually done in the
flesh, not deserved to be done, and of the works of the body, not of the
soul, and of things perfectly done, not begun only or in choate: and he uses
it as a reason to persuade men, even while they live, to be accepted of God,
verse. 9.11. But if there might be any such help after death, there needs no
such have presently to be converted unto God.

Argum. 3. Apocal. 14.13. Blessed are the dead from henceforth that dye in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors: Ergo, there is no Purgatory: for all
the godly departed are at rest.

Bellarm. First, it is not meant of all the godly, but only of Martyrs, which
dye for the name of Christ.

Ans. As to live in Christ Jesus, is a phrase of scripture, and signifies to
live godly in Christ, 2. Timot. 3.12. so to dye in the Lord, signifies to dye
in the faith of Christ, 1. Thessal. 4.16. Therefore this place is understood of
all the godly.

Bellar. 2. This word ( amodo) from henceforth, is not to be understood
straight after their death, but straight after the day of judgment, the^ they
shall be blessed.

Ans. First, by this reason none that are dead in Christ should be happy
before that time. And yet by your own confession, Martyrs are straightway
received up to heaven. Secondly, S. John uses this word elsewhere, to signify
from this time forward, as John 1.51. Christ says to Nathanael, From
henceforth you shall see heaven open.

Rhemist. Thirdly, it may be also understood of the souls of Purgatory, that
are without danger of sin and damnation, and are put in infallible security
of their salvation, with unspeakable comfort.

Ans. First, so the Saints living are blessed, being as well without fear of
damnation, Romans 8.1. and are assured of their salvation, Romans 8.16. Secondly, I
pray you what rest or comfort can they have, that endure greater pain then any
in this life? And how can their consciences be quieted, seeing their souls are
so afflicted? for bodies they have none, whatsoever they suffer is in soul:
how then can joy and pain, comfort and horror be together in the soul? Fulk.
ibid.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE CIRCVMSTANces and other matters belonging to
Purgatory.
The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de purgatorio. cap. 11.

The Protestants.
WE hold, that it is not only an article belonging to the faith, but contrary
to it: and that though there were a Purgatory, yet it should not be necessary
to salvation to believe it. First, because the scripture has not determined
it, which contains all things necessary to salvation. Secondly, the Greek
Church holds it not to this day: they confess no Purgatory, though they
pray for the dead: it were a hard matter therefore to pronounce them damned.
Thirdly, Augustine doubted of it: He says, that there should be some such
place after death, non incredibile est, it is not incredible, and vtrum ita
sit, quaeri potest, and aut inueniri aut latere fideles potest: whether it be
so or not, it may be enquired, and it may either be safely found out, or
remain hid and unknown to the faithful: Enchirid. 69. Augustine says, A
faithful man may safely be ignorant of Purgatory.

The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Purgat. cap. 1.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we deny that any sins are of their own nature venial, as they
affirm; for the wages of al sin, without the mercy of God, is death, To.
6.23. Secondly, what equity should there be in this, that venial sins
should be punished with the hellish fire of Purgatory, that exceeds all the
afflictions of this life, yea and a longer time then any man lives upon earth;
for the Pope takes upon him to pardon for thousands of years: and yet mortal
and deadly sins (as they call them) may be satisfied for here, where neither
the penance can be so grievous, nor so long? Thirdly, the sin once remitted,
there remains no punishment, Mark. 2.5. Christ says to the sick of the
palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee: and verse. 10. That ye may know that the
Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins, I say unto thee,
arise, take up thy bed and walk. The releasing him of the punishment of his
body, was a sign that his sins also were forgiven, and the sin being
remitted, the punishment also cease. Wherefore who so leaves the world
without sin, is no more guilty of any punishment.

The Papists.
3. THe souls in Purgatory do neither sin any more, neither can they
merit. Ecclesiastes 9.5. The dead know nothing at all, verse. 10. there is
neither work, knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, Bellarm. cap. 2.

The Protestants.
WE say, that if there were any such place as Purgatory, the souls there
tormented, must needs both increase in charity and righteousness, because the
more they are purged the more pure they are, and the less dross is in them:
and being in unspeakable torments, they cannot choose but tremble and fear,
yea and also be disquieted in their souls, as the Saints were sometime in
their afflictions here upon earth: and therefore cannot be without sin: for
fear has painfulnes, as the Apostle says, and he that fears is not perfect
in love, 1. John 4.18. Ergo, a servile or slavish fear is sin. That place
alleged does not only take away meriting or working from the dead, but all
knowledge and understanding. And it is spoken in the person of the Epicure and
sensual man, that thinks that the dead know nothing.

The Papists.
4. THey affirm, that the souls in Purgatory are certain of their salvation
in Bellarm. cap. 4.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, that every soul is judged presently after death, we grant: and it
makes strongly against your Purgatory: for the sentence given is either of
death or life: and the sentence being given is accordingly executed: so that
they which receive sentence of life go presently to heaven, the other to hell.
For to what purpose else should the sentence be given, if it be not
straightwaies in force? So S. Paul says, that they which look to be clothed
with their house from heaven, shall not be left naked or unclothed, 2. Cor.
5.2, 3, 4. But if some souls ordained to life eternal, should pause a while
in Purgatory, being unclothed of their flesh, they should be left altogether
naked, having not yet received their clothing from heaven. Secondly, where
there is security of salvation, there is the greatest comfort and joy that can
be: how then can the souls in Purgatory be so grieuouslie tormented, which
cannot be else where then in their conscience? for as for the whipping,
scalding, freezing of souls in Purgatory, they are but old wives fables: the
joy then of the soul is in the conscience, so is the sorrow: how then can both
these be matched in the soul together, to have unspeakable joy, as also to
feel most horrible pain?

5 In these points already set down, our adversaries we see are bold to
define certainly of Purgatory: but there are as many points, and somewhat
more, which they leave in doubt and uncertain. First, where Purgatory should
be: Bellarmine gesseth it is in the bowels of the earth next to hell, cap. 6.
so do the Rhemists, Luke 16. sect. 8. But they do not all agree, neither has
their Church defined it. Secondly, they cannot tell how many years Purgatory
endures, whether an hundred, or two hundred, or thousands of years. Thirdly,
they can not tell certainly whether it be material fire which burns in
Purgatory, but they say it is probable. Fourthly, neither ca^ they show how
corporal fire should work upon the souls in Purgatory, being spiritual and
incorporall, Bellarmine cap. 12. Fifthly, they are uncertain whether the devils
or angels be the tormentors in Purgatory, cap. 13. Sixthly, whether the pain
of Purgatory be at all time alike, or by little and little slaked toward the
end, and whether it do exceed all the pains and sorrows of this life, they
yet remain uncertain, and are not able to determine, Bellarm. lib. 2. de
purgat. cap. 14. Let us leave them therefore with their uncertainties, and
brainsicke phansies: for the vain inventions and imaginations of men have no
end, but are fitly by the Prophet compared to sparkles, that leap out thick
out of the fire, but are soon extinguished: Walk, says the Prophet, Isay.
50.11.
in the light of your fire, and sparks that you have kindled: that is, as the
sparks give but a dim light for a man to walk by, he may stumble and grope
about still for all that light: even so, no marvel if the Papists do wander
up and down in their imaginations, walking by the light and sparkles of their
fantastical and mathematical fire of Purgatory.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER THE PRAYERS OF the living, or any other works of
theirs do profit the dead.
The Papists.
Haeres. 15.
THeir opinion is, that the prayers of the living are neither auailable for the
Saints in heaven, for they need them not, not for the damned in hell, for they
cannot be helped, but only for the souls tormented in Purgatory, who do
find great ease, say they, by the prayers of the living, and therefore we ought
to pray for them, Bellar. lib. 2. de purgator. cap. 15.18. Rhemist. annot. 2.
Thessal. 2. sect. 19.

Argum. 1. Christ while he lived, profited the dead, for he raised to life the
rulers daughter, Math. 9. the widows son, Luke 7. and Lazarus, which were
dead: therefore even so the members of Christ ought one to help another, the
living the dead, Bellarm. cap. 15.

Ans. First, is not here a strong argument, think you, Christ raised Lazarus
and some others from death to life, Ergo, we ought to pray for the dead? for it
follows not, that upon the miraculous works of Christ, we should build the
ordinary duties of Christians: Augustine would have told you that Christ is
not to be imitated in such works: Non hoc tibi dicit, non eris discipulus
meus, nisi ambulaueris supra mare, aut nisi suscitaueris quatriduanum mortuum:
He says not unto thee, Thou shall not be my disciple, unless thou walk upon
the sea, and raise one that has been dead four days: But, Learn of me: for
I am humble and meek. Secondly, if prayer for the dead be unto us, as the
raising of the dead was to Christ: then, as all the dead are to be prayed for,
so Christ should have raised again all that went then to Purgatory, or else,
by your conclusion, he failed in charity, as we do now, if we pray not for
the dead, as you bear us in hand. Thirdly, though the Saints departed, and the
faithful living are members of the same body, and so are bound in love one to
the other, yet it follows not, that one should pray for the other. They with
us, and we with them do wish and long to see the redemption of the sons of
God accomplished, Revel. 6.10.22.20. But charity binds us not one to pray
for another, because we know not one the particular needs of another. Nay, to
pray for any departed, is against the rule of charity: for love believes all
things, and hops all things, 1. Corinthians 13.7. We ought to hope the best
of the dead, that they are at rest: but in praying for them, we presuppose
they are in misery, and so need our prayers: therefore we hope not the best
of them, as charity wills us.

Argum. 2. John 5. verse. 16. The Apostle says, There is a sin unto death,
for the which a man ought not to pray: that is, deadly sin, wherein a man
dies without repentance: but for other sins not unto death, whereof men
repent themselves, it is lawful to pray: Ergo, we may pray for those that are
departed not in deadly sin: for this place is properly to be understood of
praying or not praying for the dead: because so long as a man lives he may be
prayed for, because all sins are pardonable in this life, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, a sin unto death is not only final impenitencie, but sin
also against the holy Ghost, such as was the sin of Judas, and of the
Pharisees. Secondly, though we should understand it of final impenitencie, yet
it is but a so^y argument, some of the dead ought not to be prayed for: Ergo,
the rest may, Thirdly, the text cannot be understood of praying for the dead:
for the text says not, If any man see that his brother has sinned not unto
death, but, If he see him sinning: but the dead do neither sin, nor are
seen to sin. Fourthly, whereas you say, that all sins are pardonable in
this life, our Savior Christ says contrary, that the sin against the holy
Ghost can never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
Plura. apud. Fulk. ibid.

The Protestants.
TO pray for the dead, is a work neither pleasing before God, because he has
no where commanded it, nor auailable for them that are departed, because they
have their judgment already. While we live, let us one pray for another, but
when we are gone, the prayers of the living help us not.

Argum. 1. The ground of this popish opinion of prayer for the dead, is their
superstitious devise of Purgatory: for none else do they hold it lawful to
pray for but for the souls only in Purgatory. But there is no Purgatory, as
we have showed before, after this life: our purging is only in this life:
Christ has by him self purged our sins. Hebr. 1.3. Christ his blood is the
chief and only purgation of our sins: there are also other inferior and
ministerial purgings, whereby that only sovereign purging is made
beneficial, and applied unto us: as the inward operation and work of the
spirit is compared to fire, Math. 3.11. 1. Corinthians. 3.13. There is also a
purging fire of affliction compared by the Prophet to fullers soap, Malach.
3.3. There also shall be a third purging fire in the day of the Lord, 1. Pet.
3.7. when as the corruption and mortality of our bodies shall be purged away,
and then shall our mortality put on immortality, 1. Corinthians. 15.53. Other
Purgatory after this life we acknowledge none. Seeing then that there are no
souls in Purgatory, and for none else it is lawful to pray but for the souls
tormented in Purgatory: it follows, that we are to pray for none at all that
are dead.

Argum. 2. No prayer is acceptable to God without faith. We must pray without
wavering and doubting, James. 1.6. But so can we not pray for the dead: for we
cannot tell in what case they are for whom we pray, whether they be in heaven,
hell, or purgatory, and therefore we cannot assure our selves that our prayers
are heard, but must needs pray with great doubting and wavering of the mind:
Ergo, such prayers are in vain, James 1.7.

Argum. 3. Our prayers profit not the dead, because there is no place after
this life for repentance or remission of sins: for this should be the end and
intendment of our prayer, that they might be released of their sins, and
eased of their pain. There is no remission of sins after death, because
there is no true repentance: repentance there is none, because there can be no
amendment of life, which always follows repentance: for John Baptist that
was a preacher of repentance, bid not only the people to repent, but to bring
forth fruits worthy repentance, Math. 3.2.8. So says the Prophet Ezechiel,
If the wicked will return from his sins, and do the thing that is lawful,
he shall live and not dye, 18.21. There are two parts then of repentance, as
Isay says, Cease to do evil, learn to do well, 1. Isay. 16.17. But there
is no place of working out of the body: Ergo, then no repentance.

To this Augustine agrees: Non est apud inferos poenitentia ad salutem
proficiens, ecce nunc tempus est salutis, nunc tempus remissionis. In hac vita
poenitentiae tantum patet libertas, post mortem nulla correctionis est
licentia: De tempor. sermon. 66. In hell, or among the dead, there is no
repentance unto salvation: behold now is the time of salvation, the time of
forgiveness: In this life only have men liberty to repent, after death there
is no place for amendment. What is become now (I pray you) of your Purgatory
repentance? after this life there is no salvation to be had, because there is
no remission of sins: no remission of sins, because there is no repentance:
there is no repentance, because there is no amendment.

Rhemist. Our Savior says, Math. 12.32. that blasphemy against the spirit
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor the world to come: Ergo, some
sins may be forgiven in the world to come.

Ans. Mark expounds Matthew: He says, It shall never be forgiven, Mark. 3.29.
So that not to be forgiven either in this world or the world to come, is
nothing else, but never to be forgiven: for if it be not forgiven in this life,
it shall never be forgiven.

Bellarm. Yea, but Matthew must expound Mark, because he sets it down more
fully, and Mark does but abridge the Gospel written by S. Matthew, De Purgat.
lib. 1. cap. 4.

Ans. But why should not Mark rather expound Matthew, seeing he writ after him?
and we use to expound the former writers by the later, not contrariwise.

AN APPENDIX OR AN APPERTINENCE TO this part, concerning the burials and
funerals of the dead.
THere are certain points, wherein there is no great variance or dissension
between us. First, we confess, that it is meet and convenient, that the
bodies of Christians, being departed, should after a seemly and comely manner
be brought to the grave: as David commends the men of Iabesh Gilead, for
burying the body of Saul, 2. Sam. 2.5. The brethren also took the body of
Stephen and buried it, Act. 8.2. Secondly, it is not to be denied but that
lamentatio^ and sorrow may be made for the dead, observing S. Paul's rule, that
We mourn not as those that have no hope, that is, excessiuely, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
where S. Paul does not simply forbid Christians to sorrow, but not as the
Gentiles. The brethren also made great lamentation for Stephen, Act. 8.2.
Thirdly, we do also grant, that according to the diverse customs of
countries, it is not unlawful to use some comely rites and ceremonies in the
burial of the dead; not for religion, but for orders sake: as among the
Israelites, the mourners were wont to go about in the streets, Ecclesiast.
12.5. And Christ commended the woman in the Gospel, for anointing of him
against his burial, Mark. 14.

But beside these points by us confessed, and acknowledged; there are other
more weighty matters, as touching the order of funerals, wherein we worthily
and justly dissent from our adversaries.

Rhemist. as the souls of the righteous do rest in Christ, who is that altar,
under the which the Apostle saw the souls of Martyrs: so for the
correspondence to the place in heaven, their bodies are commonly laid under the
altar, where the sacrifice of the body of Christ is daily offered, Annot.
Apocalypse. 6. verse. 9.

Ans. The altar of the Cross was the only place where the body of Christ was
sacrificed: neither need it to be often offered in sacrifice, but it sufficed
once only to have been done, Heb. 9.25.27. And in the Communion, we
acknowledge no sacrifice, but of praise and thanksgiving. Heb. 13.15. It is
kept only in remembrance of the death of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.25. And how should
it be available for the dead, seeing it profits not all the living, but
only those that are present, which do eat and drink the holy elements of
bread and wine in remembrance of the body and blood of Christ given and shed
for them? So says the scripture, Do this, as often as you do it, in
remembrance of me, 1. Cor. 11.25. The doers therefore, agents, and receivers,
have the present benefit, not they which are absent: how then can the dead
receive any solace by it? It profits then not a whit to be laid in Churches,
or Churchyards, or other hallowed places, as they call them: for all places are
alike: neither helps it the dead to be buried in one place more then another:
for God shall command the sea, and all other places to give up their dead,
Apocalypse. 20. The very heathen did confess as much: one says, It skilleth
not, humine, an sublime putrescam: whether I rot under, Theodor.
or above the ground. And another thus writes, Coelo tegitur, qui non habet
vrnam: Lucan.
Heaven is a covering to him that has no other coffin. It were a foul shame
then for Christians, to exceed the very Gentiles in their superstitious
conceits. Augustine says, Si aliquid prodest impio sepultura preciosa, oberit
pio vilis, aut nulla: De cura pro mortuis cap. 3.
If sumptuous funerals profit the wicked, then homely or no burials do hurt
the godly. Therefore as it helps not a wicked man to be buried in one place,
more then another, so it does not hinder or hurt the godly and righteous man.

2 We condemn also their superstitious ceremonies which they use at their
Bellarm. de purgator. lib. 2. cap. 19.

Ans. First, this superstitious use of setting up candles, was directly
forbidden in the Elibertine Council, Canon. 34. Of the like sort also were
other superstitious vsages, as the going about of the belman to will the people
to pray for their souls, the ringing or iangling of bells to bring their souls
to heaven, with queere songs and other melody to commit the bodies to the
ground, and commending their souls to the protection of Saints. We deny not,
but comely and decent orders, void of superstition, may be used, according to
the fashion of the country: as Jacobs body was embaulmed after the manner of
the Egyptians, Genes. 50.2. At the burial of their Kings, the Israelites used
to burn odors, Iere. 34.5. The Jews manner was to wash the bodies of the
dead, to wind it up in a linen cloth, and bury it with spices and odors: So
our Saviors body was buried after the manner of the Jews, John 19.40. We
read also that Joseph was put into a coffin or chest, Genes. 50.26. Of these
and the like customs, Augustine gives a rule, writing upon those words in the
Gospel, John 19.40. As it was the manner of the Jews to bury: Non mihi
videtur Euangelista sic frustra dicere voluisse: ita quippe admonuit, in
huiusmodi officijs, quae mortuis exhibentur, morem cuiusque gentis esse
seruandum: in Iohann. tract. 120. Me thinks the Evangelist said not thus
without cause: hereby letting us to understand, that in performing such duties
of burial to the dead, the manner and custom of every country is to be kept.

The Jews also had a custom, with some company or frequencie of people, to
bring their dead to the ground, Eccle. 12.5. And in the while, to use some
admonition to the people concerning death and mortality which came in by
sin, and of the wrath and mercy of God. Syrus. interp. in Mark. 14.3.
Neither do we see, why it is not lawful now among Christians, at funerals and
burials, to have some godly sermon and exhortation, to put the people in mind
of their end, and to comfort them with the hope of the resurrection, as also to
give God thanks, for those his faithful servants, that did glorify him by
their life, and by their godly departure. This seems also to have been the
commendable custom of the Church in ancient time: as Augustine writes thus,
Exposit. in Psalm. 103. part. 1. Pauca nos cogit dicere temporis angustia, quod
and nouit charitas vestra debere vos exequijs fidelis corporis solenne
obsequium. The shortness of the time causes me to be brief, and you know, that
we are to perform a solemn duty to the body of our faithful brother. The
sermon seems to have been made at some funeral. The Jews also, the burial
being ended, did comfort those that mourned, and eat and drank with them, and
gave them the cup of consolation, Ierem. 16.7. John 11.31. Both which customs
may be kept and retained without any superstition. But other customs and
ceremonies, that do savor of impiety, and do any way implye prayer or
commendation of the souls of the dead, ought to be left and abolished.

3 Another abuse in popish funerals, is their superstitious and often
remembrance of the dead: for they have their weeks mind for the dead the
seventh Joseph mourned but seven days for his father, Genesis 50.10. So did
the Gileadites for Saul, 1. Samuel 31.13. The Egyptians in deed mourned
threescore and ten days, when Joseph mourned but seven: that we may see a
manifest difference between the moderate mourning of the faithful, and the
excessive lamentation of infidels. But the popish years minds do far
exceed the Egyptians stinted mourning: there being five times 70. days in a
year. Yet yearly stipends, erected for weekly, monthly, quarterly, or
yearly sermons we mislike not: being ordained for the instruction of the
people, without any relation to the souls of the dead, otherwise, then to give
God thanks for them, and those good things which the Lord wrought by them.

Sam. 2.5. where David sent messengers to the men of Iabesh Gilead, saying,
Blessed are ye of the Lord, that you have showed such kindness unto your Lord
Saul and have buried him: therefore now the Lord show mercy and truth unto
you, Bellarm. cap. 19.

Answer. There can be no such conclusion gathered out of these words: The Lord
will show mercy, according to his truth and promise, to those that are
merciful: Ergo, it is meritorious to be merciful: for here the reward
depends of Gods promise and truth, not upon the worthiness of the work:
Indeed David says, as it follows in that place, I will recompense this
benefit, because you have done this thing. They might deserve kindness at the
hands of David, because one good turn requires another: but before the Lord
there is no merit or desert. Secondly, to bury the dead is a work of
charity, and therefore commanded, as all other duties of charity are. The
things then commanded, we do of duty, we are bound to do them: Ergo, they
are not meritorious: So says our Savior Christ, Does the master thank his
servant for doing that which he was commanded? I trow not, Luke 17.9.

Et ideo in hoc solo casu melior est conditio diuitis, quam pauperis, quia
habet vnde suffragia fiant pro ipso. And therefore in this case only the
estate of the rich is better then the poor, because he has wherewithal
suffrages should be made: that is, able to give great legacies, and bequests to
that end: Albert, mag. de officio miss. tract. 3. Again, they have greater
respect unto the Pope departed, then any other: for the first day there must be
200. Masses read for his soul, and for nine days after an 100. Masses every
day, Tilemann, de primat pontif. error 86.

Ans. Where do they read in all the scriptures, that the rich in matters of
the soul should be preferred before the poor? nay, the scripture says
plainly, that God is no accepter of persons, Act. 10.34. And S. James says, We
ought not to regard a rich man that wears goodly apparel, having a gold
ring, before a poor man in vile apparel: 2. verse. 2. Where also do they
learn to pray for none but for those, for whom they are hired to pray? And if
prayer be a work of charity, and if by their prayers they can deliver men's
souls out of Purgatory, why do they not extend their charity to all in
praying for them?

What if the rich Glutton, and poor Lazarus were alive now, or these popish
Masse-mongers had lived then: would they have been bought for money to have
prayed for the rich man's soul, and let Lazarus alone? It is like they would.
But surely all their Masses should neither have profited the one: nor the want
of them have hindered the other. Mark, I pray you, what Augustine says:
Praeclaras exequias in conspectu hominum purpurato illi diuiti turba exhibuit
famulorum: De cura pro mort. cap. 9.
sed multo clariores in conspectu domini vlceroso illi pauperi ministerium
praebuit angelorum: A goodly funeral did the friends and servants make for the
rich man arrayed in skarlet in the sight of the world: but a more blessed
burial had the poor man in the sight of God, by the ministry of the angels.
Therefore there is no respect of persons to be had among the dead: neither have
the rich any greater privilege for the multitude of suffrages, then the poor
that wants them: for no doubt the rich man's executors spared for no cost;
Masses, Trentals, Diriges they had enough, if they were then to be had: yet for
all this stir his soul went to Hell, and Lazarus soul was by the angels
carried to heaven, that had none of this geere.

6. Lastly, if there were no other thing to be misliked in their Funerals, this
were sufficient to condemn them as abominable; that they think, their
singing, Bellarm. ibid.

Augustine gives two reasons of this duty to be showed in the burying of the
dead. First, Corpori humando quicquid impenditur, non est praesidium salutis,
sed humanitatis officium. What duty is performed in enterring the body, is
an officious work of humanity, not any relief for the health of the soul.
Secondly, says he, Corpori mortuo, sed tamen resurrecturo, impensum huiusmodi
officium, est quodammodo eiusdem fidei testimonium: De cura pro mortuis epilog.
This Christian duty bestowed in burying the dead bodies, which shall
notwithstanding rise again, is a lively testimony in us of the same faith.
That is, we do carefully commit the bodies of Christians to the ground,
knowing that they are not lost, but shall rise again: but as for the dead
themselves, they receive no benefit at all. Curatio funeris, pompae
exequiarum, viuorum sunt solatia magis, quam subsidia mortuorum: This great
provision for funerals, this great pomp of burials, De cura pro mortuis cap. 2.
they are comforts for the living, not helps to the dead. Impleant ergo
homines ista erga suos postremi muneris officia, and sui leuamenta moeroris:
Let men therefore perform this last duty to their friends, which is also a
great lightening of their grief: Ergo, funerals profit not the dead, but
comfort the living: yea, it is called the last duty, which is performed at
burials: If it be the last, then there is no duty afterward to be done:
therefore prayers also are superfluous: for if it were needful to pray for the
dead, then the last duty should not be in the burial, another coming
afterward. And thus much also concerning the manner and order of funerals.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS Controversy, of the Saints departed that are in joy
and bliss.
THis controversy stands of these several questions.

1. Of the blessed estate of the Saints in heaven, and of the Canonizing of
them upon earth.

2. Of the adoration of Saints: First, whether they be to be adored or not, and
whether it be lawful to swear by them. Secondly, of the diverse kinds of
worship. Thirdly, of the worship of Saints upon earth.

3. Of the invocation of Saints: whether they pray for us and understand our
prayers.

4. Of the adoration, translation, keeping of relics, and of the miracles
wrought by them.

5. Of Images, and the sign of the Cross, and other matters thereto belonging
more particularly handled.

6 Of Churches: the form, use, ornaments, dedication of them, and such like.

7 Of Pilgrimages and Processions.

8 Of holy and festival days, the Lords day, Saints days, and of Lent.

9 Of the Virgin Mary, her conception, vows, assumption, worship, merits. Of
these now in order.

THE FIRST QVESTION CONCERNING THE blessed and happy estate of the Saints
departed.
THis question has two parts: First, of their blessedness which they have
before God in heaven. Secondly, of the publishing or making known their
blessedness before men, which they call the canonizing of Saints.

THE FIRST PART OF THE BLESSED estate of the Saints before God in heaven.
The Papists.
BEllarmine takes great pains, Lib. 1. De Sanctis, in six long chapters
together, to prove, that the Saints departed do presently enjoy the sight of
God, and do enter into bliss, and that their souls forthwith are received
into heaven, and are not kept in any secret by-places till the day of
judgment. But all this while he sighteth with his own shadow: for we grant,
as much as he proves, that the righteous are with Christ so soon as they are
loosed from their bodies, as Christ said to the thief upon the Cross, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.42. See also to this purpose,
Philipp. 1.23. 2. Corinthians. 5.1. Heb. 12.22. All these places do evidently
prove, that presently after their departure, the souls of the faithful do
enjoy the presence of Christ, and the celestial company of the Angels in
heaven. Yet our adversaries stay not here, neither are contented with this,
that the Saints are blessed: but proceed further, and give them a full
possession of blessedness, making no difference between Rhemist. annot. Luke
15. sect. 2. And Bellarmine therefore takes up Calvin, because he says, the
Saints are yet in hope and expectation of the perfect fruition of glory, Cap.
1. lib. 1. De Sanctis.

The Protestants.
WE confess, that the Saints in heaven are already Apocal. 14.13.
blessed: yet they look for the full accomplishment and perfection of their
glory, when as their bodies shall be glorified in the resurrection: Then it is
said, they shall be like the Angels, and yet not in all things: much less are
their souls now equal to the Angels in glory, Fulk. ibid. annot. Luke 15.
sect. 2.

Argum. 1. The Saints shall be as the Angels, but not before the resurrection,
Math. 22.30. Neither can it be proved out of that text, that they shall then be
equal to the Angels in all things: for it is not all one to say; they shall be
as the Angels, because they shall then need no marriage, as to say they shall
be equal to the Angels in all things. Apocalypse. 6.10. The souls under the
altar do cry, Lord, how long! Ergo, they are in expectation of greater
glory. And reason also gives as much, that the body and the soul being
joined together in the kingdom of God, shall make a fuller weight and measure
of joy.

Argum. 2. The wicked spirits and damned souls, have not yet their full and
perfect torment: Ergo, neither the Saints their perfect joy. The devils are
now tormented, and kept in chains of darkness, 2. Pet. 2.4. Iud. 6. But their
full damnation is reserved for the day of the Lord, Math. 25.41. They are not
yet tormented in such measure, as they shall be, and themselves make account
for, Math. 8.29. Luke 8.31.

Lastly, if now the Saints are equal to the Angels in joy, their souls only
being in heaven: it then follows, that in the resurrection, when their bodies
shall be restored to their souls, their happiness shall far Rhemist. Luke 20.
sect. 3 affirm that some Saints shall be above the Angels.
exceed the Angels: which no where the scripture teaches us, unless they will
thus reason, Christ took not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Hebr. 2.16.
Ergo, we are better then the Angels. But to this Augustine answers very
well: Some perhaps will say, that we are better then the Angels, because
Christ dyed for us, and not for the Angels. Quale est (says he) ideo se velle
aegrotum laudari, quia vitio suo tam detestabiliter aegrotauit, vt non posset
aliter, Tractat. in Johan. 110.
quam medic^ morte sanari. As if a sick man deserved commendation, because by
his own fault, he was so dangerously sick, that he could not be healed, but
by the death of the Physician. Quid hoc aliud est, quam de impietate gloriari?
Christus enim pro impijs mortuus est. What is this else but for man to boast of
his wickedness? Christ dyed not for angels, but for men, because they were
wicked.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE Canonizing of Saints.
The Papists.
Bellarm. cap. 7.

Argum. 1. The Patriarchs and Prophets were Canonized for Saints in the old
law, Heb. 11. So Act. 7. Stephen and other were Canonized: therefore it is
credible, that the Lord would have the same order still continued in his
Church, Bellarm. cap. 7.

Ans. First, neither in the old nor the new law, were any set up to be Saints,
with intent to be worshipped, called upon, temples to be consecrated in their
names: but only the scripture gives testimony of them, as of holy and
faithful men: and so may we also honor the blessed Martyrs, whom the cruel
Emperors of Rome, and since them the Popes of Rome have sent through fire and
other torments to heaven. Secondly, when they have as good testimony for their
Saints, as we have for the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, they may be bold to
pronounce them to be holy blessed. Thirdly, your argument follows not, unless
you will say, that the Church may do all things now, which the Prophets and
Apostles did then: They may as well make scripture, and more Canonical books
by the same reason, as make and Canonize new Saints.

The Protestants.
THat none of the Saints are to be adored or worshipped, their images or
relics, or prayers to be made unto them, or any such honor to be given them,
it shall afterward appear more at large: And therefore they ought not to be
Canonized to any such end or purpose. We also grant, that the number of Gods
Saints and elect is increased daily: and we are sure in general, as the
scripture testifies, that the death of his Saints is precious in the sight of
God, Psalm. 116.15. And that all are blessed that dye in the Lord: But
particularly we are not able certainly to determine of any: the matter is to be
left wholly unto God, and we in the mean time to hope the best.

Argum. 1 If the Church has authority to Canonize Saints, and determine of
the election or salvation of men, then may we as well judge of the condemnation
of those that are lost: for if it be known to the Church who are Saints in
heaven, they also may as well define who are damned in hell. But this none can
do: nay, it were great rashness and want of charity for any so to take upon
them. S. Paul says, Why condemnest thou another man's servant? he stands or
falls to his own master, Romans 14.4. No man can judge whether the servant
stand or fall, but his Master: Ergo, if the Church presume to determine of the
election or damnation of those that are departed, she is now a Mistres and
Lady rather of the Saints, then they Lords or patrones to her, as the Papists
hold they are.

Argum. 2 Judge not (says S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 4.5.) before the time until
the Lord come. The judgment then of men, who are saved, and who are condemned,
is reserved for the coming of Christ: Therefore it is great presumption for
men to prevent the time, and to take upon them to be Judges in Gods place.
Again, our Savior Christ says, that To sit at his right hand or left, in his
kingdom, was not his to give (meaning as he was man) but it shall be given to
them for whom it is prepared of my Father, Math. 20.23. How then is it in the
power of any sinful man, to give unto any a seat, either at the right hand, or
left hand of Christ, in the kingdom of God? Argument. Gualter. Bruti. Fox
page. 487.

Augustine also consents: Non separatio iam cuique tuta est, illius erit
separatio, qui non nouit errare: Nos in hac vita difficile est, vt nos ipsos
nouerimus, quanto minus debemus de quoqua^ praeproperam far sententiam. It is
not safe for men now to make separation (of the good and bad) it belongs to
him, that can not err: We in this life do hardly know our selves, how much
less ought we to judge rashly of others? exposit. in Psalm. 139. Here are two
reasons given, why it is not lawful for men to judge of the election or
reprobation of men: first their judgment is subject to error, and therefore
the matter must be referred to God, who erreth not: Secondly, we can not judge
our selves, much less can we judge of others. Ergo, no man living ought or is
able to define either who are Saints in heaven, or who are damned in Hell.

AN APPENDIX OR THIRD PART of other circumstances, which belong to the
Canonizing of Saints.
The Papists.
THey say, that it does appertain only to the Pope, to Canonize a Saint for
none are Canonized by the Pope for saints, which have not been known to
work miracles, Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 8.9, 10.

The Protestants.
FIrst, if saints were to be registered and Canonized as they say: yet it
should not belong to the Pope, but to the whole Church.

Argum. 1 The Pope has no authority over the whole Church: no nor yet in any
other Bishops dioces, no more then they have in his: Let him be content with
his own dioces (and it were to be wished, that he could rule that well) the
whole world is too large a province for him.

2 The whole Church has power to excommunicate and deliver up to satan, 1. Corinthians 5. 4. and to cut off the profane and wicked from the Church of God, as
heathen and publicanes, Math. 18.17: Ergo, to judge who are members of the
Church, and saints of God, is a matter which appertains to the whole Church.
3 Before Anno. 800. in the time of Carolus magnus, there was no saint
publicly Canonized by the pope, as Bellarm. confesses: but the truth is,
this custom of Canonizing saints began not till more then 1000. year after
Christ, til Alexander the 3. his time, and Gregory the 7. I pray you then,
were there no saints before? if there were, who canonized them?

Secondly: So much as is to be known of saints and holy men, every Christian
is to acknowledge, without any public decree or determination of the Pope or
any other: for the word of God gives rules, whereby we may discern the
righteous from the unrighteous: Christ speaking of false prophets, says, By
their fruits ye shall know them, Math. 7.16. And again, he faith thus to his
Apostles, By this shall men know that you are my disciples, if you love one
another, John 13.35. By these rules, it is easy for every Christian to judge
who for the present time, are the true disciples of Christ, who otherwise.

Thirdly, it is a most impudent and shameless saying, that the Pope can not err
in canonizing of Saints: 1 Miracles are no sufficient proof of a saint: for
many, that shall be condemned in the day of Judgment, have had power to do
strange works, Math. 7.22, 23. 2 What better argument can we have of this,
then common experience? For the Popes have registered in their Calendars
notorious wicked me^, and traitors to their Princes, as saints and holy men:
Such an one was Thomas Becket, who some hundredth years was worshipped as a
saint, by the name of S. Thomas of Canterbury: and yet was a plain traitor to
his prince, Fox page 225. And therefore his shrine was justly put down in King
Henry the 8. days. Richard Scroope of York was openly in arms against Henry
the fourth. Fox. pa. 579
Thomas Earl of Lancaster a rebel against Edward the second, yet both are the
popes canonized saints.

Fox p. 1054
Elizabeth Barton was called the holy Maid of Kent, and feigned that she had
many revelations: yet was found to be a traitor, and executed: these are the
popes saints. And on the other side, they have condemned the true saints and
Martyrs of God, and accursed them to the bottomless pit of Hell: as they dealt
most wickedly with John Husse that zealous servant of God, upon whose head they
set a crown of paper pictured with deuilles, as if he were given into the
power of Satan. But we do judge of these holy men, as the scripture teaches,
which says, that they are blessed which dye in the Lord, Apocal. 14.13. Their
good life, holy profession, and constant death and martyrdom decla^^d no
less; and that assurance, which God gave them of their election: as it
appeared in that worthy Martyr doctor Barnes, who being brought to the stake,
says thus unto the people: If saints do pray for us, I trust to pray for you
within this half hour: who at the same time uttered his opinion, that not
withstanding to pray unto saints was against the word of God, Fox. page. 1199.
although it should be granted, that they pray for us.

Let them now be ashamed to say still, that the pope cannot err in Canonizing
saints, who condemns good men, and justifies the wicked, according to the
common saying, Many are worshipped for saints in heaven, whose souls do burn
in Hell.

Thirdly, Augustine thus writes of this matter: Per has humanorum cordium
tenebras, res multum miranda and dolenda contingit, vt eum nonnunquam quem
iniustum putamus (iustiu tamen est) auersemur, and hominem bonum tanquam malum
affligamus, quem nescientes amamus. By reason of the darkness and ignorance of
men's hearts, a pitiful and strange thing many times falls out, that we
should hate a man, whom we take to be a wicked and ungodly one (and yet he is
a righteous man:) and so we punish a good man for a bad, whom we
notwithstanding do unwittingly love for his goodness, tract. in Johan. 99. Ergo
the judgment of men is uncertain, and the best may be deceived in judging of
others, who are bad, and who good.

THE SECOND QVESTION CONcerning the adoration of Saints.
THis question has three parts, First, whether saints are to be adored:
Secondly, of the diverse kinds of adoration: Thirdly, concerning the worship
due unto holy men living, as the kissing of feet, and such like.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER SAINTS are to be adored and worshipped.
The Papists.
THey doubt not to affirm, that there is a kind of Religious woorshippe due
unto Saints, not that great Religious woorshippe which is proper unto God, but
a kind somewhat less and inferior to that, yet a religious adoration, which
is the mean or midst between that highest worship due unto God, and civil
honor which is given unto men. So this is their sentence, that religious
worship is due both to God and to the saints: herein only (say they) the
difference is, the more religious worship belongs only to God, the less
unto the saints. Bellarm. cap. 12. lib. 1. de Sanctor. beatit.

Argum. 1 The Psalmist says, Adore his footestoole, Psalm. 99.5. and Heb.
11.21. Jacob adored the top of his rod: Ergo, it is lawful to adore creatures.
Bellarm. cap. 13. Rhemist. annot. 11. Heb. sect. 9.

Answer. In the first place by the footestoole is understood the Tabernacle
with the Arc: the Prophet says not, Adore his footestoole, but, At or before
his footestoole: for we deny not, but that we may kneel down, and fall
prostrate in adoring of God before such things, but none is to be adored but
God. In the same place the Apostle says, that Jacob worshipped toward the end
of his staff, that is, leaning upon his staff. The vulgar latin reads
corruptly adorauit fastigium baculi, He worshipped the end of his staff: for
then the Greek preposition (...), were superfluous. And Augustine expounds it
aright, saying, that Jacob by faith worshipped God upon the end of his staff:
quaest. in Genesis 162. Fulk. annot. Heb. 11. sect. 9.

Argum. 2. Nabuchadnezzar bowed himself to Daniel, and caused odors to be
offered unto him, and worshipped him, who for so doing was not reproved of the
Prophet: Ergo, Saints are to be worshipped. Bellar. ibid. Rhemens. annot.
Apocal. 19 sect. 5.

Ans. 1 The offering of sacrifice, is a worship, by our adversaries own
confession, proper to God, though they grant most grossly, that it is lawful
to offer incense to the images of saints. Bellarm. cap. 13. The King therefore
commanding in this place sacrifice to be offered to Daniel, did attribute unto
him the godly worship: and therefore no doubt he was reproved of Daniel, though
the text make no mention of it. Bellarmine, by offering of sacrifice, here would
understand the bringing of gifts. Ans. This is showed afterward verse. 48. How
the King made Daniel a great man, and gave him great gifts: and the offering of
presents is but a part of civil honor: but the King here does yield religious
worship to Daniel.

2 It appears verse 47. that the King was reproved by Daniel, and forbidden
to worship him, and commanded only to worship God, because the King
confesses, that Daniels God is a God of Gods, and therefore only to be
worshipped.

The Protestants.
WE can find in the word of God but two kinds of worship or adoration: a
religious worship only due unto God: and a civil honor used amongst men. As
for the Angels and saints, we do honor them with love, not with service. We do
also reverence the holy men upon earth, as the Prophets and Apostles were in
times past, with a civil adoration or worship of love, not with a religious
service. There is also a due reverence and estimation of such things as are
sanctified to holy uses, as of the Tabernacle, Arc, Altar, Sacrifice in the
Law: such now are the Sacraments, which are duly to be reverenced, yet not to
be adored, or kneeled unto. So we conclude, that all religious service and
worship belongs only unto God, and it were great idolatry, to give it to
any other, Fulke annot. Apocal. 19. sect. 5.

Argum. 1. The scripture is plain: Math. 4 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. 1. Tim. 1.17. To God only wise, immortal,
invisible, be all honor and glory: Ergo, all religious worship is only due
unto God. Bellarmine answers, that these places are to be understood of a
certain kind of religious worship, which is only proper to God. Ans. All
religious worship is forbidden in these places to be given to any but unto God:
for Satan did not tempt Christ, to worship him as God, but only to fall down
and worship him: he asked only of him, (...), a certain inclination of the
body, which Christ denies, as being only proper to God, Caluini. argum.

Argum. 2. When Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet and would have worshipped
him, he was forbidden by Peter, Act. 10.25. So the Angel would not suffer John
to worship him, Apocal. 22. Paul and Barnabas stayed the people that would have
offered sacrifice unto them, Act. 14.14.

Bellarm. answers to the first, that Peter of modesty refused the homage of
Cornelius.

Ans. Peter gives this reason, why he would not have Cornelius so to do, I
also am a man (says he:) thereby letting him to understand, that such kind of
worship ought not to be given to any man: The same reason is rendered Acts. 14.
by Paul and Barnabas, why they refused sacrifice: We also (say they) are men.
If Peter did of modesty refuse Cornelius worship, then Paul and Barnabas did
for modesty sake only likewise refuse to be sacrificed unto, which I am sure
they will not grant.

Bellarm. to the second says, that John did well in worshipping the Angel, and
the Angel did well in refusing to be worshipped: for though the Angels of
right are to be worshipped, yet they do well to refuse it, for reverence to the
humanity and manhood of Christ. Ans. first, let it be noted that Bellarmin
shapeth a clean contrary answer to our Rhemist. as appears before, cont. 8.
quaest. 3. part. 1. For they say, that John was deceived in the person of the
Angel, taking him for Christ, and is forbidden by the Angel to worship him as
God: but Bellarmine altogether freeth John from all error, and commends his
doing: whereas it is certain, that John knew well enough that he was an
Angel, but being carried away in the ecstasie of his mind, did for the
present time forget himself. And that the Angel did not of modesty refuse to
be worshipped, but absolutely and simply, it is made manifest by his answer to
John, Worship thou God: He would not have the Apostle to worship him, but God.

Bellarmine to the third says, that the Apostles did well in refusing to be
sacrificed unto: because to offer sacrifice is an external act of worship to be
performed only to God, cap. 14.

Ans. 1. What reason have they to burn incense unto saints and their images,
rather then to offer sacrifice? For it appears in the law, that the burning
of incense was more precious, and a more high point of the Leuitical service,
then was the offering of sacrifice. 1. The Altar of incense was more curiously
made, being ouerlayed with fine gold, and was called the golden altar, the
other for burnt offerings, the brazen Altar, Exodus 40.26.

2. The altar of incense was placed in the Tabernacle near unto the most holy
place, the other altar stood at the door without, Exodus 40.26.29. 3. The
ministers were diverse: the priests offered sacrifice in their courses, but
Aaron only and his successors the high priests burned incense, Exodus 30.7. 4.
Upon the brazen altar incense was offered with other sacrifices, Leuit. 2. But
upon the golden altar no burnt sacrifice or any oblation, but only incense was
offered unto God. 5. Of all offerings and oblations, it most lively prefigureth
the sacrifice of atonement wrought by Christ upon the cross, who therefore is
called by the Apostle, A sacrifice of sweet smelling savor unto God, Ephe.
5.2. Seeing then that the offering of incense was a more sovereign thing in
the Law, then was the oblation of sacrifices: there is small reason for it,
that our adversaries should reserve the less, that is, the offering of
sacrifices for the Lord, and participate the greater and more worthy service,
that is, censing of odors and perfumes unto saints, as Bellarm. does, cap. 13.

Ans. 2. If sacrifice were not then to be offered to saints, much less are
prayers to be made now unto them: for to call upon God is a greater thing, the^
to offer sacrifice, Psalm. 50. ver. 8.14. If saints can not challenge the less,
that is, to have sacrifices, they have no right to the greater, namely, to be
called upon and prayed unto.

Lastly, Augustine says, Non sit nobis Religio cultus hominum mortuorum, quia
si pie vixerunt, non sic habentur, vt tales quaerant honores, sed illum a nobis
coli volunt, quo illuminante laetantur meriti sui nos esse consortes: honorandi
ergo sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religione^. Let us not make
it any part of Religion to worship men that are dead: for if they lived well,
they are now in that state, that they need not, neither do require any honor
at our hands: but they would have us to worship God: by whose illumination or
revelation, they may understand, and do rejoice, that we are partakers and
fellows in the same faith. They are then to be honored for imitation, not to
be adored for Religion. Haec August. de vera Religion. cap. 55.

AN APPENDIX TO THIS FIRST part, concerning vows and oaths made to or by
Saints.
The Papists.
FIrst, vows may be made to Saints (say they) properly as unto God, though not
altogether in the same manner: Prayer may be made to saints, therefore votum,
prayer (...) or al^o. As they differ not in name, so neither in deed are they
to be severed. Bellarm. lib. 3. de sanct. cap.

Ans. 1. He takes that for granted, which is chiefly in question: for it is
idolatry to pray unto any other but unto God: Call upon me in the day of
trouble, Psalm 50.15. It is not lawful to pray unto saints, therefore not to
vow.

2. To make vows is a more strict and binding act of religion, then prayer is:
for in every vow there is a prayer: we pray God to give us grace to perform
the thing vowed: and there is beside a full purpose of the heart with a solemn
promise, whereby we bind our selves to the perfourming. Again we may make
petition and request unto mortal men, but vows we can make none unto them: It
would not therefore follow, though saints might be prayed unto, that they are
also capable of our vows.

Secondly, it is also lawful (they say) to swear by the name of Saints,
because all is referred to the honor of God; as he that swears by the
temple, swears also by him that dwells therein. Rhemist. Matthew 21. sect. 8.

Ans. 1. In this place Christ reproves the Pharisees for their swearing* and
condemns it by this argument: that howsoever they thought it a small matter to
swear by the Temple, yet in effect they did swear by God himself. See the^
the boldness of these men, that dare justify swearing by creatures by the same
reason, that Christ condemns it. 2. Our Savior says nothing but this, that
in every oath there is an invocation of the divine power, and therefore
whosoever swears by a creature, commits idolatry, in making it his God.

The Protestants.
1. THat it is great impiety to make vows unto Saints, it is thus proved,
Isay 19.21. In that day the Egyptians shall know the Lord, and shall do
sacrifices, and vow vows unto the Lord. But sacrifices are not due unto
saints, but only to God: therefore neither vows.

Again, the vows of Christians are not to bind them selves to go in
pilgrimage, or to offer unto this Saint or that, this Image or that, as
Augustine says, alius pallium, alius oleum, alius ceram, one voweth a cloak,
another oil, De tempor. Sermo. 7.
a third a wax Candle: God cares not for these vows, says he, Sed hoc, quod
hodie redemit, ipsum offer, hoc est, animam tuam. But offer and vow unto God,
that which as this day he has redeemed, that is, thy soul. The vows
therefore of obedience and repentance and all Christian duties are the true
vows, the vowing of body and soul to the service of God, Romans 12.1. But this
can not be vowed unto any but to him that redeemed us: Ergo, not to any Saint.

2 That we ought only to swear by the name of God, the scripture is plain,
Deuteron. 6 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall
swear by his name; and by no other, Exodus 23.13. But saints are not to be
feared nor served, for the Septuagint translate: (...), Thou shall worship God,
which kind of worship the Papists themselves dare not attribute to saints:
Ergo, neither are we to swear by them.

Again, to swear, is to call him to witness by whom we swear, and so to
make him our God: for whom we swear by, we confess to be a searcher and
knower of our hearts, and a revenger of false swearers. To swear then, is to
call God to witness. Quid tu facis, cum iuras? Deum testem adhibes. Augustine.
What do thou, Sermon. 10. Sermonu^ 17.
when thou swearest? Thou call God to wintesse: But they that swear by
saints, call them to witness, and none else are called to witness, but they by
whom they swear: Ergo, they make Saints their Gods, seeing God is called upon
in every oath.

THE SECOND PART OF THE distinction of the two kinds of worship (...), and
(...),
The Papists.
Bellarmine, Cap. 12.

The Protestants.
This distinction is but of late invented and coined of our adversaries,
somewhat to countenance them out in their idolatrous and superstitious worship
of saints. We thus do refell it.

Argum. 1. This distinction helps them not: for here are only two words,
which do betoken two kinds of worship (...), is the religious honor: (...), is
the civil duty, such as servants perform to their masters. They should have
found out three names for their three kinds of worship: they have gained
nothing by this distinction, but that civil adoration is due unto Saints, such
as is given to men upon earth. As for their feigned word (...), which may be
called a superseruice, when they can find it in scripture, they shall know more
of our mind: and yet receiving this term, it signifies but a more civil
service, it betokens not a new kind of religious worship.

Argum. 2 Neither are the words so used, as they make us believe: for, the
word (...), which they make proper for the service of God, is applied to men,
as Leuit. 23. Opus servile non facietis, You shall do no seruil work: the word
is (...): Lodouic. Viues also shows out of profane authors, that sometime the
word (...), is taken for the service of men or maids to their masters: in 10.
lib. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 1.

So contrariwise, the word (...), is taken in scripture for the proper service
of God, as Gal. 4.8. Ye did service to them that by nature were no gods: the
word is, (...): Ergo, religious service is only due unto God, not to Angels
or saints, for they are not by nature gods.

Augustine says, (...) debetur Deo, tanquam Domino: (...), vero, no^ nisi Deo,
tanquam Deo: quaest. in Exodus 94. Religious service is due unto God as Lord:
religious worship is only due unto God, as he is God.

THE THIRD PART CONCERNING the kissing of holy men's feet.
The Papists.
IT is a sign of reverence done both to Christ and other sacred persons, as
Prophets, Apostles, Popes, or others representing his person here upon
Rhemist. act. 4. sect. 3.

Argum. 1. The Shunamite fell down and embraced Eliseus feet, 2. King. 4.27:
Ergo, the Popes feet ought to be kissed.

Ans. 1 Your popes must be first as holy men as this Prophet was, who was thus
reverenced for his holiness, before they can challenge the like honor.

2 This reverence to the prophet was voluntary in the woman, not looked for or
exacted by the prophet, as the pope looks for it of duty.

3 Here is no mention made of kissing of feet, but only that she caught him
by the feet, which was partly a sign of her joy, that she had met with the
prophet, partly by this sudden and disordered gesture, the prophet perceived
that she was troubled in mind, for Gehazi would have thrust her away, but he
said, Let her alone, for her spirit is troubled within her.

4 This is no warrant for the pope to offer his feet to be kissed of Kings
and Emperors, because the woman fell down at the prophets feet: think you,
that if the King of Israel had so done, the prophet would have suffered it?

Argum. 2. Marie kissed Christ's feet: Ergo, the popes feet ought to be kissed.

Ans. What arrogancy is this, that the pope a mortal and sinful man, should
challenge that honor which was done to Christ being God in the flesh, and void
of sin? He might also with the like blasphemy challenge to be worshipped:
because the women in the Gospel caught Christ by the feet and worshipped him,
Mat. 28.9. We may see by this, of what spirit he is, and whether he be not
that Antichrist, that shall make him self as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

The Protestants.
THe kissing of the feet, was an humble and lowly gesture, which was worthily
used toward our Savior Christ, who was God in the flesh, and in his body and
humanity annexed to his Godhead, as God to be worshipped: but it is too divine,
and too lowly an homage to be offered to any mortal man: and holy men in times
past refused it, when any carried away with immoderat zeal and admiration of
their person, were ready to give it unto them.

Argum. 1. When Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, the holy Apostle would
not suffer him to do it. The pope is of a clean contrary spirit to S. Peter:
for he refused it being offered: the Pope holds out his toe, and offers it
to be kissed, and urges men thereunto.

Argum. 2 If such kissing of feet be commendable, how comes it to pass that
the pope only has holy feet to kiss; and not other Bishops and Clergy men,
as well as he?

Augustine thus writes upon those words of the Psalm, Worship his
foote-stoole, reading according to the Septuagint* says he, the earth is his
foot stool, but we must not worship the earth: Conuer^o me ad Christu^, and
inuenio, quomodo sine impietate adoretur terra: suscepit enim de terra terram,
quia caro terra est. in Psalm. 98. I turn me (says he) unto Christ, and I
find, how the earth may without any impiety be worshipped: for he took
earth of earth, flesh of the flesh of the Virgin, the flesh is earth: Out of
these words I conclude that the flesh, the body, the humanity ought not in any
to be worshipped, but only in Christ, for the near conjunction of the Godhead
and humane nature together: and therefore consequently no kissing of feet,
which is an external act of divine worship, is seemly for any mortal man.

THE THIRD QVESTION CONcerning the invocation of Saints.
THis question has three parts. 1. Whether prayers are to be made unto
Saints. 2. Whether they do pray for us. 3. Whether they understand our prayers.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER prayers are to be made to Saints.
The Papists.
Sanctos defunctos pie and vtiliter a viuentib. inuocari: that Saints departed
are with great profit and piety called upon, and prayed unto: and that it is
not only lawful but godly, so to do, Rhemist. 1. Tim. 2. sect. 4. Bellarmine
cap. 19. lib. 1. De sanctor. beatitud.

Argum. 1. They say, they do not pray unto saints, as authors of any benefit
or grace, but as intercessors only: Neither do they make them immediate
intercessors, but only through Christ, concluding al their prayers, per
Christu^ Dominum nostrum. Bellarm.

Ans. 1. It is false, that you pray unto the^ as intercessors only, for you
desire them not only to pray for you, but to have mercy on you: for thus they
pray, O blessed Lady have mercy upon us, preserve thy servants, let the merits
of S. Marie bring us to the kingdom of heaven. Fulk. 1. Timoth. 2. sect. 4.

2. It is also false, that they make them not immediate intercessors, but
conclude their prayers per Christum Dominum nostrum: For in that blasphemous
prayer, Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro nobis impendit, fac nos Christ
scandere, quo Thomas asce^dit: Here they ask life eternal of Christ by the
blood of Thomas of Canterbury. How then is it true which the Rhemists affirm
in word, that Christ alone by his merits procures all grace and mercy toward
mankind, ibid: when they hope to obtain their requests by the merits of
Saints? See Fulk. annot. John. 16. sect. 3. where diverse prayers to saints,
as to S. Marie, S. Osmond, S. Anne, S. Katherine, are rekoned up, and none of
them concludes, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Argum. 2. Exodus 32.13. Moses thus prays, Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
thy servants: Moses here hops to have his prayers heard by the merits of
these holy men, Bellarm.

Ans. Moses rehearses only the covenant, which the Lord made with these holy
men and their seed, as the words following do show, To whom thou swarest by
thine own self, and swarest unto them, I will multiplye your seed: Moses
therefore pleads not the merits of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, but urges and
presses the promise of God, and covenant made with them.

Argum. 3. The saints do pray one for another here upon earth, and do one
desire an another prayers: as S. Paul Romans 15. Ephesians. 6. Coloss. 4. and in
other places desires to be assisted by their prayers: Ergo, much more may we
desire the prayers of Saints departed. Bellarm. Rhemist.

Ans. 1. To pray one for another while we live, is a duty of Charity, and
commanded in scripture: but to request the prayers of saints departed, has no
warrant in the word. 2. We do not desire the godly living to pray for us, as
our Mediators, or as though by their worthiness we are brought into the favor
of God, as you say the saints do: and therefore your argument follows not,
from the prayer of the living to the prayer of the dead. 3. We may one pray for
another, and one request the prayers of another, while we live, because we
know our mutual necessities: But the saints departed know not what things
are done upon earth, neither are every where present to hear our prayers.

The Protestants.
THat prayer is only to be made unto God, and to no other creature beside, as
being an especial part of the worship of God, which we ought not to give to
any other: thus it is proved out of the word of God.

Argum. 1. Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not
believed? But we must believe only in God, and therefore only pray to God.
Rhemist. answer, It is true, no more can we pray unto our lady, nor any saint
in heaven, unless we believe they can help us.

Ans. The scripture every where teaches that we must believe in God, and that
they are cursed that put any confidence in man, Ierem. 17.5. Again, they can
have no assurance, to settle their conscience, but out of the scriptures: They
have a vain persuasion of the ability of Saints to help them, but they have
no ground of any such belief out of scripture.

Argum. 2. Heb. 4.16. Let us come with boldness to the throne of grace, Ergo, we
have no need of the invocation of saints, seeing we have free and bold
access through Christ.

Rhemist. By this reason we should not pray one for an other, while we are
alive. Ans. we do not put our confidence in the merit and worthiness of other
men's prayers, as you do in the intercession of saints. Again, this mutual
duty of prayer one for another, is commanded and required of God, as the
other is not: Wherefore to run unto saints, and not unto Christ, is to doubt
either of his readiness, or ability to help us.

3 John. 16.26. Christ says, that after he has by his mediation and
intercession brought us into the favor of God, In that day shall you ask the
Father in my name, and I say not, that I will pray to the Father for you, for
the Father himself loves you. If then the prayer of Christ to God his Father,
shall not then be needful, what use is there of the prayer of other creatures?
Fulk. 1. Tim. 2. sect. 4.

Augustine says, Pro quo nullus interpellat, and ipse pro omnib. hic vnus,
verusque Mediator est. lib. 2. cont. Parmenian. cap. 8. He for whom no man
prays, but him self entreats for all men, he is the only true Mediator:
Ergo, saints no mediators, and therefore not to be prayed unto.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER THE Saints departed do pray for us.
The Papists.


Argum. 1. 2. Pet. 1.15. I will endeavor (says the Apostle) that you may have
remembrance of these things after my departure. Peter promises to be careful
of them, and to pray for them after his departure. Rhemist. ibid. Bellarm. cap.
18.

Ans. This which here the Apostle promises, he performs in writing this
Epistle, whereby they might be put in remembrance, when he was gone. And
therefore he says. ver. 13. I think it meet, so long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance: he acknowledges now
only to be the time wherein he may do them good, and therefore deferreth it
not. There is no syllable, which sounds that way, that he would pray for them
after his dissolution.

Argum. 2 Apocal. 5.8. The 24. Elders are said to have golden vialles full of
odors, which are the prayers of the saints: Rhemist. in hunc locum. Ergo, the
Saints in heaven do pray for us.

Ans. The 24 Elders do represent the Church Militant upon earth, whose
conversation is in heaven, and they do continually offer up their prayers. And
that the place is so to be understood, it appears verse 10. Thou have made
us Kings and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth: that is, their
kingdom is spiritual, in fighting against, and ouercomming the concupiscence
of the flesh and all carnal desires.

The Protestants.
THat the blessed Saints do sing unto the praise of God in heaven, and do
magnify the Lord, and praise him with a new song of thanksgiving, which is a
kind of prayer, we deny not, Apocal. 5.9. and that they have a general desire
and longing, both for us, for themselves, and all the elect of God, that the
day of our refreshing were come, and that all the people of God were joined in
one, and their enemies vanquished and destroyed, we learn also out of the
scripture, Apocal. 6.9. But that they should offer up our special prayers, and
make particular request for us to God, it no where in the scripture is found,
but rather the contrary.

Argum. 1. The scripture no where testifies, that the Saints in such manner do
pray for us: Ergo, we may safely be ignorant of it: nay it were great
presumption, without scripture to believe it.

Argum. 2 The Saints departed know not our wants, nor what is done in the
earth. The living know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all,
Eccles. 9.5. But of this more shall be said in the next part. See Augustine of
this matter. contro. 8. quaest. 2. part. 3.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER THE Saints understand our prayers, and be always at
hand to help us.
The Papists.
THey affirm 3. things, which they are driven to grant by necessity of
Argument, while they stiffly mantaine invocation of Saints: For first they
grant Bellarm. cap. 20.

Ans. We deny not, but that God may reveal unto them some things at his
pleasure, but hereof it follows not that they know all our affairs, and
hear all our prayers.

Again, what a preposterous order is this, and superfluous, God first
reuealeth unto them our prayers, and then they solicit God in our behalf? I
pray you what need this, seeing God knows our prayers? First, why is he not
as ready of himself to grant our requests, as to stay till he be entreated?

Secondly, seeing it were in vain to pray to Saints, if they had not power to
help us: they also are urged to confess, that the saints are patrones of men,
and have the government of the world committed to them: yea, that they may
receive others into the kingdom of heaven.

Argum. 1. Apocal. 2.26. To him that overcomes, will I give power over
nations, and he shall rule over them with a rod of Iron: Ergo, the saints have
the government of men committed unto them. Rhemist. ibid. Bellarm. cap. 18.

Ans. The power which our Savior here promises, is the participation of his
kingly inheritance, first, spiritually to overcome the world by faith in this
life, and after this life they shall be set in full possession of his royal
inheritance. The Rod of Iron, is the word of God, which is also called a two
edged sword, whereby they execute vengeance upon the heathen, Psalm. 149.7. It
is the sword of the spirit, whereby the wicked shall be destroyed. Augustine
expounds it to be the rod of Justice, whereby the good are corrected, and the
wicked broken in pieces: Homil. 2. in Apocal.

Argum. 2 Luke 16.9. Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when they
need, they may receive you into everlasting habitations: see, the saints may
receive their friends and benefactours into their eternal mansions: Rhemist.
ibid.

Ans. 1 Alms bestowed upon the poor do procure their prayers, but not their
patronage. 2 The words are thus parabolically to be understood: They shall
receive you, that is, shall give testimony of you, and your alms shall be a
testimony of your charity, and proceeding from a lively faith, shall
everlastingly be rewarded. 3 That it is not meant of the persons, but of the
work, it is plain, because alms which issue from a true faith, shall be
rewarded at the Lords hand, though bestowed upon an hypocrite. Fulk* ibid.

Thirdly, They also hold that the saints at their pleasure can be present with
their bodies, and be amongst us, and so hear our prayers Bellarm. cap. 20.

Argum. 1 Otherwise the saints should be fettered as it were in heaven, if they
remain and be kept all in one place. Ans. They are not fettered when they are
limited by the Lord to a place: see also what a goodly opinion these fellows
have of heaven, making a prison of it. Rhemist. annot. Apocal. 6.9.

Argum. 2 They follow the Lamb whither so ever he goes: Ergo, they may be
every where. Ans. That place Apocal. 14. is understood of all the elect, yea of
those that do imitate and follow Christ, living upon earth. 2 If the souls are
every where, because the lamb is every where, then Christ in his humanity is
every where, and so the Papists are become Vbiquitaries.

Argum. 3 The devils are of great dexterity, and celeritie in passing from one
place to another. Ergo, much more the Saints.

Ans. 1 The argument follows not: for devils by property of nature together
by the sufferance of God, do wander up and down the world, being thereto
appointed of God: but the souls of saints have no such office, as we read in
scripture, to be cursory spirits in the world. 2 Though it should be
granted, that in a short time they are able to change their places: yet it is
impossible, they should be in so many places to hear the prayers every where,
made unto them, unless they could be in diverse places at once. Fulke Apoca.
6. sect. 1.

The Protestants.
FIrst, it is a great untruth and blasphemy to say, that the saints do know
our thoughts, inward repentance, prayers, as the Rhemistes affirm.

Argum. 1 God only is the knower of the heart, neither does he communicate
this property of the Godhead to any creature: he may reveal what he thinks
good unto them: but for them, when they will them selves, to know our secret
prayers and meditations (for this is the question) it is impossible.

Argum. 2 Augustine, Out of those words of the Prophet Isay 63.16. Abraham is
ignorant of us, and Jacob know us not, concludes thus, Si tanti patriarchae,
quid erga populum ex his procreatum ageretur, ignorauerunt, quomodo mortui
viuorum rebus atque actibus cognoscendis adiuuandisque miscentur, De cum pro
mortuis
If so great Patriarks were ignorant what became of the people which was borne
of their loins, how is it like, that other dead can be present to understand,
and be helping to men's affairs?

Secondly, We acknowledge no patrones, protectors or captains in heaven, but
our Lord God and Savior Christ.

1 Psalm 73.25. The Prophet David says, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
Jacob calls only upon the Lord God, to be the guide of his journey. Genesis
28.20.

2 By appointing saints to be patrones of places and countries, at length they
brought in a multitude of popish saints, and were not in superstition far
behind the Gentiles, who gloried in the number of their gods: For have they
not alloted some to countries, as S. George for England: S. Andrew for Scotland
S. Denis for France, S. Patrik for Ireland? So likewise diverse saints were
called upon for diverse diseases, as S. Rombal for the toothache, S. Petronil
for the Ague: One for horse as S. Loye, S. Antony for Pigges, S. Gregory for
Scholars, S. George for soldiers: Even thus the heathen invented diverse
gods, Neptune for the sea, the Satyrs for the woods, the Nymphs for the water,
Ceres for corn, Bacchus for wine, Venus for the Trojans, Pallas for the
Grecians, Jupiter stator for the Romans.

Nay they were yet more ridiculous, they appointed many Gods for one thing:
As for Infantes Vagitanus, that made them to cry, CuCuninus, that kept them in
their Cradle, Adeona, Abeona, to teach them to go: So for the entry of the
house, August. li. 4 de ciuitate dei. ca. 8.
they had Limentinus the God of the thresholde, Cardea the God of the hinges,
Forrulus that kept the door: for their corn, they had the Goddess Seia when
it was sown, Proserpina when it sprouted, Nodotus when it knotted, Hostilina
when it ^ared, Flora when it waxed white, Runcina when it was cut down. The
like superstition almost reigns in popery. But what need we run to so many
for these things, when as at the Lords hands we are promised, as king in the
name of Christ, to receive al things we need? This great folly of theirs
shows what good comes by the devised patronage of Saints.

Thirdly, it is also another popish fable and dream, that the Saints may be
present every where, as it pleases themselves, at their tombs and sepulchers,
and wheresoever else they are called for.

Argum. 1 Acts 3.21. The heavens contain the humanity of Christ; it has
pleased him there to rest himself, until his coming to judgment. Ergo, much
more are the saints kept in their resting places.

Argum. 2 The Saints are at rest, they do cease from the affairs of this life,
Apocal. 14.13. They rest under the Altar in the peace of Christ, Apocal. 6.9.
there expecting and waiting the coming of Christ to judgment: Ergo, they do
not wander nor stray abroad in the world, neither do entermeddle with humane
affairs.

Augustine says, Si rebus viuentium interessent animae mortuorum, meipsum pia
matter nulla nocte desereret, quae terra marique secuta est, vt mecum viueret:
de cura pro mortuis. If the souls of the dead were present at the affairs of
the living, my devout mother would never a night be from me, who when she
lived, followed me by sea and land, to have my company, and to live with me:
Ergo the saints departed are not present with us, when they would.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION CONCERning the relics of Saints.
THis question has 4 parts. 1 Whether the relics of saints are to be
worshipped. 2 Of the translation of relics. 3 Of the keeping and preserving
of relics. 4. Of the miracles wrought at the tombs and relics of Martyrs.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING the worshipping of Relics.
The Papists.
THe relics of saints, that is their bodies and bones, and sepulchers, where
Trident. council. sess. 25. though with less honor somewhat, then the Saints
themselves, Bellarm. de reliquijs sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 21. And not only their
bodies (say they) are worthy of due reverence, but other monuments of theirs,
as S. Peter's chair at Rome, Romans 16. verse. 16. the prison, wherein S. Paul was
kept in Malta, Rhemist. Act. 28.1. the chain that S. Paul was bound with at
Rome, Act. 27.4. the stone that hit Saint Stephen upon the elbowe now to be
seen at Ancona in Italy, Act. 7. sect. 6.

Ans. As for S. Peter's chair, and S. Paul's chain, they are neither able to
show that Peter sat in such a chair, or that it is the very chain which they
show, wherewith Paul was bound. Concerning the prison house at Malta, they
show that, which never was: Paul was a prisoner, but not in prison there: that
of the stone that smote Stephen upon the elbow is a mere fable: See Fulk upon
that place.

Argum. 2. Josias, when he caused the bones of other dead to be burned, yet he
commanded them to let the Prophets bones alone, Bellarm. cap. 3. The disciples
of John came and buried his body: an example of duty and religious devotion
to the dead bodies of Saints, Rhemist. Math. 14. sect. 2. Their bodies are the
temples of the holy Ghost, and shall be raised again to life: Ergo, they must
be adored and worshipped, Trident. Council. sess. 25.

Ans. One answer may serve for all these arguments. We deny not, but that the
dead bodies of the faithful are to be laid up with reverence in hope of the
resurrection, but it therefore follows not, that they must be abused to
idolatry: John's disciples buried his body, but shrined it not to be
worshipped: Josias made difference between the bones of the idolatrous
priests, and of the true Prophet: the one he burned, and thought them unworthy
of honest sepulture, the other he suffered to rest, and enjoy the honor of
burial. But of any adoration or worshipping of his bones, we read not.

The Protestants.
THe bodies of Martyrs are reverently to be brought to the ground, in
testimony of our hope of their resurrection, and their memory is to be
honored, as in praising God for their constant martyrdom: so the Psalmist
says, Right precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints, Psalm.
116. As also in following their steps, and propounding unto us their good
example: but to adore and worship their bones, to kiss, and kneel down at
their sepulchers, is to too gross idolatry, and not to be used amongst
Christians.

1 The Lord did of purpose himself bury the body of Moses in a secret place,
which was never known to the Israelites: and this reason is generally rendered
by most writers, lest the people of Israel should worship his body, and so
commit idolatry: Ergo, the adoration of the bodies of Saints displeases God:
Argum. Calvin.

Bellarmine answers, that though the people of Israel might by that means
have fallen into idolatry, yet the people of God may now more safely honor
relics, because they are not so prone to idolatry.

Ans. Experience of popish idolatry proves the clean contrary: for the like
superstition and worshipping of images was never so common and usual, no not
in the most corrupt times of that Church, as now it is in popery.

2 Our Savior Christ reproves the Scribes and Pharisees, calling them
hypocrites, because they did garnish the sepulchers of the Prophets, whom their
forefathers put to death, Math. 23.29. But their doctrine they neglected and
regarded not. Such hypocrites are the Papists at this day, who commit a double
fault: for they contemn the doctrine of the Apostles, whose memories they
would seem to honor: and again, in the superstitious honor and worship,
which they yield unto them, they exceed the bonds of Christian piety.

3 Their bodies were not to be worshipped when they were alive, much less now
they are dead. What are they now but earth, dust and ashes? according as the
Lord said to Adam, Thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return, Genes. 3.19.
What is this else, but to worship the earth, even dust and ashes? So Augustine
says: Timeo adorare terram ne damnet me, qui fecit coelum and terram: I am
afraid to worship the earth, lest he condemn me, that made both heaven and
earth. Only in Christ (says he) I find, quomodo sine impietate adoretur
terra, how the earth, that is, his body, may be worshipped without any
impiety: namely, because of the near conjunction and union of his humane
nature with the Godhead in one person: for otherwise of it self the body of
Christ is Gods creature and workmanship, and not capable of divine worship.
This then is the privilege that Christ has, more then all Saints and Martyrs
beside, that in him only the humanity is adored.

THE SECOND PART OF THE TRANSLAtion of the bodies of Saints.
The Papists.
IT is an usual thing amongst them to translate, and carry from one place to
John Baptists head was translated from Samaria to Alexandria, and is now at
Amiens in France, Rhemist. Math. 14. sect. 1. So the body of S. Luke was
removed, they say, from Achaia to Constantinople, and from thence to Padua in
Italy, where now it remains: Argument. in Luke Rhemist. The stone also that
hit S. Stephen is now at Ancona in Italy, Act. 7. sect. 6.

Argum. 1. Joseph gave charge concerning his bones when he died, and they were
removed from Egypt to the land of Canaan, at the departure of the Israelites,
Exodus 13. Heb. 11.22. Ergo, the removing and translation of Saints bodies or
relics lawful, Rhemist. Bellarm. cap. 3.

Ans. Joseph gave commandment concerning his bones, to testify his faith and
hope in the promise of God, for the inheritance of the land of Canaan: they
were not removed to be adored or worshipped: Ergo, no such translation of
relics is hereby proved. Secondly, you can show no such charge, that S. Paul,
Peter, or any of the rest, gave concerning the translation of their bodies, as
Joseph gave unto his posterity.

The Protestants.
WE deny not, but that the bodies of the dead, before they be interred, may
be conveyed unto the place of their burial, as Josias was carried being dead
by his servants from Megiddo to Jerusalem, where a sepulcher was prepared for
him, 2. King. 23.30. But either for the dead to be removed to be buried in some
one place more then another, for the holiness thereof: or the bones of Saints
to be raked out of their graves, and translated, with intent to shrine them,
and set them up to be adored: they are superstitious customs, and not used of
ancient time among the people of God.

Argum. 1. That the place profits not the dead, but unto them it is all alike
wheresoever they are buried: we have showed before, 1. part. controuer. 9
quaest. 2. part. 4. The example of Augustines mother is notable, and worthy
the memory: She had with great care provided her a sepulcher near unto her
husband, who dyed at Thagasta in Africa, and was there buried, and was purposed
her self to lie by him: but the Lord so disposed, that she left her life at
Hostia in Italy, and being ready to depart, she said thus to her sons:
Ponite hoc corpus vbicunque, nihil vos eius cura conturbet: Bury my body
where you think good, take no great care for it. And being asked, if it
grieved her not to leave her body so far off from her own city, she gave
this godly answer: Nihil long est a Deo, neque timendum est, ne ille non
agnoscat in fine seculi, vnde me resuscitet: August. lib. confess. 9. cap. 11.
No place is nearer to God then other, neither am I to fear, lest the Lord
should not as well raise me up in this place, as in mine own city: Ergo, in
respect of the dead, it skilleth not where they are buried.

Argum. 2. The other custom of translating of relics to be worshipped, is
far more impious and superstitious: for hereupon it comes, that the people
have been deceived with false relics: yea one and the self same relic is
said to be in diverse places. As of S. John Baptists head: his face, they say,
is at S. Iean Angelz: the rest of his head at Malta: his skull at Nemours: his
brain at Nouium Rastrouiense: his iaw bone at Vesalium: a piece of his ear at
S. Floride: his forehead and hairs in Spain at S. Saluadores: and yet for all
this his whole head is to be seen at Saint Siluesters in Rome, and at Amiens
in France: Fulk. Matthew 14.2. Thus they have mangled also the body of Saint
Peter: half (they say) is at Saint Peter's in Rome, half at Saint Paul's: his
head at Saint John Laterane: his nether iawe with his beard at Poycters in
France: at Triers many of his bones. Fulk. Romans 16. sect. 4. See what mockage
and cosoning here is, and abusing of simple people? How can their whole bodies
be in one place, and yet their parts and bones in another? And where do they
learn thus to dismember their bodies, and to rake them out of their graves?
The honoring of the bodies of Martyrs, is to suffer them quietly to rest in
their graves, and not to rot above the ground. Josias honored the Prophets
sepulcher, and would not remove his bones: herein therefore they dishonor the
Martyrs, and offer violence to their bodies, thinking falsely that they do
great worship unto them.

Augustine says, that he which would now renew the ceremonies of the Jews,
that are as it were buried: tanquam sopitos cineres eruens, non erit pius
deductor aut baiulus corporis, sed impius sepulturae violator. Epistol. 19. He
should be as one raking in the ashes of the dead, and so be rather a violator
of Christian burial, then a bringer of the body honestly to the ground. So by
Augustines judgment, eruens sopitos cineres, he that pulls out dead men's
ashes, bones, or relics, is sepulturae violator, a prophaner of their burial.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE KEEPING and preserving of relics.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Hebr. 9. sect. 4.

Ans. When we have a commandment for the reservation of such things, as the
Israelites had, we may believe they will keep so long. And again, the
Israelites for all that did not worship the pot of Manna, though it were of
such long continuance.

The Protestants.
THe bodies and bones of men departed neither are to be kept out of their
graves, as we have showed, neither can they be preserved without corruption.

Argum. 1. Unto all Adams seed it is said, Dust thou art, and to dust shall
thou return: only the body of Christ had this privilege, Psalm. 16. Not to
see corruption: Ergo, the bodies of men departed, though they were never so
holy, being all the seed of Adam, must be turned to dust.

Argum. 2. If they would glorify God and speak the truth, they do very well
know by experience, that the relics of Saints have no such promise or
warrant for their continuance: for most, if not all of their relics, were
forged and devised, and no such thing indeed. S. Peter's brain at Genoua was
found to be a pumice stone: S. Antonies arm was found to be an Hearts pissle:
at Toures of late the image of Venus in an Agate was worshipped for the image
of the Virgin Mary: the blood of Hales in England was descried to be but the
blood of a drake: the three hosts at Caleis were but three white counters
sodred into a marble stone. These and many such monuments and relics of
Saints the Church of Rome has great store: no marvel now, if they be of long
continuance, for stones and counters may last a great while: and drakes blood,
with other such stuff, is not so dainty, but it may be still renewed.

Of such cosoning tricks Augustine complained in his time, speaking of
runnagate Monks, he says: Alij membra martyrum, si tamen martyrum, venditant:
Alij fimbrias suas, and phylacteria magnificant: Some do boast of relics of
Martyrs, which they carry about, and perhaps they are no such relics: some
do extol their habit and Monkish weed: De opere Monachorum, cap. 28.

See then, I pray you, what devilish idolatry was this, to cause the people
to worship counters, drakes blood, Hearts sinews, and other such base
creatures, in stead of relics: which, though they were such indeed, ought
not to be worshipped.

THE FOVRTH PART CONCERNING VISIsions and miracles done at the Tombs and
relics of Martyrs.
The Papists.
FIrst, they almost make it an ordinary thing in their Church to work
miracles: Bellarmine says, that it is a sufficient note of the Church, the
glory or De eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14. Christ says, that they that do believe
in him, shall do greater works then he. No marvel then, if the image of our
Lady (say they) and the like, work miracles, as Peter's shadow did, and that
they seem greater then Christ's: for he promises that his Saints shall work
greater miracles then himself, Rhemist. annot. John 14. sect. 3. They also
call upon us to confirm our doctrine by miracles, because we preach newly and
extraordinarily, Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 12. sect. 5.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, that place alleged proves not such a generality and
perpetuity of working miracles: for then every one that believes should do
greater works then Christ: for our Savior speaks generally, He that
believes. Augustine does far otherwise, and in a better sense expound this
place: He that believes in me shall do the same works that I do: Quae
opera, nisi vt ex impio iustus fiat? prius ego facio, deinde and ipse faciet,
quia facio, vt ipse faciat. What works, says he, but that he which believes
of a wicked man shall be made righteous? which work first I do (says
Christ,) then he himself does it, because I make him to do it. Quod vtique in
illo, sed non sine illo Christus operatur: Man's conversion is wrought by Christ
in man, and not altogether without man, because Christ working in us, does
enable us by his grace to work out our salvation: Philipp. 2.12: yet is it not
our selves that work, but the grace of God in us. Then it follows, he shall
do greater works then these: Prorsus maius hoc esse dixerim, quam est coelum
and terra: The redemption and conversion of men, is a greater work then the
heavens or the earth: Tract in Iohann. 72. Augustine therefore does properly
understand this place, not of outward miracles, but of the wonderful
conversion of the heart, which we are said to work, because Christ works it
in us.

2. As we deny not but that there may in these days be miracles wrought: and
all such miracles as serve to confirm the doctrine delivered in scriptures, we
do not refuse, though we be not bound to believe any man's report of such
miracles, but only the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists: so we affirm
that there is no such necessity of miracles, as in times past: neither that we
are to be pressed to show miracles, seeing we profess the ancient Apostolic
faith, which has been already confirmed by the miraculous works of our
Savior Christ and his Apostles. Wherefore we condemn the fabulous histories
and reports of popish Saints, whose lives are fuller of miracles, if we will
believe them, then were the lives of Christ and his Apostles. Nay, there is
nothing almost done in their service, but by a miracle: Christ's body present
in the Mass by a miracle: Devils chased away with holy water: Saints know
their thoughts, hear their prayers, are present here and there, their bodies
many years kept from corruption, and all by miracles: I conclude this point
with Augustine: Aut non sunt vera, quae dicuntur; aut si haereticorum aliqua
mira facta sunt, magis cauere debemus: Either they are not true miracles, which
they boast of: or if they be, we must beware and take heed of them the more.

The Papists.
Gregory's table of hospitality, Rhemist. Hebr. 13.2. Peter believed the
vision and apparition showed to Cornelius, at his report, before it was
written: Ergo, we ought to believe visions not written in scripture, Rhemist,
Act. 10. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
FIrst, that of our Savior Christ's appearing, is an heretical fable, and
impugneth the article of our faith concerning Christ's ascension into heaven,
and there remaining till his second coming. Secondly, Peter was not bound to
believe Cornelius vision, till he had been by vision admonished himself: the
Apostles which were then endued with the gift of discerning spirits, could
better judge of true visions, then any man now can: yet we refuse not to give
credit to visions, when they are as credibly reported unto us, as this was to
Peter: but no vision, nor miracle, nor angel from heaven, shall draw us away
from the doctrine of the scriptures to believe errors. Lastly, we deny not,
but that they may have visions: but such as one Vincentius bragged of, that
wrote against Augustine concerning the original of the soul: He said, that
another Vincentius who had been a captain or chief Donatist, appeared unto
him in vision, and bad him write those books: to whom Augustine thus
answers: Ille qui se transfigurat in angelum lucis, in eo tibi est
transfiguratus, Lib. 3. cap. 2 de animae origin.
quem tu fuisse veluti angelum lucis credidisti. He that can transfigure
himself into an angel of light, did transfigure himself into the shape of that
man, whom thou esteemedst as an angel of light. Such apparitions they may
have, and yet no great cause to boast of them.

The Papists.
THirdly, they say that the power of working miracles was in the Apostles
actually,

First, Peter says, That which we have, give we to thee, Act. 3.6. Secondly,
we must not think, that they had no more power, then as dead instruments in
the workmans hand, Rhemist. in hunc locum.

The Protestants.
WE both agree, that the power of working miracles was given of God: but herein
we differ, they think that this power was inherent in the Apostles, and that
having once received this power of God, they could execute it themselves: like
as a man having the power of sense and moving by nature, moves and sees when
he list himself. But we hold against the Pelagians, Gratiam dei ad singulos
actus dari, that the grace of God is daily infused, and we have need of it for
every act: it is not sufficient once generally to have received it. So then the
Apostles were but the instruments of Christ's working: he is better said in them
and by them to work miracles, then they in and by him. Neither does it
follow, that they are dead instruments: for the horse (I trow) that draws
in the plough is no dead instrument: yet he has need for every boute and
turning to have a driuer and a guide: truly we are as unfit for the Lords yoke
by nature, as the horse is for the plough: and therefore have need of the Lords
continual direction. The Apostles then gave that they had, not as owners, but
as the Lords agents, and instruments of his working.

Tractat. in Johan. 71.
Augustine thus writes: Maiora, quam ipse fecit, dicit eos facturos, sed in
eis vel per eos se faciente: He says, they shall do greater works then he:
that is, himself working in them or by them: Ergo, Christ wrought miracles by
the hands of the Apostles, they were his lively instruments in working.

The Papists.
Ergo, virtue in holy relics, Rhemist. Secondly, napkins that had touched S.
Paul's body wrought miracles, by the virtue given unto them: Ergo, relics
may, Act. 19. verse. 12. Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. TO the first: first, the virtue was not in the hemme of Christ's garment,
but he says, it proceeded from himself, Luke 8.46. Secondly, it was her faith
that healed her, for many that thronged Christ, touched his garments, but
received no benefit: neither was there any virtue in his garments when the
soldiers parted them amongst them. Thirdly, if it pleased the Lord to use some
external signs, as of oil, clay, spittle, in healing of men, yet have we no
warrant, that he will do the like by touching of relics.

To the second: first, the napkins brought from Paul had no such virtue in
them: for the text is plain, that they were wrought by the hands of Paul.
Secondly, not all that touched them were presently healed. Thirdly, they were
but as signs and tokens to the diseased, that the Apostle (when it pleased
God, might dispense miracles, even when he was absent. Lastly, if they have to
this day miracles wrought by the relics and monuments of Saints; I fear me,
nay, I dare say, they are no better then the Donatists miracles were, either
figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum: either the
glosings and fables of lying men, or the strange workings of deceiving spirits.

THE FIFTH QVESTION CONCERNING Images, and of the sign of the Cross.
THe first part concerning Images, is subdeuided into certain other articles
and points. First, of the difference of Idols and Images. Secondly, whether it
be lawful to have Images. Thirdly, if it be lawful to worship them. Fourthly,
what manner of worship it should be.

THE FIRST ARTICLE OF THE DIFFErence between Idols and Images.
The Papists.
THere is great difference (say they) between an Image and an Idol: an Image
called in Greek (...), is the true similitude of a thing: an Idol, (...)
simulachrum, does represent that which is not, as were the Idols of Venus,
Minerua, women Goddesses, which was a mere devised thing. Images they confess
they have, but no Idols, Bellarm. cap. 5.

First, S. Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 10. That an Idol is nothing: that is, does
represent a thing that is not: as such were their heathenish Idols, Bellarm.

Ans. First, the place is not so understood: for the Apostle says, That things
offered to Idols also are nothing, which were not made to represent any thing:
But his meaning is this, that of themselves they are nothing to breed offense,
neither were it needful to shun eating of Idol sacrifices, or to abhor an
Idol, but that they are abused and turned to the service of devils, as it
follows in the next verse. Therefore an Idol is not said to be nothing,
because it represents a thing imagined, but that of it self, being but wood,
or stone, or such like, it were not offensive, if it were not abused to
idolatry. Secondly, all the portraictures of the Heathen were not Idols in
this sense: for Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Hercules, whose images they had, were
men sometime living. Thirdly, you have images representing nothing: as the
pictures of Angels, of God the Father, of the holy Ghost, which have no shape
nor likeness. Again, you have also your imagined Saints, as Bellarm. lib. 1. de
sanctor. beati. ca. 20.
S. George, S. Christopher, for there were never any such: and therefore you
have Idols as well as the Heathen.

The Protestants.
THough the name Idol have an odious signification in the English tongue, yet
neither the Greek (...), nor the Latin simulachrum, do sound so evil unto
the ears: and in many places of the scripture we may in differently read,
idol or image: for all worshipping of Images is idolatry. If we will
distinguish them, they are thus rather to be severed: An Idol is that image,
which is set up with an intent to be worshipped: an Image is a general name as
well to unlawful pictures set up for idolatry, as lawful, which have but a
civil use. But that the Papists Idols are images, thus we prove it.

Argum. 1. The scripture calls the Gentiles Idols, images, Romans 1.23. there
the word (...) is used: Ergo, idol and image are taken for one: they have
images set up for religious or rather irreligious uses, Ergo, Idols.

Arg. 2. Apocal. 9.20. There is mention made of Idols of gold, silver, brass,
which cannot be understood of the Idols of the Gentiles, which were abolished
long ago: and that prophecy is to be understood of men living after the
opening of the seventh seal, which is toward the end of the world. Wherefore
it must needs be understood of the Papists, who are the only known people in
the world, that worship images: Ergo, they have Idols.

Augustine takes imago, and simulachrum, which is the Latin for the Greek
(...) for all one: for the love of the dead (says he) images were first made,
whereof the use of simulachers or Idols do arise.

THE SECOND ARTICLE, WHETHER IT BE lawful to have the images of the Trinity,
of Christ, or of the Angels.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Act. 17. sect. 5.

Arg. 1. To paint the Trinity, or any one of them as they appeared visiblie,
is no more inconvenient, then it was indecent for them so to appear. Rhem.
ibid.

Ans. You flatly control the law of God, which simply forbids any
similitude to be made of things in heaven or in earth to worship God by. And
Deuteronomy. 4.15. God expressly declares, that he would not appear in any visible
shape when he gave the law, lest the people should abuse that shape, to make an
image of God after it. Lastly, the argument follows not: for God saw it was
convenient sometime by visible signs to appear unto men, and yet sees it to
be inconvenient for pictures to be made to resemble him by: for else he would
never have forbidden it.

Arg. 2. The angels were pictured in form of Cherubims: Ergo, Spirits may be
portraicted.

Ans. When you can show an express commandment for your images, as the
Israelites had for them, we will yield, that they are lawfully made. Again,
how follows it, God may command images to be made for the use of religion:
Ergo, men may? for the law binds not the Lord who is the lawmaker. But the
law says, thou shall not make to thy self, that is, by thine own authority
any graven image. The Cherubims also were not made publicly to be seen and
gazed upon by the people, but were set in the holy place: so are not your
pictures and images which are set up openly in your Churches to entise people
to idolatry.

The Protestants.
TO set forth the Godhead and divine nature by any picture or image, is
impossible, and therefore both unlawful and inconvenient: but to bring them
into Churches, and to make them for some use of religion, is a high step unto
gross superstition.

1. Such images of the Trinity among the Papists, are made to resemble the
divinity and Godhead: for to what purpose else should such images be made?
Fulk. Act. 17. sect. 5. They picture God the Father like an old man: because in
that form he appeared to Daniel: but how know they whether it were God the
Father, rather then God the Son, who is as old as God the Father, or then the
whole Godhead? They commend also the image of God the Father with the world in
his hand: which is a lying image, and makes simple people to believe, that the
world was made only by God the Father, which was the work of the whole
Trinity. Some of the Papists themselves, as Abulensis, Durandus, Peresius, do
hold, that the image of God ought not to be made, and that it is rather
tolerated, then allowed in the Church.

As for the images of Christ in the form of a Lamb, and the holy Ghost in
shape of a Dove, Bartholomaeus Caranza, a papist, shows that they were
forbidden in the sixth general Synod, Canon. 28. And this Bellarmine denies
not.

Concerning the picture of Christ as he was man, the Papists themselves
confess, and we deny not, but it may better be made then the image of the
Trinity: yet can there not be any true image of Christ, as he was in form of
man: for the image does only express his bodily shape, not as he was God in
the form of man: and so such a picture were dangerous to the weak and
ignorant: being a lying image, showing Christ only as man, who was both God
and man. And again, the image, which is made of his bodily shape, is no more
the image of Christ, then of any other man, Fulk. Act. 17. sect. 5.

But some will say, if Christ's image cannot conveniently be made, because it
expresses not his Godhead; by the same reason we cannot make a picture of a
man, because his soul being invisible cannot be painted.

Ans. The reason is not alike: for he that pictureth a man living, sets
forth the life, beauty and motion of the body, by which effects, by a
consequent, the soul is resembled, which causes and works these things in
the body: but in the bodily shape of Christ, there cannot be made to appear
any such notorious signs of his Godhead.

2. Though it be not simply unlawful to express in painting the visible
shapes that were showed in vision to the Prophets, if it be only for use and
signification of the history, or if there be any other commendable use: yet to
make those shapes for any use of religion, or service of God, is abominable
idolatry, Fulk. ibid. Epiphanius saw in a Church at Anablatha, Epiphan.
epist. ad Iohann.
an image painted in a table, as it had been of Christ or a Saint, he took it
down and cut it in pieces: affirming that it was contrary to the scripture
for any image of a man to hang in the Church of Christ. The Elibertine Council,
Canon 36. decreed, that no pictures should be made in Churches. If no pictures,
much less carved images, which are a more strong provocation to idolatry.

Augustine renders a reason, why it is dangerous to have images in Churches,
where there is yea but the least fear of superstition: Quis orat intuens
simulachrum, qui non sic afficitur, vt ab eo se exaudiri putet, nec ab eo sibi
praestari, quod desideret, putet? Who (says he) prays beholding an image,
and is not so affected, as though he were heard of it, and hops not to have
that performed by it, which he desires? Psalm. 113.

THE THIRD ARTICLE, WHETHER THE images of Saints are to be worshipped.
The Papists.
Tridentine Chapter, sess. 25. confessed by our Rhemists, Act. 17. sect. 5.
maintained by the Jesuits, Bellarm. cap. 12.

Argum. 1. The brazen serpent was worshipped of the people, seeing it was set
up in a high place, and gave health to those that looked upon it: Ergo, images
may be worshipped, Bellarm. The people also fell down before the Arc and
tabernacle, and worshipped God: Ergo, lawful, praying, to fall down before a
Crucifixe, Rhemist. annot. Heb. 11.21.

Ans. First, it was not the serpent that healed the^, but Christ who was
thereby prefigured. John 3.14. The serpent was lift up, that the people might
round about the better behold it, and it shows forth also the lifting up of
Christ upon the Cross. It was not set up to be worshipped, neither was it
worshipped till the people fell into superstition, and offered incense to it,
and therefore because the people abused that monument, Hezekiah brake it down,
2. King. 18. Secondly, it is not all one to fall down before, in, or at the
Arc and tabernacle, and to worship God, as to worship the Arc or tabernacle.
You do not only fall down before a Crucifixe, but worship it: neither is it
as lawful to worship before a Crucifixe, as it was before the tabernacle: for
the one was commanded of God, the other is the superstitious devise of men.

Argum. 2. As the image of Nabuchadnezzar was for his honor, so the image of
Christ is for his, Rhemist. Revel. 13.14.

Ans. A good similitude, if Christ himself had not forbidden so to be honored
and worshipped.

Argum. 3. Man is honored because he is the image of God: Ergo, images of
Saints to be reverenced, because they are their Images, Bellarm. cap. 12.

Ans. First, man is a lively image of Gods own making, images of Saints are
the works of men. Secondly, no image can so lively represent a Saint, being
but a dead thing, as man who has a living soul is the image of God. Thirdly,
we do reverence men with civil honor, not with religious worship, as they
do their images. Fourthly, though Gods image in man were to be worshipped: yet
it would not follow, that Saints images should: for all divine worship
belongs only to God: but the Saints themselves, though they were alive, are
not to be worshipped, much less their images.

Argum. 4. The chief Iconomachi, that is, enemies or oppugners of Idols, say
they, are the Jews, Samaritanes, Mahometanes: yea the devil himself loves
no images, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. First, it follows not, the Jews and Turks abhor images, and
therefore Christians ought to love them: for the heathen hated many vices,
which are also to be abhorred of Christians. Secondly, they were not the first
Iconomachi, Image haters: for Moses was an Iconomach, when he caused the golden
Calfe to be burnt to powder: Hezekiah an Iconomach, that brake down the brazen
serpent: Josiah an Iconomach, that caused the Idols to be destroyed, 2. King.
23. Nay, God himself was the first Iconomach, that forbids Images and Idols
to be made in the moral law. Thirdly, I pray you where did the Jesuit learn,
that the devil hates an image? I am sure the scripture speaks contrary,
that what was offered to Idols was sacrificed to devils, 1. Corinthians. 10.20.

The Protestants.
THat Images or Idols are not at all to be reverenced or worshipped, or to be
made, or set up in Churches, or in any other place for any religious, or rather
irreligious use: thus out of the holy scriptures we make it plain.

Argum. 1. The making of any similitude or likeness, to fall down before it and
worship it, is flatly forbidden in the second commandment, Exodus 20. Ergo,
they are not to be worshipped. So likewise, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Isai. 40.18. and in
many other places in the old Testament, Worshipping of Images, which is
idolatry, manifestly forbidden in the new Testament, Romans 1.23. 1. Corinthians.
10.20. 1. John. 5.21. Ergo, not lawful.

Ans. One Catharinus a great Papist, says, that the commandment in the law
against images, was but temporal, and to continue but till the establishing of
the new Testament. But Bellarmine utterly misliketh this answer, being most
absurd, for the moral law is perpetual, De imaginib. sanct. lib. 2. cap. 7.
They do give therefore a more deliberate answer: that the scriptures do
reprove and condemn the idolatry of the heathen, which worshipped their
images as Gods. But so do not they: they make no account of them, as they
affirm, for their matter or form, but for that relation they have to the
things whose images they are, Rhemist. Philipp. 2. sect. 2.

Ans. First, the Jews also in their golden Calfe had a relation to that God
that brought them out of the land of Egypt, Exodus 32.4.5. The like relation had
Jeroboam in setting up of his Calves, 1. King. 12.28. for they were not so mad
as to think that a Calfe brought them out of Egypt. And it appears yet more
plainly: for Exodus 32.5. Aaron says, To morrow shall be the Lords holy day:
the word is Jehovah: which name the Jews only ascribed unto God: So Judge.
17.3. Micah his mother says, that she had consecrated the shekles of silver to
the Lord Jehovah, to make a molten Image: wherefore in their Images they had
relation to God, and yet were they reproved for their idolatry. The like
relation the Gentiles also had in their Idols, as Augustine witnesses: Non ego
illum lapidem colo, etc. adoro, quem video, sed seruio ei quem non video. Quis
est ille? Numen quoddam inuisibile quod praesidet illi simulachro. in Psalm. 96.
I do not worship that carved stone or Image: I reverence that I see, but I
serve or worship that I see not: that is, a certain divine spirit, which is
president in that image. Wherefore popish idolatry can no more be excused by
this shift of reference or relation, then either the Jews or Gentiles, that
pretended the same color.

2 It may be proved by the practice of the popish Church in England, that
simply without any such relation or signification they commanded Images to be
worshipped. Thomas Man Martyr troubled, because he believed not in the
Crucifixe. Fox p. 815. artic. 7.
Robert Rave of Dorney molested, because he said, that an Image graven with
man's hand, is neither God, nor our Lady, but made for a remembrance of Saints:
nor we ought to worship any thing, but God and our Lady, and not images of
Saints, Fox. p. 850.
which are but stocks and stones. Mistress Alice Dolie brought into trouble
for saying, We should not worship that thing that has ears, page 984.
and eyes, and can neither see, nor hear. These good men and women, we see,
were persecuted in those days for denying worship to Images, as they were
Images. So then the popish doctrine was (as it appears) that Images were
simply to be worshipped.

Argum. 2. Apocalypse. 9.20. Worshippers of Idols of silver and gold are there
condemned: which can be no other but the Papists: for that prophecy is to be
fulfilled in the latter times toward the end of the world, after the opening
of the seventh seal and blowing of the sixth trumpet. But there is no known
nation in the world, nor has not been many a day, that worship Images, but
the popish Synagogue.

Argum. 3. Man is the image of God, and yet is not worshipped: how much less
ought we to worship carved images, which are but made with men's hands? As
Augustine says, Opera hominum non colenda, meliores sunt artifices: The handie
works of men are not to be worshipped, the workmen themselves are better, and
yet not worshipped. What foul idolatry is this, to prefer the works of
men's hands, before the work and image of God, to despise men, and have in so
great regard dead stocks and stones.

Argum. 4. Augustine says: Noui multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum
adoratores: I know there are many which worship sepulchers and pictures. Of
these he warns men to take heed, Noli consectari turbas imperitorum: Follow
not such unlearned and unskillful multitudes. Bellarmine answers, that
Augustine wrote thus when he was a young man, and not fully converted, cap. 16.
A silly shift: yet we will vouchsafe an answer, though it be worthy of none.
Let us hear what Augustine thought when he was old, and stayed in judgment:
Iam vero artifex melior est eis, quem te tamen puderet adorare: melior and tu,
in Psalm. 113
quamuis ea non feceris, quoniam, quae illa non possunt facis, melior and
bestia. The workman is better then the image, who gave fashion and shape unto
it, yet thou would be ashamed to worship him: thou thy self art better, for
thou can do many things which that cannot: nay a brute beast that hears
and sees is better. By this we may see what Augustine thought of worshipping
of Images.

THE FOVRTH ARTICLE, WHAT MANNER OF worship is to be given to Images.
The Papists.
BEllarmine, who is the mouth of the rest, sets down these two positions:
First, that Images, though they are not properly to be worshipped with divine
and non solum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris, and not only as they represent
another thing: Bellarm. de imaginib. sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 21.23.

The Protestants.
WE have showed before that Images ought not to be worshipped at all, and that
all religious worship is due only unto God: wherefore to us this question is
superfluous, with what religious worship Images are to be adored: for no
religious worship at all is due unto them: yet let us vouchsafe the while, to
see the contradictions that are amongst them, and the absurdities that they are
driven unto.

1 Our Rhemists confess, that Images are not at all to be worshipped with any
divine honor, Act. 17. sect. 5. But it was decreed in the idolatrous Council
of Nice the second, and maintained by Thomas Aquinas, Bonauentur, Caietanus,
and other papists, that the image of God is to be worshipped with the same
worship that is due unto God. And Bellarmine comes not much short of them,
that says, improprie, improperly Images may have the same worship: as the
Kings ambassador improperly is honored as the King. I pray you how far are
these men from making their Images Gods? for they say they are the Lords
deputies and Vicegerents, as the ambassador is for the King.

Again, the Rhemists affirm, that the Images of Christ are not to be honored
or accounted of, but for the respect and relation they have to our Savior,
Annot. Philipp. 2.2. So the Tridentine Council determines, Sess. 25. Honos,
qui eis debetur, refertur ad prototypa, quae illae repraesentant: The honor due
unto them is to be referred unto those things which they represent. But
Bellarmine teaches clean contrary, that they have not only a respective
honor, as representing other things, but properly and in themselves considered
are to be worshipped. We may see by this, how handsomely they agree together.

2. Let us see their absurdities. First, they hold that all images are not to
be worshipped alike: for they make 3. degrees of religious worship; the
highest, which they call (...)* due unto God; the lowest religious worship,
which they call (...) proper to Saints; the middle or mean worship, called by
the^ (...), as you would say, Superseruice, to be given only to the virgin
Mary. And as these three, Christ, the Virgin, the Saints do differ, say they,
in honor, so their Images accordingly must be distinguished in their worship.

Thus it comes about, that a Roode of wood representing Christ, is more to be
honored, then an Image of our Lady of silver; and Her image, if it be but of
stone, is more to be reverenced then a Saints image of gold: and thus the
excellency of nature, which is given these things by creation, is inuerted.

Again, whereas beside these three devised worships, which are properly due
(as they say) to the Saints, not to their ^mages, the images also have their
proper worships: they make three other inferior kinds of worship, which do
exceed in degree, as the other superior kinds do: so as Christ has his
(...), worship, his image must have (...), his under worship, (for we must
coin new names for strange devises) their Lady Mary has her (...),
super-seruice: her image must have an (...), and vnder-ouer-seruice: as the
Saints have their (...), service, so their images must have their (...), an
vnder-seruice. And thus have we six kinds of religious worship: as Bellarmine
has coined them, cap. 25. and yet before the Jesuit told us but of two kinds
of religious worship, and the third a civil: three in all, Lib. 1. de Sanct.
beatit. cap. 12.

But the scripture acknowledges one only kind of religious worship, and that
due only unto the Lord: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, Math. 4.10. And the Angel forbad John to fall down before
him, giving a rule for all religious worship: Worship God, says he, Apocal.
22.9.

Now, if our adversaries deal plainly with us, and tell us in good sooth, that
they would not have images to be adored with divine worship: I ask them,
whether to offer incense be not a part of divine worship? They cannot deny it:
for Hezekiah therefore brake down the brazen Serpent, because the people burned
incense to it, 2. King. 18.4. Seeing then the Jesuit allows censing and
burning of odors before Images, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sanctor. beatitud. cap. 13.
they give unto them divine honor. The Jesuits simple shift, that offering of
incense was a sacrifice then, an so part of divine worship, but it is none
now, is not worth the answer. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 17.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS question concerning the sign of the Cross.
THis part also is divided into certain points or articles.

1. Of the honor due to the true Cross of Christ, whereon he suffered. 2. Of
the Image of the Cross. 3 Of the Sign of the Cross in the forehead, or made
otherwise with the hand. 4 Of the power and efficacy of the Cross.
THE FIRST ARTICLE OF THE TRVE Cross whereon our Savior suffered.
The Papists.
THe wood of the Cross, both the whole and every piece thereof (say they) is
worthy of great worship and reverence: and therefore it has been worthily
Rhemist. annot. John. 19. sect. 2.

Argum. 1. It is highly sanctified, by the touching, bearing and oblation of
the sacred body of Christ, the Altar of that supreme sacrifice, and instrument
of our redemption. Ergo, to be worshipped, Rhemist. ibid. Bellarm. lib. 2. de
imagine. cap. 27.

Ans. If therefore it was holy because it touched the body of Christ, and was
an instrument of his death: by the same reason, the nails that pearsed him,
the spear that goared his side, the tormenters that crucified, Judas that
betrayed and kissed him: All these should also be honored and worshipped, that
handled and touched him, and were instruments, occasions, and procurers of his
death.

Argum. 2 The Cross of Christ was found out, say they, in Constantines time
the great, by a strange miracle: for there were three crosses dug up, which
had been a long time buried in the earth: the two crosses upon the which the
2. thieves suffered, the 3. whereon our Savior hung: They brought them al
three to a woman that then lay very sick, they laid the two first to her, and
she remained as she was; then they applied the third, and she was presently
made whole. Bellarm. ex Ruffino: Ergo, the Cross is holy and to be worshipped.

Ans. The invention of the Cross by Helena Constantines mother, seems to be
a forged and fabulous story.

1. Eusebius that writes of the life of Constantine, and the Acts of Helena
and registreth diverse matters of less importance, yea he shows how the
Mount Caluarie, where the heathen had built Idolatrous Temples, was purged, and
in that place (say they) the Cross* was found, yet he makes no mention at all
of the invention of the Cross: which it is very like he would not have
omitted, if there had been any such thing.

2. The most ancient author that writes of this matter, is Ambrose, deobitu
Theodosii, which oration Erasmus thinks to be forged in Ambroses name.

3. There is great disagreement amongst writers about this story. Ambrose
says, the Cross was known by the title that Pilate fastened to it.
Sozomenus and Nicephorus say, the letters were worn out, and it could not be
discerned by the title. Paulinus says, the way to discern it, was revealed to
Helena: Ruffinus ascribes the devise to Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem: Paulinus
says, it was known by raising up a dead man to life: Ruffinus, by restoring a
sick woman to health, Fulk annot. John 19 sect. 2. Thus we see of what small
credit this story is. And be it granted, that there might be some such thing
found: yet they must bring better proof for that miraculous invention, before
we will believe it.

The Protestants.
WE are not taught any where in the word of God, to give any religious worship
to any creature, nor to adore stocks and stones, no nor the very Cross it
self, whereon Christ was crucified, if it were now to be seen or had.

Argum. 1. If there had belonged unto the Church any religious care of it, the
Apostles would (no doubt) have procured the safe keeping thereof, and not have
suffered the Church to want it 300. years: and it had been an easier suit for
Joseph and Nicodemus to beg the Cross, then the body of Jesus.

Argum. 2. If the Cross were to be adored, we are uncertain which it is, and
where to be had; and so might worship a common piece of wood, for the wood of
the Cross: for there is no doubt but this relic is forged and counterfeyted
as the rest be. Euegrius says, the Cross was at Apamea: Ruffinus, that it was
left at Jerusalem, and that Helena sent a piece of it to Constantinople: and in
many other places there are pieces of the Cross to be seen, which if they
were all laid together (as Erasmus says) would fill a ship: for why?
Paulinus witnesses, that the Cross remains whole at Jerusalem, as though it
had been never touched, though innumerable pieces be daily cut off from it, at
the request of men. But this fable that goes under the name of Paulinus, the
Papists themselves are ashamed of.

But if the true and right Cross were to be had; why might it not be served,
if people began to abuse it to Idolatry, as Hezekiah served the brazen
serpent? he brake it in pieces, when the people began to make an Idol of it.

Augustine says, Christus ambulauit in mari, vt ostenderet in mari esse viam:
sed tu quoniam i^ mari ambulare non potes, naui portare, ligno portare, creed
in crucifixum, and poteris peruenire: Nemo potest transire mare huius seculi
nisi Cruce Christi portatus. Christ walked in the Sea, to show us that our way
must be through the Sea: But thou, because thou can not walk in the sea,
must sail in a ship, and be carried in a piece of wood: Believe in him that
was crucified for thee: No man can pass the sea of this world, but being borne
up with the cross of Christ.

Here Augustine makes no reckoning of the wood of the Cross, which was
easier to be had in his days, then ever since, but ascribes al to faith and
belief in Christ crucified.

THE SECOND ARTICLE OF THE Image of the Cross or Crucifix.
The Papists.
THe Image of Christ upon the cross, whether painted, carved, or graven, we

Argum. 1. As adoration was done unto God in old time, at and before the Arc
and Tabernacle, so it may be done now, at, or before a crucifix, relic,
image, Rhemist. annot. Heb. 11. sect. 9.

Ans. 1. It is not al one to worship God at or before a thing, as to worship
and adore the thing: the Israelits worshipped God, in, at or before the
Tabernacle, yet did they not worship the Tabernacle, as you do the crucifix.

2. They might worship God before the Arc, because they were commanded so to
do: but it is not lawful to fall down before a crucifix, because all such
images are flatly in the 2. commandment forbidden.

Argum. 2. The sign of the cross appeared to Constantine in the air, he
caused the cross to be carried before him as an ensign in battle: When the
Jews had leave of Julian to build the Temple, there were Crosses seen every
where in their garments, and many such apparitions have there been of the
Cross: Ergo, it is to be honored and worshipped, Bellarmine cap. 28.

Ans. 1. What if Constantine caused the Cross to be carried before him,
stamped it in his coin, set up his picture with the Cross in his hand? all
this we grant was done, and may be done again: It was but a civil, no
religious use of the Cross: He worshipped it not, unless you will say, he set
up his own image with the Cross in his hand to be worshipped.

2. As for the apparitions of the Cross (though we think many of them to be
forged) yet we deny not, but that the Lord has and may yet show, what signs
and tokens it pleases him in the Heaven, and the earth: yet it follows not,
that the sign of the cross should therefore be worshipped, because it was
showed to Constantine, no more then other signs and strange sights that many
times appear in the air.

For the other apparition of Crosses in the Jews garments, we will require
it with another, and yet you shall gain nothing by it. Anno. 1505. under the
reign of the Emperor Maximilian, there appeared diverse tokens of bloody
crosses, the nails, the sponge, the spear, and other signs of Christ's
passion, in the garments of men and women, yea in their rocks, while they were
a spinning, reported by Francis Mirandula, Carrion, Functius, Melancton,
Flaccius: But the Popish Chronologers make no mention of it, as Christianus
Masseus, and others of that profession. As the Crosses in the Jews garments,
that went about to establish their ceremonies again, did show, that do what
they could, the gospel, that is, the preaching of his Cross should take
place, as it did: so these signs in Germany did porte^d, that the gospel in
Germany should be preached, though the Papists striued never so much against
it. But it is a far fetched conclusion, to infer hereupon, that the sign
or Image of the Cross is to be adored.

The Protestants.
THe Image of the Cross of Christ, is neither to be painted, carved, graven,
for any religious use, nor to be adored or worshipped: but men so doing do fall
into the grievous and high offense and sin of idolatry.

Argu. 1. The Scripture never calls the Cross, whereon Christ suffered, the
holy Cross, as the papists do, but rather cursed: for S. Paul proves that
Christ became accursed for us, because he dyed upon the Cross, according to
the scripture, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. How then is it now
honored, which was then accursed? And if all crosses are worthy honor, because
of Christ his Cross, then why not all nails, and spears? for with them he
was pearsed; al thorns also, because of his crown of thorns: yea, and al
horse-mangers too, because he was laid in a Cribbe?

Argum. 2 They are uncertain of what fashion the Cross of Christ was,
whetherlike the Greek letter. Y. or this letter, x. or the Greek (...). T. or
of this fashion. or of this,. which is the usual form of their Crosses: how
then dare they worship that which they know not, and are uncertain of?

3. All those reasons which we brought before against the worshipping of
images: part. ^. huius quaest. articul. 3. may be urged against the adoration
of Crucifixes.

Augustine thus writes, Hanc intuentes salutiferam crucem, omne calumniantium
superborum virus expellimus, In Psalm. 118 Cont. 26.
By beholding this helpful, or helthfull Cross, we are able to avoid the
poison of all proud venomous Cauillers. He speaks not of any Crucifix that
they had in sight, but of the fruitful meditation of the passion of Christ: as
he says a little before, Dum vigilantissima and diligentissima pietate
Christus crucifixus attenditur, When with diligent and watchful and godly
attention we consider Christ crucified. Lo, this was Augustines Crucifix, to
meditate upon the death of Christ.

THE THIRD ARTICLE OF THE SIGN of the Cross in the forehead, or made over any
thing with the hand.
The Papists.
THey say, it is an holy and venerable sign, and meet to be used, to cross
the Rhemist.

Argum. 1. Jacob crossed his hands when he blessed his sons: it is like our
Savior did lift up his hands in the form of the cross, when he blessed. It
is a convenient memorial of the death of Christ: and therefore to be used.
Rhemist. annot. Luke 24. sect. 5.

Ans. 1. Jacob laid his hands after that form, because of the present
occasion: for the younger son that should be the greater, was placed at his
left hand, and the elder at the right.

2. Seeing the scripture expresses not in what manner Christ lifted up his
hands, it is great presumption for you to say, it was done in the similitude of
the Cross.

3. How can it be a convenient memorial of Christ's death, being neither
ordained of Christ, nor taught by his Apostles so to be?

Argum. 2. Apocal. 7.3. Hurt not the earth, till we have sealed the servants
of God in their forehead: This is the sign of the Cross, Rhemist. ibid.
Bellarm. cap. 29.

Ans. It is the sign proper to Gods elect, and therefore not the sign of the
Cross, which many reprobates have received, Fulk ibid.

The Protestants.
THough we find that the sign of the Cross has been of ancient time used
in Baptism, and is now in some reformed churches without popish superstition:
yet this ridiculous and superstitious abuse of the sign of the Cross, which
is common and usual among the Papists, to cross themselves, their foreheads,
their eyes, mouth, lips, to cross themselves going forth, and returning
home, thinking thereby to be sufficiently shended and preserved from evil, we
do utterly condemn, and have worthily abolished.

Argum. 1. This custom of crossing has no warrant from scripture, neither was
practiced by the Apostles: Valentinus the Heretic was the first that made any
great account of it, Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 1. therefore not to be used amongst
Christians.

Argum. 2. Math. 23.5. Christ reproves the Pharisees for their phylacteries,
that is certain writings of the law in parchment, which they bound to their
foreheads, and for their broad fringes, which were notwithstanding commanded by
the law. If our Savior reproved them for abusing the things rightly
instituted at the first: much more worthy of blame is the superstition of
Christians that has no ground nor warrant at all.

In Iohann. tract. 43.
Augustine says, Christus elegit, vt in cruce penderet, vt ipsam crucem in
cordibus fidelium figeret: Christ made choice of that kind of death to hang
upon the Cross, that his Cross might be fixed in faithful men's hearts: he
says not in frontibus, in the forehead, though in some editions that word be
foysted into the text, but in cordibus, in their hearts.

THE FOVRTH ARTICLE OF THE POWER and efficacy of the Cross.
The Papists.
Rhemist. 1. Timoth. 4. sect. 12.13. Bellarm. cap. 30.

Argum. 1. That the sign of the Cross, even ex opere operato, as Bellarmine
says, by the very act, and making of the sign, yea by a Jew, Infidel or
Pagan, has power to drive away the devil, they would thus prove it: David by
his Harp drove away the evil spirit from Saul: the Angel did the like with
the fishes liver, in the story of Toby: Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, we must have better scriptures then Apocryphal stories to build
our faith upon: The good angels of God have power from God to drive away evil
spirits, though they use no external signs: yet it follows not, that every
man may do that which is granted to the Angels, though we should admit the
story. Secondly, David not so much by the sound of his Harp refreshed Saul,
as by his godly songs and music chased away the spirit: neither did the evil
spirit depart from him, but he for the while found some ease: his fantastical
and melancholy fits which Satan wrought upon, being by his pleasant harmony
somewhat allayed. Thirdly, all this being granted, yet have they not proved by
these examples, that Pagans and Infidels, by the sign of the Cross, may chase
away evil spirits.

2. That things are hallowed and blessed by the sign of the Cross, they also
prove it, because the Cross being an holy sign in it self, does communicate
holiness unto the things signed with the Cross: Bellarm. cap. 130.

Ans. First, we deny the sign of the Cross, as they use it to be an holy but
rather a superstitious and deceivable ceremony. Secondly, though it were
holy, yet being abused, it cannot transfer any holiness to other things* for
in the law the sacrifices of the wicked, though they lay upon the Altar, were
not thereby sanctified, but were an abomination, being not offered in a right
faith: Nay, there is no outward ceremony so holy, as that it can impart the
holiness to another thing: as it is showed, Hagg. 2.13. Though a man did bear
holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, yet was it not thereby holy.

The Protestants.
FIrst, it is a deceitful toy that they bear the people in hand: the devil
at the sign of the Cross will fly away: For the weapons of our warfare
(says S. Paul) are not carnal, 2. Corinthians. 10.4. but the sign of the Cross
is an external and carnal, no spiritual weapon, and therefore prevails not
against spiritual powers. Act. 19. The devil would not give place when Jesus
and Paul were named, much less at the sign of the Cross.

Augustine says: Signum Christi expellit exterminatorem* si cor nostru^
recipiat saluatorem: The sign of Christ does expel the destroyer, when our
heart receives our Savior: Tractat. in Iohann. 50. So it is not the sign in
the forhead, but the faith of the heart, that makes Satan afraid: if sometime
he avoid when men sign themselves, he is disposed to play with them, that he
may deceive them more strongly.

Secondly, we know no such means to sanctify creatures by: They are blessed
and sanctified for our uses (as S. Paul says) by the word and prayer, 1. Tim.
4. Prayer therefore without warrant of the word is but presumption. They
therefore having no word for their superstitious crossings, inuocations,
incantations, popish blessings, do deceive themselves and others, in thinking
that the creatures in such order are sanctified unto them.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING THE name of Jesus.
The Papists.
THe name of Jesus (they say) ought to be worshipped by capping and kneeling
Paul, That at the name of Jesus all things shall bow, Philipp. 2.10. Yea, they
say, that Protestants by abolishing the name and Image of Christ, do make a
way for Antichrist. Rhemist. annot. Phi^ipp. ^. sect. ^. Apocal. 13.17.

The Protestants.
1. THe bowing at the name of Jesus, as it is used in popery, to bend the knee
at the sound thereof, is not commanded in this place: which shows especially
the subjection of all creatures, of Turks, Jews, infidels, yea of the devils
themselves to the power and judgment of Christ. Secondly, Protestants have
only taken away the superstitious abuse of the name of Jesus. Thirdly, the
kneeling at the name of Jesus is superstitiously abused in popery: for the
people stoop only at the sound, not understanding what is read, and so make
an idol of the Letters and syllables, adoring and worshipping the very name
when they hear it or see it: And again in sitting and not veyling at the name
of Christ, Immanuel, God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, and bowing
only at the name of Jesus: Fulk. ibid. Fourthly, due reverence may be used to
our Savior without any such ceremony of capping or kneeling, Fulk. Neither do
we bind any of necessity to use this reverence to the name of Jesus, as the
Papists do, which think that Christ cannot otherwise be honored: neither do
we judge and condemn those that do use it, being free from superstition, and
grounded in knowledge, and careful not to give offense: for superstitious and
offensive ignorance is not in any case to be defended. Fifthly, this outward
reverence to the name of Jesus was first taken up amongst Christians, because
of all other names it was most derided and scorned of the Paganes and Jews:
and therefore they did the more honor it. But now there is greater danger of
popish superstition in abusing holy things, then of profane paganism in
utterly contemning them: and therefore there is not such necessary and just
occasion of using this external gesture now, as was in former times: It was
not used of necessity then, much less now.

THE SIXTH QVESTION CONCERNING Temples and Churches.
THis question has diverse parts. First, of the form and situation of
Churches. Secondly, of the end and use of Churches. Thirdly, of their
ornaments, Fourthly, of the dedication of Churches. Fifthly of things hallowed
and consecrated for Churches.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SITVation of Churches.
The Papists.
THe Churches and Temples of Christians (say they) are most conuenientlye and
have been of ancient time builded toward the East. Bellarmine libro tertio,
capite tertio, de sanctis.

Argu. 1. Paradise was built in the East, Genes. 2.8. and therefore we ought to
pray that way, for desire we have to our Country.

Ans. 1. Paradise was then Eastward unto Moses and the Israelites being in the
Wilderness, when he wrote this story: but it cannot be East to all Christian
nations: for Paradise being planted in Eden which was part of Mesopotamia, must
needs be West to the Persians, South to the Scythians and Tartarians, North to
the Aethiopians: wherefore this reason is not general for all Churches in
Christian nations. Secondly, it skilleth not where that earthly Paradise is
situate: our heavenly Paradise is in heaven, which is every where open to all
true believers.

Argu. 2. We look for Christ to come in the East to judgment, therefore we
pray toward the East: As the lightning shines from the East to the West, so
shall the coming of the Son of man be. Math. 27.24. Therefore he shall
appear toward the East. Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. By that similitude of the lightening, the sodainnes of his appearing,
not the place is declared. Secondly, it is great presumption to define that
which the Scripture has not revealed* Christ's coming is only generally set
down, he shall come in the clouds, Math. 24.30. And we shall be caught up in
the clouds. 1. Thessal. 4.17. There is no particular description of the place.

The Protestants.
TO us it is no matter, which way Churches are builded, we may turn our selves
in prayer as well toward any one part of the heavens, as an other: Neither do
we refuse to pray in Churches builded toward the East. But that our Oratories
and places of prayer ought rather to be builded that way, then any other; out
of the Scripture it cannot be proved, and we hold it as a mere superstitious
opinion.

Argu. 1. S. Paul exhorts men every where to lift up pure hands. 1. Tim.
2.8. He says, In every place, without exception, whether toward the East or
the West, or wheresoever.

2. If any place were more dangerous then other to pray in, it is not so safe,
and perhaps more perilous to pray toward the East for Idolaters were wont to
turn them toward the East, and to worship the Sun rising. Ezech. 8.17. And
for this cause the holy place in the Tabernacle was toward the West. Exodus
26.27. And it was the custom of the Jews to pray Westward, least they should
be entised to worship the Sun rising in his strength. And therefore the
Jesuit makes but a bad argument: The Jews prayed toward the West, Ergo.
christians must pray toward the East: nay rather contrary, because they turned
their back to the East, for fear of Idolatry; Christians, if any place were
to be regarded more then other, ought upon the same ground also to follow the
same custom, for as much as all men by nature are prone to Idolatry: and the
reason of their so praying, seems rather to be moral, then ceremonial: This
I say not, as though I commended the Jews superstitious praying toward the
West, but only to show that they have better reason for their custom, then
our adversaries have for their superstitious turning toward the East. But to
christians all places are alike.

Augustine says, cum quis quaritorationem, c^llocet membra, sicut ei occurrit.
If any man be desirous to pray, let him place his body, as occasion serves: he
says not, toward the East, or toward the West. ad Simplician. lib. 2. quaest.
4.

AN APPENDIX OF THIS PART concerning the form and fashion of Churches.
The Papists.
Salomons Temple was, which consisted of three parts: there was first the
porch or court for the people; then the holy place where the Altar stood, and
the Priests offered sacrifice, and last of all the most holy place, where the
Arc and Mercieseate were placed. So they have the Church porch, then the body
of the Church, and above that, their Sanctuary, as they call it, or the queere
or chauncell, which was separated from the rest, by steps or stairs, hangings
or curtains, and other partitions. And here must stand their Altar. Bellarm.
lib. 3. de (...) Sanctor. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
COncerning the fashion and form of Churches, and the (...) and partitions
within, we will not much contend, so these conditions be observed, First, that
all superstition be avoided in making one place of the Church holier then the
rest, wherein the Papists mightily offend* for the queere or chauncel was for
their Priests and singers, the other part of the Church for lay men, they were
not to enter into that holy place: and thus according to the places, they
divided the congregation: as though one part were more holy then the other* The
people also were made to believe, that to be buried in the Chauncell but
especially under the Altar, was more auailable for the dead, then to be buried
in the Church. But where learn they that our Churches ought to have a
sanctuary, as the Jewish Temple had? that was an evident type, and is now
accomplished in our Savior Christ, who is now entered into the heavens, as the
high Priest then entered into the holy place to make atonement for the people.
Heb. 9.24. This therefore is very gross, to revive and renew again Jewish
types and figures. And if herein they will imitate the building of Salomons
Temple, to have a Sanctuary, why do they not also build toward the West, as
the Temple was? why bring they not their Altar down into the body of the
Church? for in their holy place there was no Altar. And indeed, Altar we
acknowledge none, as afterward shall be proved. But we see no reason* why the
communion Table may not be set in the body of the Church, as well as in the
Chauncell, if the place be more convenient and fit to receive the Communicants.
But I pray you why is your Altar rather set in your Sanctuary, then the Font
or Baptistery? they are both Sacraments, as well Baptism as the Lords Supper:
why should one be preferred, as holier then the other?

Secondly, all things in the Church ought to be done unto edifiyng, and
therefore we allow no such partitions, as do hinder the edifiyng of the people
and exclude them from hearing: as in popish Churches the Priest is pued or mued
up by himself a great way off, that his voice can hardly be perceived of the
people: The Minister is so to stand and turn himself as he may be best heard
and understood of the people: as Ezra had a pulpit of wood to stand in when he
read the Law, Nehemiah. 8. 4.

Augustine thus writes, Cum Episcopus solus intus est, populus and orat eum
illo, et quasi subscribens ad eius verba, respondet, Amen. While the Bishop or
Pastor prays within, the people both prays together with him: and
subscribing to his words, answers, Amen. By this it appears, that though in
Augustines time the Minister had a place for him self (as it is meet he
should) yet he so disposed himself, that his prayer was heard of all the
people: for otherwise how could they pray with him, and subscribe or give
assent to his words?

THE SECOND PART, OF THE END and use of Churches.
THis part has 3. several points. First, whether the Churches of Christians
are built to offer sacrifice in. Secondly, whether they be in themselves places
more holy then others. Thirdly, whether they may be dedicate to Saints.

THE FIRST POINT OR ARTICLE, whether our Churches are for sacrifice.
The Papists.
THe principal end of Churches is for the sacrifice of Christians, and in that
the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, but chiefly
for the external sacrifice of the Mass. Bellarm. cap. 4.

Argu. 1. The Churches of Christians have altars, therefore sacrifices: that
they have altars, he thus proves: First 1. Corinthians. 10.21. You can not be
partakers of the Lords table, and the table of Devils: by the table here is
meant the altar, for the table of the heathen was their altar, wherein they
sacrificed to their Idols.

Ans. 1. A table is one thing, an altar an other: and very vnproperlye is an
altar called a table: this place in any wise man's judgment makes more against
them then with them. Secondly, S. Paul speaks not here of the sacrifices of
the heathen nor of their altars, but of the feasts which they made in their
idolatrous temples, which was done upon tables, of such sacrifices, as had been
offered to idols: unto the which feasts S. Paul forbids Christians to
come, as it appears in the rest of the Chapter, and more plainly. cap. 8.10.

Argu. 2. Heb. 13.10. We have an altar, of which they have no power to eat
that serve at the Tabernacle: that is the altar whereon Christ's body is offered.
Bellarm. Rhemist in hunc locum.

Ans. The Apostle speaks expressly of participation of the sacrifice of
Christ's death, (as it is manifest in the 2. verses next following) which is by
a Christian faith, and not in the Sacrament only, whereof none can be
partakers that remain in the ceremonial observations of the Leuitical
sacrifices. For the Apostle speaks manifestly, verse 12. of the suffering of
Christ without the gate: Christ therefore is the altar, yea our Priest and
sacrifice too. You abuse this place to prove your material popish altars,
which are many: but the Apostle says, we have an altar, speaking of one.

The Protestants.
THe Churches of Christians are the houses of prayer, made to that end, that
they should come together to hear the word of God read and preached, receive
the sacraments, and offer up their spiritual sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving: other external sacrifices, or altars we acknowledge none.

Argu. 1. The temple of the Jews was called an house of prayer, that is,
principally for prayer, Mark. ^1.17. Moses was read and preached in their
synagogues. Act. 15.21. Much more are the Churches of Christians appointed for
preaching and prayer. Act. 20.7. The first day of the week, which is the Lords
day, they came together to break bread, and Paul preached unto them. Ergo the
administration of the word and sacraments with prayer, is the chief and only
cause of the holy assemblies of Christians.

Argu. 2. Altars we have none in our Churches. S. Paul calls it the Lords
table. 1. Corinthians. 10.21. where we receive the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ. And he calls it bread, which is broken* 1. Corinthians
11.20. But bread is set upon Tables, not sacrificed upon Altars.

Augustine also calls it, Mensam Domini, the Lords table, Epist. 59. and
epist. 50. He shows how cruelly the Donatistes handled Maximian a catholic
Bishop, beating him with Clubbes, even in the church, lignis altaris effractis
immaniter ceciderunt, and wounded him with the wood of the Altar, which they
had broken down. Where though he improperly call it an Altar, yet was it a
communion table framed of wood, and made to be removed, not fastened to the
wall, as their popish Altars were.

THE SECOND ARTICLE, WHETHER Churches are more holy places in them selves.
The Papists.
GOd (they say) rather dwells and is present in Churches, then else where:

Argum. 1. The Temple of Solomon was ordained even for the prayers of private
men: and Solomon prays unto God, that they might be heard. 1. King. 8.38. So
Anna prayed in the Tabernacle, 1. Sam. 1. And the apostles went up to the
Temple to pray, Act. 3.1. Ergo, prayers made in the Temple are more available,
Bellarm. cap. 4.

Ans. 1. See what Jewish arguments here are: because the Lord gave an especial
blessing to his Temple amongst the Jews, that was the only place for
sacrifices, and so also a peculiar privileged place for prayer: therefore he
will bind and tie himself to some certain place now. But our Savior says
clean contrary unto the woman of Samaria, The hour comes when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship my Father, John. 4.21. The
prayers and sacrifices of Christians, are now no more tied and limited to
places: That was but a type unto the Jews, that as then God would be only
heard in his Temple: so his name is now only truly inuocated and called upon
in his Church.

2. It is falsely alleged that the Apostles went up, only to pray, to the
temple: they went up at the ninth hour of prayer, when the people were
accustomed to go unto the Temple, that they might preach the gospel unto them.

The Protestants.
WE prefer public prayers made by the Congregation in the Church, before
private prayers, not because of the place, but in respect of the congregation,
whose prayers jointly al together are more fervent and effectual, then the
prayer of one man: But if we compare public prayer with public, and private
with private, we doubt not but that the one and the other being made in faith,
may as well be heard out of the Church, as in it.

Argum. 1. The promise of our Savior is general, Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together, I am in the midst amongst them, Math. 18.20. So S. Paul, I
will that men every where lift up pure hands. 1. Tim. 2. Ergo, they may be
heard praying in faith in any place.

Argum. 2. So our Savior says, When thou prayest, enter into thy chamber: he
says not, go to the church. Bellarm. says, he enters into his chamber, that
prays without vain glory, whether he do pray secretly or openly.

Ans. Our Saviors words are plain without allegory, for he speaks of
shutting the door of the chamber, and there is a manifest opposition between
the Pharisees praying in the corners of the streets, and the frequencie of
people, and the others praying in secret.

Augustine says, Quid supplicaturus Deo locum sanctum requiris? volen^ in
Templo orare, Lib. sententiar. Augu.
in te ora: and ita age semper, vt Dei Templu^ sis, ibi enim Deus exaudit vbi
habitat. When thou art about to pray, what need thou go to any sacred
place? would thou pray in the Temple or Church? see that thou be the Temple
of God, and there the Lord will soonest hear where he dwells.

THE THIRD ARTICLE, WHEther Churches and Temples maybe dedicate to Saints.
The Papists.


Argum. 1. The Temple of Solomon was not only built for sacrifices and prayer,
but for the Ark of God also: as David says to Nathan: Now I dwell in an
house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remains within curtains. 2. Sam.
7.2. But there is as great honor, yea, and greater due to the relics of
Saints: Ergo, it is lawful to build Temples unto them. Bellarmine cap.
quarto.

Ans. 1. When you have a commandment to build Churches for relics, as they
had to build a Temple for the arc, ye may be bold to do it.

2. To build a Temple for the arc, was all one as to build an house for the
Lord: for it was the Mercieseate of God: it pleased the Lord to dwell between
the Cherubims, there to show evident tokens of his presence. And whereas David
consulted to build an house for the arc, the Lord does thus answer him by
his Prophet: Shall thou build me an house for my dwelling? verse 5. So the
Temple was made in the honor of God, being made for the Arc. It was all one,
for the Arc to dwell there, and the Lord him self to dwell there: This
argument therefore makes nothing for them.

The Protestants.
TO build Churches and religious houses in the name and honor of saints, and
to make them Patrones and Protectoures of those places, and there to call upon
them, and make prayers unto them, all which is defended by our adversaries, we
hold it utterly unlawful, as tending to manifest impiety, and idolatry.

Argum. 1. No divine worship is to be given to Saints, therefore no Churches to
be made in their names For it is part of the divine worship to have Temples.

Augustine says, Nos non Martyribus Templa, sacerdotia aut sacra constituimus,
quoniam non ipsi, sed Deus ^orum nobis Deus est: De ciuitat. Dei, lib. 8. cap.
vlt.
We do not ordain Temples, Priesthoodes, or sacrifices for Martyrs: for not
they, but their God, is both their God and ours: None therefore is to have a
Temple but God. But mark I pray you their distinction: They say, that
Religious houses as they are Temples, are only consecrated to God, but as they
are Basilica, palaces, sumptuous buildinges, the self same Churches may be
dedicate to Saints. Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. If one and the same Church may be consecrate both to God and to some
saint beside, I pray you who is the principal patron of that church: God or
the saint? You will say I am sure, God is. But I will prove the contrary,
because it has the name of the faint: It is called by the name of S. Peter, S.
Paul, or some other, not by the name of God: Thus they are not contented to
make saints Gods fellows, but will even thrust him out of place, giving unto
saints the honor of Gods house.

2. How names are to be given to places, we can not better learn, then of
those ancient founders of names the holy Patriarchs: As Abraham Genesis 22.14.
calls the mountain Iehouah-iireh, The Lord has seen. So Jacob gives holy
names to the place where he met the Angels, Genesis 32.2. and where he wrestled
with the Angel, ver. 31. They as we see gave holy and reverent names unto
places, not made peculiar for Gods service, but only for civil use for the
places to be called and known by: how much more ought churches and houses of
God to be called by his name?

We therefore conclude, that Churches ought not to be erected in Saints
names, to worship them thereby, and make them our Patrones, mediators, and
presenters of our prayers: for this were great Idolatry: Even like as the
Heathen called their Temples by the names of their Idolles, Venus, Jupiter,
Diana and the like: Yet we refuse not to call our Churches by the names of
Saints, as they have been called of old, because we are not inuentors of
names; and terms inured by continual custom can hardly be left. We use them
only as civil terms to distinguish places by: if any otherwise use them, for
any Religious purpose, they do amiss. And yet we deny not, but that the names
of holy men may be safely remembered, by thanksgiving unto God for such
excellent instruments, and setting before our eyes their good example. And
concerning the names which have been superstitiously given in times past unto
Churches and other places (though it were to be wished, that they never had
been so given) yet now we use them (setting apart all superstition) as civil
names of difference, as S. Luke describes the ship of Alexandria, wherein they
were carried, whose badge (says he) was Castor and Pollux, Act. 28.11. In a
civil matter of description, he refuses not to use the names of the heathen
gods. Augustine also gives a good rule concerning such names. He speaks of
the names of days, which were called after the names of heathenish Idols, as
the 4. day in the week, which we call Wednesday, was then called and is yet in
the Latin tongue, In Psalm. 93.
Dies Mercurij, Mercury his day. Sic dicitur, a paganis, and a multis
Christianis, sed nolumus vt dicant, et vtinam corriga^tur: melius de ore
Christiano ritus loquendi ecclesiasticus procedit. So it is called of the
heathen, and of many christians, but I would not have them called so, and I
wish they were amended: for a Christian kind of speaking best becomes a
Christian. Sed si quem forte co^suetudo traxerit, etc. sciat illos omnes
homines fuisse. But if custom prevail with a man so to speak, let him
understand that all they were but men, whom the heathen take for gods.

So say we, it were to be wished, that we had names void of al show of
superstition: but seeing for our speaking we must be ruled by custom, let us
know that those saints, by whose names places are called, are no Gods, nor Gods
fellows, nor patrons, or Mediators for us, nor any way to be worshipped: But
they are the fellow servants of all faithful Christians, to be reverenced
with a Christian duty of love, not a religious worship of service.

THE THIRD PART OF THE ADORning and beautifiyng of Churches.
The Papists.
Bellarmine cap. 6.

Argum. 1. The Tabernacle of the Jews was of exceeding beauty: the Curtains
thereof, of silk; the vessels, even to the snuffers for the Lamps, were of
gold, the Priests garment had a breastplate of gold, set about with precious
stones: Therefore why should not the Temples of Christians be in like sort
adorned, and set forth? as Isay prophecieth, that the Glory of Lebanon shall
come, the Fur, Olive, and Box tree to beautify my sanctuary, Isai. 60.13.
which is literally to be understood, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. First, if the Jesuit had turned his argument and reasoned thus: the
temple of the Jews was gorgeous, and sumptuous, and beautiful to the eye:
therefore Churches of Christians ought not to be so now: he had reasoned much
better: for their serving of God was external; now God will be worshipped in
spirit. All things were done unto them in types and figures: the outward glory
of their temple was a lively figure of the spiritual beauty of the Church of
Christ. Secondly, where you would have the prophecy of Isay to be literally
understood, you have made a good argument for the Jews: for then they shall
have their sanctuary restored again, which the Prophet speaks of by name.
And if that place of Isay have a literal sense, why not that also, 54.10. I
will lay thy stones with Carbuncle, and thy foundation with the Saphires: I will
make thy windows of Emeraudes, and thy gates shining stones? Say also that
this shall be literally performed: and so according to this gross sense, the
prophecy of Haggie shall also be fulfilled: the glory of the last house shall be
greater then the first, Hagg. 2.10. But I think you never saw Church built in
this goodly manner, in beauty surpassing the Jewish temple, nor never shall.

The Protestants.
THat the Churches of Christians, and places of prayer, ought decently to be
kept, yea and with convenient cost and seemly beauty to be built and
repaired, and Church vessels with other necessary furniture, to be of the
best, not of the worst sort, we do both commend it, and practice it: for so we
learn by the example of our Savior, that cast out of the temple sellers of
doves and money changers, and would not suffer them to carry vessels through
it, Mark. 11.15, 16. that the house of prayer ought to be reverently regarded:
but yet it follows not, that such immoderate and excessive cost should be
bestowed upon the walls of the Church and Idols, to garnish and beautify
idolatry, and poor people in the mean time to want. A Matrone ought to go
comely and decently apparelled, though not tricked up with the jewels and
ornaments of an harlot.

Argum. 1. Our Savior Christ reproves the Scribes and Pharisees, because they
drew the people to be good unto the altar, and bestow largely upon them, and
so leave their parents helpless, Math. 15.5. And he often does inculcate that
golden saying, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: it is better to succor
the living temples of God, which are the bodies of his poor children, then to
bestow superfluous cost upon dead temples of stone.

Argum. 2. Christ also does rebuke them, because like hypocrites they did
garnish the sepulchers of the Prophets, and yet persecuted their doctrine,
Math. 23.29: so all popish pharisees are worthy of blame, that take greater
care in garnishing the temples and tombs of the holy Apostles and Martyrs,
then they do in setting forth their holy doctrine, and preaching the Gospel,
nay they do contemn, persecute, and hate that doctrine, for the which those
holy men died: so that this proverb was very well devised of them; In times
past we had golden Priests and wooden Cups, now we have wooden Priests and
golden Cups.

Augustine exhorting the people to be liberal to their Bishops and Pastors,
thus writes further: Forte ecclesiam fabricat, forte vtile aliquid in domo dei
molitur, In Psalm. 105 part. 2.
expectat vt attendas, expectat, vt intelligas super egenum. Perhaps he is in
building a Church, and doing some profitable work in the house of God, he
looks that thou should attend, and consider of his need. By this it
appears, that Churches were not superfluous costly in Augustines time: for
nothing was done, but what was thought necessary and profitable: and the
builders (which were then for the most part their Bishops) were not of any
great ability, to bestow superfluous cost, nay they were not able to finish
the necessary works, without the benevolence and contribution of the people.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE DEDICAtion of Churches.
The Papists.
Judas Macchabeus, John 10.22. and by his presence allowed it, Rhemist in eum
locuum.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, a thanksgiving to God for the restitution of the temple after the
horrible profanation thereof; is a thing approved by Gods law, but it is not
necessary to keep a yearly memory thereof: for neither was there any such
instituted by Ezechiah, after the profanation of the temple by Achaz and
Vrias, nor by Josias, after the same had been most horribly polluted by
Manasses and Amon, nor by Zorobabel, Esdras or Nehemiah, after it was
reedified, when it had been utterly destroyed by the Chaldees Fulk. ibid.

Secondly, your popish hallowing of Churches has nothing like unto it, but the
name: for they use a number of foolish ceremonies, and many of them gross
superstitions, in the dedication of their Churches.

First, there are twelve Crosses painted round about in the Church, and twelve
burning Lamps set over against every one of them, one against one: hereby (say
they) the twelve Apostles are signified, that by the preaching of the Cross
gave light to the whole world. Secondly, they use oil in anointing their
Altar, and other vessels, showing hereby that they are consecrate to holy uses.
Thirdly, they sprinkle water, burn incense, set up Taper light: this shows
(says the Jesuit) that the place is consecrate to prayer, and other holy
actions. Fourthly, they sprinkle ashes round about the Church, and write in the
floor the Greek and Latin Alphabet from one side of the Church to the other.
This betokens (say they) the preaching of faith, which is the foundation and
ground of all righteousness, which was first taught in the Greek and Latin
tongue. Fifthly, they beat upon the Church door, and call upon Saints and
Angels: that is, (say they) to command Satan to depart, Bellarm. cap. 5.

First, they offend in the number of their foolish ceremonies, exceeding herein
the manner of the Jewish dedication: so that unto them it may be said, as Paul
to the Galathians; How turn you again to impotent and beggarly rudiments? 4.9.

Secondly, they have no warrant for their frivolous shadows and
significations: Coloss. 2.17. which are but shadows of things to come, but the
body is in Christ: we have the body, what need any more shadows? Christ will
not now be worshipped with Crosses, ashes, characters, candle light, and such
apish toys.

Thirdly, some of these ceremonies are impious, and sacrilegious: the
invocation of Angels and Saints, is a robbing of God of his honor, who only
is to be prayed unto.

Augustine says of such inuentors of new rites and ceremonies, Ipsam
religionem, quam deus paucissimis sacramentis liberam esse voluit, oneribus
premunt: Epistol. 119
They cumber religion with burdensome ceremonies, which the Lord has made free
with a few sacraments.

THE FIFTH PART OF THINGS HALLOWED and consecrate for Churches.
The Papists.
THey maintain their superstitious and popish blessing with the Cross, the
hallowing of wax, fire, palms, ashes, holy bread, holy water, salt, oil, and
such Rhemist. annot. 2. Timoth. 4. sect. 12.13. Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 7.

Arg. 1. First, for the hallowing of these creatures to holy uses, and making
of them actually holy, they allege that saying of S. Paul, 1. Timoth. 4.5.
Every creature of God is good and is sanctified by the word of God and prayer:
Ergo, these creatures may be sanctified to holy uses, as the water also in
baptism, and bread and wine in the Eucharist: for the Apostle speaks not
here only of the common benediction of meats, but of a more high and exact
applying of creatures to holy uses, Rhemist.

Ans. 1. S. Paul here speaks only of the common and ordinary use of Gods
creatures, as of meats and drinks for every man's private use and he shows
how they are sanctified by the word of God, which permits unto the faithful
the free use of the^, and by prayer: not that they are unclean by nature, but
by pollutio^ of sin: and by this means are made holy and clean. Secondly,
we confess also, that some things set apart for the service of God, are more
specially called holy, as the Arc, Altar, and Temple: but it is not lawful to
sever what creatures we will from the common use, and consecrate them to the
service of God, but such as are appointed by his word; as water in Baptism,
and bread and wine in the Lords Supper have the warrant of Gods word, as none
of your popish trumperie have: neither are these creatures so consecrate holy
in themselves, to confer or impart their holiness to other things, but are so
called in respect of the holy use, for the which out of the word of God they
are appointed.

Argum. 2. For the efficacy and power of these hallowed things, they thus
reason. The bitter water given to the adulterous woman caused her thigh to rot,
if she were guilty, otherwise it made her fruitful. Numb. 5. Elisaeus healed
the bitter water with casting in salt: the Apostles healed the sick with
annoynting them with oil, Rhemist. Bellarm. ibid. Ergo, these sanctified
creatures may do the like.

Ans. First, the bitter water of it self had not that power, but by virtue of
that oath, with the which the woman was charged. Again, it has the warrant of
the word, as yours have not. Secondly, Elisaeus and the Apostles had the spirit
to work miracles, so have not you: and they might have done that they did
without any such means. Again, it was common salt, and ordinary oil which
they used, not blessed before, after your popish manner.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we hold that no such things ought to be separated for holy uses,
because they have not the warrant of the word of God: for all things that are
sanctified, are so sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1. Timoth. 4.5.
But they have not the word of God for their warrant, neither do they use any
prayer of faith, but a superstitious kind of crossing. Nadab and Abihu were
consumed with fire, because they offered strange fire, not taken from the
Altar: that is, they presumed of their own authority, without Gods
commandment, to consecrate a strange element to Gods service, and were
punished, Leuit. 10. Ergo, it is dangerous without Gods word, to consecrate any
such things.

Concerning the sprinkling and washing with holy water: Augustine thus writes
of the same or like custom of washing: Ne ad ipsum baptismi sacramentum
videretur pertinere, Epistol. 119 cap. 18.
multi hoc in consuetudinem recipere noluerunt: nonnulli de consuetudine
auferre non dubitarunt. Many would not receive that custom, lest it should
seem to be another baptism: and some have not doubted clean to take it away.

Secondly, though such things were rightly hallowed, yet have they no such
power: Christ shows the way, whereby evil spirits are chased away: by prayer
and fasting, Mark. 9.9. And therefore to conjure creatures, to expel Satan,
without the word of God, is no better then a kind of Magic and enchantment.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION OF PILGRImages and Processions.
The Papists.
FIrst, they hold that pilgrimages made to Jerusalem and the holy land, as they
call it, to Rome, and to the memories of Saints in other places, to ask and
obtain Council. Trident. sess. 25. Bellarm. cap. 8. The halt and lame went up
to Jerusalem to be healed in the poole of Bethesda, John. 5. Certain Greeks
came up to worship at the feast, John. 12.20. The Eunuch went up in pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, Act. 8. Ergo, it is lawful and requisite, Rhemist.

Ans. First, when you can prove that such miracles are wrought at the memories
of Saints, as the scripture testifies of this poole, men may be bold to go
unto them for their bodily health, as we see there is resort unto Bathes: but
not for any religion. Secondly, the Grecians, that visited Jerusalem, were
Jews that dwelt amongst the Gentiles, or Proselytes, which were bound to
visit the temple at Jerusalem. Thirdly, the Eunuch went not up in pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, but to worship: for there was yet no other known place of the
world, where God was worshipped.

Secondly, their solemn processions, especially upon Palm Sunday, with
carrying the Sacrament about, strawing of rushes, bearing of palms, setting up
Math. 21.8. when he came riding to Jerusalem, and the people strawed their
garments in the way, Rhemist. annot. Math. 21. sect. 1.

Ans. First, your processions are horrible abusings and prophanations of the
Lords institution, who ordained his Supper to be eaten and drunk, not to be
carried about in procession like an heathenish Idol. Secondly, that which the
people and Christ's disciples did, they had warrant for out of the scripture:
but who required this theatrical pomp at your hands? The riding of Christ upon
an ass was before prophesied of, Zachar. 9. and the childrens crying out in
the temple, Psalm. 8. The cutting down of palm branches was a ceremony
belonging to the feast of Tabernacles, truly accomplished by our deliverance in
Christ. But you have turned the holy mystery of Christ's riding to Jerusalem,
to a Maygame, and Pageant play.

The Protestants.
FIrst, that no places ought to be freque^ted or resorted unto for religions
sake, or more holiness, or for the health of the soul: we prove it out of the
word of God.

Saint Peter says, That in every nation, he that fears God is accepted with
him, Act. 10.35. Ergo, one nation is as holy as another. And now our Savior
says, That God will not be worshipped at Jerusalem, or in Mount Garrizin, but
in spirit and truth, John. 4. He therefore that seeks places to worship God
in, as though he were rather to be found in one place then another, has left
the spiritual worship.

Augustine thus writes concerning pilgrimage: He wishes men to seek them
teachers and instructors, by whom they might be taught: De erat in ea terra,
quam incolebas: quae causa vtilius cogeret peregrinari? But is there no teacher
in the country where thou dwell? what better cause can thou have to
travel, and go in pilgrimage to seek one in other countries? De vtilit.
credend. cap. 7.

Thus he would have men to play the pilgrims, not to run gadding to Relikes
and Images, but to seek for teachers and instructors.

Secondly, the popish pompous processions are both superstitious, in reviving
and renewing the Jewish ceremonies, such as the feast of Tabernacles was, which
are all now abolished as shadows by the coming of Christ. And they are
plainly idolatrous, for they carry about their breaden god in procession, and
make an Idol of a piece of baked wheat: but Paul says, The Sacrament ought to
be received with thanksgiving in the Churches and congregations of Christians,
1. Corinthians. 11.33. not to be carried about to be gazed upon in the fields.
Seemly processions, void of superstition, which are used for civil purposes,
as to maintain the limits and bounds of townships, and withal by the sight of
Gods blessing upon the creatures to be stirred up to thankfulness, we neither
mislike nor condemn.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING THE HOLY LAND, and holy wars for the same, as they
were called.
The Papists.
THey which are but a little acquainted with ancient stories, shall find, that
Richard the first, calling to mind his rebellion and disobedience to his
father, in part of satisfaction purposed a voyage into the Holy land, as it was
called, to redeem Christ's patrimony from the Infidels, Fox. page 235.
Bellarm. de laicis. lib. 3. cap. 16. First, for why? they say it is an Holy
land: for if the places of Gods apparition are coun^^^ holy. Exodus 3.5. Joshua.
5.15. much more the places of Christ's nativity, burial, passion, and
resurrection. Saint Peter calls the place where Christ was transfigured, 2.
Pet. 1.18.
The holy mount, Rhemist. 1: Timoth. 4* sect. 10.

Ans. The places, where God appeared in times past, were holy for that time
only of Gods presence, not for ever after: and the mount is called holy in
respect of the time, wherein the transfiguration was; not that the holiness of
the place does always continue: for that place which Jacob called Bethel, the
house of God, Genes. 28. is by the Prophet called Bethauen, the house of
wickedness, Ose. 4.15. because of the idolatries there committed: what was now
become of the holiness of the place?

The Protestants.
TO war against the Turks upon just cause, as to seek to defend our selves
from their invasions, and to maintain the confines and bounds of Christendom,
to deliver Christians unjustly and cruelly kept in slavery under him, we hold
it lawful: but to wage battle with him, only for a superstitious devotion
to the land of Palestina, to recover it out of his hand, we see no warrant at
all for it.

Argum. 1. The evil success that Christians have had against them, and the
shameful overthrows that they have sustained at their hands, do evidently
show, that God was not pleased with those superstitious wars. While Princes
had a good quarrel, seeking only to maintain their own, and to deliver
Christian countries from the thraldom of the Turks, God prospered them, as
the famous victories of Scanderbeius, and Johannes Hunniades obtained against
Amurathes the 8. Turkish Emperor, do notably testify: but those superstitious
and pope-holy wars, though sometime they had good success, yet in the end
all went to wrack. And as their cause was not good, so neither were the means
that they used: for they brought S. George, and S. Denis into the field against
the Turks, and left Christ at home If the Israelites could not be delivered
from the Philistims by the presence of the Arc, but thirty thousand fell
before them, and all because of their sins: let not men think that popish
Saints can defend them, while their lives remain unreformed at home.

2. That the heathen are not to be provoked to war, but upon just cause: that
is, when they provoke us; it appears by the example of the Israelites, who as
they came from Egypt, sent unto the King of Edom and Moab, that they might
have leave to walk through their land: but they not granting so much, yet the
people of God offered them no violence, but went a longer journey about, Judge.
11.17.

Augustine says, Sapiens gesturus est iusta bella: sed multo magis dolebit
iustorum necessitatem extitisse bellorum: A wise man will take just war in
hand: De ciuitat. dei. 19.7.
but it more grieueth him that he has just cause to war. And what he means
by just war, he further shows: Iniquitas partis aduersae iusta bella
ingerit gerenda sapienti. The iniquity or injuries of the adverse part, does
give unto a wise man occasion of just war. Just war therefore arises, when
men are provoked by injuries.

THE EIGHT QVESTION CONCERNING holy and festival days.
THis question has diverse parts. First, of holy days in general. Secondly,
of the Lords day. Thirdly, of the Festival days of Christ and the holy Ghost.
Fourthly, of Saints holy days. Fifthly, of the time of Lent.

THE FIRST PART OF HOLY DAYS in general.
The Papists.
Bellarm. cap. 10. proposit. 2. Apocalypse. 1.10. I was in the spirit (says the
Apostle) on the Lords day: God reuealeth such great things to Prophets rather
upon holy days, then profane days: Ergo, some days holier then other,
Rhemist. Apocal. 1. sect. 6.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, God gives not his graces in respect of times, but according to
his own pleasure. Times of prayer he chooses often, and of other godly
exercises, not for the worthiness or holiness of the times, but for the better
disposition of his servants in such exercises, to receive them: yet this was
not perpetually observed: for God appeared to Moses keeping of sheep, Exodus 3.
to Amos following his herd, Amos 7. Secondly, we grant that the Lords day
being commanded of God, and so discerned from other days, may be said to be
holier then the rest, in respect of the present use, but not in the nature of
the day: for then could it not have been changed from the last day in the week
to the first: as water in Baptism is holier then other waters, because of the
sacred use, not in it self, as by a quality of holiness inherent. And as for
other festival days, which have not the like institution, they are appointed
only of the Church, for Christian policy and orders sake, for the exercise of
religion. But this now popish, and before time Jewish distinction of days, as
being by their nature ho^^er then other, is flatly against the Apostles rule.
Romans 14.5. One puts difference between day and day, and Galath. 4.10. You
observe days and months, times and years.

Augustine says, Nos dominicum diem and pascha celebramus, sed quia
intelligimus, quo pertineant, non tempora obseruamus, sed quae illis
significantur temporibus, Cont. Adimant. cap. 16. We keep the Lords day and
the feast of Easter, not observing the times, but remembering what is signified
by those times: that is, for what cause they were ordained: Ergo, obseruers of
times are reproved.

The Papists.
2. THey affirm the keeping and sanctification of holy days to be necessary,
Rhemist. annot. Galath. 4. sect. 5. and that we are bound in conscience to
keep the holy days appointed of the Church, although no offense or scandale
might follow and ensue upon the neglecting of them.

Esther 9. Mardocheus and Esther appoint a new festival day, not instituted of
God, and bind every one to the observing thereof, that none should fail to
observe it. ver. 27. Ergo men bound in conscience to keep festival days.
Bellarm. ca. 10.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, though we refuse not some other festival days, yet we
acknowledge none necessary, more then are of the holy Ghosts appointing in the
Scripture. Secondly, we deny that the constitutions of the Church for holy
days do bind Christians, in respect of the days them selves, in conscience to
keep them, otherwise then they may give offense by their contempt and
disobedience to the wholesome decrees of the Church: for it self in it own
nature is indifferent, neither can the Church make a thing necessary in nature,
which God has left indifferent: nothing binds absolutely in conscience, but
that which is necessary by nature: wherefore keeping of holy days, being not
enjoined but left indifferent in the word, binds no otherwise then we have
said. Thirdly, the example of Esther shows that the Church has authority to
appoint for civil uses, days of rejoicing: that festival day then begun did
not bind the obseruers in conscience, no otherwise then they were bound in all
lawful things to obey their governors, for their consent was required, and
they promised both for themselves and their seed to keep that day. Esther.
9.27. Whereby it appears that they were not bound absolutely in conscience to
observe it.

Augustine speaking of the Sabbath, says thus: De tempor. ser. 36.
haec est dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus and laetemur in ea. This is the
day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad therein, Psalm. 118.24.
This only holy day he says, is of the Lords making, and therefore of all
other necessary to be kept.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE Lords day.
The Papists.
THe several points wherein our adversaries and we do differ about the

First, the principal exercise of the Sabbath, say they, is for the people to
come to the Church and hear Mass, which their abominable and idolatrous
sacrifice they make the proper work of the Sabbath, Catechism. Roman. page 649.

The Protestants.
THe Sabbath was ordained for the people to assemble together to hear the word
read, Act. 15.21. and preached, and to receive the Sacramets, Act. 20.7. and to
offer up their prayers: these were the proper exercises of the Sabbath: as for
the popish sacrifice of the Mass, we find no mention at all thereof in
Scripture.

The Papists.
Bellarm. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
WE hold, that as the Lords day was instituted of God, so the manner of
celebrating and keeping it holy, is to be learned out of the word, and neither
custom nor authority ought to give liberty for such works upon the Lords day,
as are not warranted by the word.

First, we grant that we are not so necessarily tied to the rest of the
Sabbath as the Jews were: for those things are abolished which appertained to
the Jewish Sabbath: First, the prescript of the day. Secondly, the ceremonious
exercises of the Sabbath in the sacrifices and other rites of the Law. Thirdly,
the typical shadows and significations of their Sabbath, as first it
betokened their rest in Canaan; then the rest and peace of the Church by
Christ, Hebre. 4.3. 5. Fourthly, the strickt and precise rest, wherein
Christians have more liberty then the Jews had: and again, they observed
their rest, as being properly and simply, and in it self a sabbath days duty;
but we do consider it, as being referred to a more principal end: as making
of us more fit for spiritual exercises.

Secondly, we allow these works to be done: First, opera religiosa or
pietatis, the religious works, and conferring to piety: as the Priests did
slaye the sacrifices upon the Sabbath, and yet brake not the rest of the
Sabbath, Math. 12.5. so the people may walk to their parish Church, though
somewhat far off: the Pastor and Minister may go forth to preach, yea, and
preaching is of it self a labor of the body, to study also and meditate of
his Sermon, to ring the bells to call the people to the Church: all these are
lawful, as being helps for the exercises of religion. Secondly, opera
charitatis, the works of mercy are permitted, as to visit the sick, the
Physician to resort to his patient, yea, to show compassion to brute beasts,
as to help the sheep out of a pit, Math. 12.11. Thirdly, opera necessitatis,
the works of necessity, as the dressing of meat and such like, Math. 12.1.3.
Our Savior excuses his Apostles for plucking the ears of Corn, when they
were hungry. As for opera voluntaria, works of pleasure and recreation, we
have no other permission to use them, then as they shall be no lets or
impediments unto spiritual exercises, as the hearing of the word, and
meditating therein, and such other: Otherwise they are not to be used.

Augustine says, speaking of the Jews, who did greatly profane their
Sabbath, in sporting and dalliance: Melius toto die foderent, quam toto die
saltare^t: In Psalm. ^2. part 1.
It were better for them to dig all day, then to dance all day: even so
verily, it were better for many poor ignorant people, that upon the Sabbath
give themselves to drinking, and quaffing, and gaming, if they should go to
plough or cart all the day. But as for other servile works, as to keep Faires
and Markets upon the Lords day, to travel themselves, their servants, and
beasts upon the Sabbath, it is flat contrary to the commandment of God, and
the practice of the Church, Nehemiah 13.16. where there is no extreme and
urgent necessity: so that it is not to be doubted, but that as the keeping of
the Lords day is a moral commandment; so also the manner of the observing
thereof in sanctifying it, and resting therein is moral: the ceremonies of the
rest being abolished, that is, the Jewish strictnes thereof, and the opinion
which they had of their rest, as being simply a part of the sanctifying of the
Sabbath. But we do consider it, as referred unto more principal duties, and
observe it, not as of it self pleasing God, but as making us more fit for
spiritual exercises. Contrary to these rules, we acknowledge neither power in
Ordinaries, nor privilege in custom, to dispense with the sanctification of
the Sabbath.

The Papists.
THey affirm that the Apostles altered the sabbath day, from the seaueth day
to the eight, counting from the creation, and they did it without scripture,
Rhemist. Apoca. 1. sect. 6.

The Protestants.
1. THe Apostles did not abrogate the Jewish sabbath, but Christ himself by
his death, as he did also other ceremonies of the Law: and this the Apostles
knew both by the scriptures, the word of Christ and his holy spirit.

2. They did not appoint a new sabbath of their own authority: for first they
knew by the scripture, that one day of seven was to be observed for ever, for
the service of God and exercise of religion, although the prescript day
according to the Law were abrogate: for the Lord before the moral law was
written, even immediately after the creation, sanctified the seventh day,
showing thereby, that one of the seven must be observed so long as the world
endured. Secondly, they knew there was the same reason of sanctifiyng the day
of Christ's resurrection, and the restitution of the world thereby, as of
sanctifiyng the day of the Lords rest, after the creation of the world.
Thirdly, they did it by the direction of the spirit of God, whereby they were
so directed and governed, that although they were frail men by nature, and
subject to error: yet they could not decline in their writings and ordinances
of the Church, from the truth, which assurance of Gods spirit in the like
measure the Church has not: but so far forth is promised to be led into all
truth, as she follows the rule of truth expressed in the Scriptures.
Wherefore the Church has no authority to change the Lords day, and to keep it
upon Monday or Tuesday, or any other day: seeing it is not a matter of
indifferency, but a necessary prescription of Christ himself, delivered by the
Apostles: for the Lords day began in the Apostles time, and no doubt by their
Apostolic authority directed by the spirit of Christ, was instituted, Act.
20.7. Apocal. 1. ver. 10. Neither can there come, so long as the world
continues, so great a cause of changing the Sabbath, as the Apostles had by
the resurrection of Christ. Wherefore the law of the Sabbath as it is now kept
and observed, is perpetual.

The Papists.
Rhemist. Math. 15. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
THe observation of the Lords day is not delivered by blind tradition, but
has testimony of holy Scriptures, 1. Corinthians. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Apocal. 1.10.
and the observation thereof is according to Gods commandment, not after the
doctrine of men, Fulk ibid.

The Papists.
Bellarm. de cultu sanctor. li. 3. ca. 11.

The Protestants.
1. WE grant, that the Sabbath may be so applied, both to call to remembrance
things already, as upon that day done: as the resurrection of Christ, and the
descending of the holy Ghost. Some think also that Christ upon that day was
baptized, August. de tempor. ser. 154.
upon that day turned water into wine, fed five thousand with a few loaves,
came unto his Apostles after his resurrection the doors being shut, and that as
upon this day he shall appear to judgment: but upon what ground I know not:
Certain it is that upon this day Christ rose again, and that the holy Ghost
came down then upon his Apostles. We deny not but that the keeping of the
Lords day holy, may fitly bring unto our remembrance these things: yea and that
it may be a type and symbol unto us in some sort, both of things spiritual,
as to betoken our ceasing and resting from the works of sin, Hebr. 4.10. and
1. Pet. 4.1. as also of things to come, as the kingdom of heaven is called a
Sabbath, Isai. 66.23.

But we dare not, neither will affirm, that the Sabbath was ordained and
constituted for any such end: for the commandment of the Sabbath now to us is
only moral, not typical or ceremonial, as the Jewish Sabbath was: but look
wherein the Sabbath was moral to the Jews, so it is kept still: As in these
two points it was moral to them: first, to be a sign between them and the
Lord, and to distinguish them from other people, Exodus 31.17. And so also the
right keeping of the Lords day is a notable outward mark of difference
between the Church of God and all others. Secondly, that upon the Sabbath they
should resort together, and hear the law read and preached, Act. 15.21. And
for this cause, namely, the exercise of religion, are Christians chiefly bound
to the Sabbath. It may (I say) fitly be drawn to resemble heavenly and
spiritual things: but that is not any end of the institution. The Jews had
two kind of types, typos factos, and, typos destinatos, types made and applied,
and types appointed and ordained of God to shadow forth some notable thing: as
the Paschall Lamb, was typus destinatus, of our Savior Christ, as they were
not to break a bone of the Lamb, so was it accordingly performed in Christ.
They had also many types beside, that were not destined to signify any
certain thing: of such S. Paul speaks, 1. Corinthians. 10, 6, 11. So we say of
the Sabbath, that it is not typus destinatus, it is not instituted for any
shadow or signification, though it may be fitly applied to such an use.

The Papists.
6. THey say that we are not bound upon the Sabbath by any peculiar
commandment to abstain from sin, more then upon any other day: neither
Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 10. propos. 4.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we grant that all sin, as of theft, adultery, and the like, are
in their own nature alike, at what time soever they are committed, yet they
may be made more heinous by the circumstances: as of the place, as sacrilege
is greater then common theft, so why not of the time?

Secondly, if that which is no sin upon the worke-day, be a sin upon the
Sabbath, as to dig, to plough, to cart, then that which is a sin of it
self, as to steal, to commit adultery, must needs be greater and more
heinous being done upon the Sabbath: for beside the sin, he also prophaneth
the Sabbath, which is the breach of another commandment. Thirdly, the
internal act of religion is properly commanded in the sanctifying of the
Sabbath: for it cannot be sanctified by the external act of going to Church,
and hearing the word, unless a man be inwardly in the devotion of his heart
prepared for those holy exercises. So inward grace is more sought for upon the
Sabbath, not in respect of that inward desire which we have unto them, which
ought always to be alike fervent in us, if it were possible, but because of
those outward means, of hearing the word, public prayer, receiving the
Sacraments, which are upon the Sabbath: for the which we ought more especially
to prepare and examine our selves, Ecclesiast. 4.17. 1. Corinthians. 11.28.

Augustine says, speaking of the Jewish women: Quanto melius foeminae e^ru^
lanam facerent, quam illo die in neomenijs saltarent: spiritualiter obseruat
Sabbatum Christianus, abstinens se ab opere seruili, id est, a peccato:
Tractat. 3. in Johan. Their women might be better occupied in spinning at home,
then in dancing upon this day: for a Christian does spiritually keep the
Sabbath, in abstaining from al servile work, that is, from sin. They then
that do observe the Sabbath only in external acts, do but carnally keep it.

The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 3. de cultu sanctor. cap. 11.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we grant that this opinion is very ancient, and that in
Tertullians time it was received in many Churches: and they thought it as
unlawful to bow the knee upon the Lords day, Tertul. lib. de coron. Militis.
Die dominico ieiunare nefas ducimus, and de geniculis adorare: We count it
unlawful to fast upon the Lords day, and to pray kneeling. But the Papists
observe not the one, why then should they bind themselves to the other?
Ignatius makes fasting upon the Sabbath as great an offense, as the killing of
Christ himself, Epistol. ad Philipp. But, I trust, they will not say so.

Secondly, the reasons why fasting is not to be used upon the Lords day,
because the Jesuit sets down none, I will supply out of Augustine: first,
Sentio (says he) ad significandam requiem sempiternam (vbi est verum Sabbatum)
relaxationem, Epistol. 86.
quam constrictionem ieiunij aptius conuenire. I think, that to signify the
eternal rest, which is the true Sabbath, liberty rather, then the urging of
fasting does most fitly agree. But to this we answer, that this signification
of eternal rest, is no essential part of sanctifying the Sabbath, nor no end
of the institution, as we have showed before, though it may have such an
application: and therefore this reason proves not such a necessity of not
fasting upon the Sabbath. Secondly, Die dominico ieiunare magnum est scandalum:
It is a great offense to fast on the Lords day, because the Manichees made
choice of that day to fast in: Per quod factum est, vt ieiunium Sabbati
horribilius haberetur, By the which (says he) it came to pass, that the fast
of the Sabbath was more abhorred, Augustine. ibid. But this reason now binds
not us, because the name and heresy of the Manichees is now worn out, and
therefore there is no fear of any scandale to arise that way.

Thirdly, we grant that the Lords day is not the fittest time for public
fasts: first, because it is a day of rejoicing: so we read that the people in
Nehemiah his time, were forbidden to mourn and weep, after the law was read
unto them by Ezra, because it was a day of joy and mirth, Nehem. 8.11.
Secondly, the day of solemn and public fasting ought to be set a part from
other days, and to be proclaimed solemnly, and to be spent wholly in
spiritual exercises, even as the Sabbath, with vacation and rest from other
bodily labors, as we may read, 2. Chronicl. 20.3. Nehem. 9.1. And therefore
any day is more fit then the Sabbath, because that is a holy day already unto
the Lord: but when we will humble our selves before the Lord by fasting and
prayer, some day would only for that purpose be consecrate unto GOD: that may
be as a voluntary sacrifice: whereas we are bound of necessity to keep the
Lords day.

But concerning private and particular fasts, when men by themselves have
occasion to give themselves to prayer, whereof S. Paul speaks, 1. Corinthians.
7.5. Such private exercises may be better performed upon the Sabbath, because
of the ordinary exercises of the word, which are notable means to kindle and
stir up true devotion in him, which at that time will humble himself: yea
and public fasts, though not ordinarily, yet when there is just occasion, may
be kept upon the Sabbath: as we read Act. 20.7. how that Paul continued his
preaching till midnight: whereof Augustine writes thus, Necessarius sermo
resiciendi corporis causa interrumpendus esse non visus est profecturo
Apostolo: The necessary preaching of the Apostle, he thought not good, for the
refreshing of their bodies to break off, being ready to depart. We conclude
therefore, that it is lawful to fast upon the Lords day, though it be not
always expedient. And Augustine very well determines this matter: Ego in
Euangelicis, and Apostolicis literis video praeceptum esse ieiunium: quibus
autem diebu^^non oporteat ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, praecepto domini, vel
Apostolorum non inuen^o de finitum: I find both in the Evangelical and
Apostolical writings, that fasting is commanded: but upon what days we ought
to fast, upon what we ought not, I do not find it defined, Epistol. 86.
Wherefore to fast or not to fast upon the Lords day, or upon any other, being
not determined in scripture, is left as a thing indifferent to the Church of
God.

The Papists.
Romans time: some by the name of certain Idols, which the Saxons did
worship* which names the Church uses not, but has appointed to call the first
day the Dominike, after the Apostle, Apocal. 1.10. the other by the name
Feries, until the last of the week, which she calls by the old name
Sabbath, because that was of God, not by imposition of the heathen, Rhemist.
annot. Apocal. 1. sect. 6.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, as the name of Sunday, and the rest, is of the heathenish
beginning, and therefore were better to be otherwise termed, as the first,
second, or third from the Lords day, as the Jews called their days from the
Sabbath: so your term of feries, is no less heathenish, derived from the word
feria, or feriae, which were so called a feriendis victimis, of striking the
heathenish sacrifices, as Sextus Pompeius says, Fulk. ibid.

2. We have other names also that might be reformed, as of our months; as
March is so called of Mars, August. cont. Faust. 18.5.
June of Juno, January of Ianus, which were heathen gods: July and August do
bear the names of men: yea, and if we might be inuentors of new names, the
terms of Christmas, Michaelmas, Candlemas, should not stand in force, nor any
more be used, which are as offensive as the rest: for as for the names of
heathen Idols, the most part are ignorant of them: but the vulgar term of
Mass, is to too well known, and too much loved of many of our country men.
Now for the name Sunday, which is so great a mote in your eye, if there were no
more but that: Augustine shows, how it might be favorably expounded, Dies
magni solis celebramus, illius solis, de quo dicit scriptura, orietur vobis sol
iustitiae: We do keep Sunday holy, namely, of that great Sun, whereof the
scripture speaks, the Sun of righteousness shall arise.

3. We wish that all these terms might be laid down, as Augustine says,
Nolumus, vt dicant, and vtinam corrigantur vt non dicant: We would not have men
so to speak, In Psalm. 93.
and I wish they were reformed. But seeing by continual custom men's tongues
are inured to such terms, let them know, that they are used only as civil
names, to call things by, not for any religion or mystery in them contained,
or signified.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE FESTIVAL days of Christ and the holy Ghost.
The Papists.
THE feasts of Easter and Whitsontide, and other solemnities of Christ, were
Rhemist. Matthew. 15. sect. 2. to be kept upon certain days, and that Peter did
appoint that Easter should not be kept the 14. day of the first Moon, as the
Jews observed it, but the Lords day after. And of the feast of Pentecost
mention is made, 1. Corinthians. 16.8. Ergo, these feasts were instituted of the
Apostles: Bellarm. cap. 12.13.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we grant that it is expedient for the Church to keep the
memorial of the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, and of
the coming of the holy Ghost; and the days instituted for the remembrance
thereof, no doubt, ought to be had in greater account, then any other holy
days instituted by the Church. Secondly, it cannot be proved, that they were
prescribed by the Apostles, or if they were, but as indifferent ceremonies,
which are subject to alteration, and in the which the religion or worship of
God does not consist. Certain it is, that before the time of Constantine the
great, there were not many festival days kept, in so much, that the feasts of
the Nativity of Christ, Easter, Pentecost, were not uniformly observed for
many years after, as appears by diverse Councels. Council. Aurel. 4. c. 1.
Tolet. 10. cap. 1.
And before Constantines time, there was great contention between the Bishop
of Rome and the Bishops of the East, about the celebration of Easter: they
alleging the constitution of Saint John, the other of Saint Peter: wherefore
it is like, that the Apostles appointed no such certain days: for then the
Church would not have broken them.

Thirdly, Pentecost, whereof Saint Paul speaks, was the feast of the Jews,
which with other solemnities of theirs the Apostles observed not as a portion
of Christian religion, but taking occasion of the meeting of the Jews in those
festival days: and so do we observe those holy days for order and
edification of Gods people, that use to assemble at such times, Fulk. Matthew.
15. sec. 3.

Fourthly, what cause is there, why Easter and Whitsontide should be tied to
the Lords day, and the Nativity of Christ, which Bellarmine confesses, was
upon the Lords day, should indifferently be kept upon any day? but that hereby
we understand, that it is an indifferent matter, whether they should be kept
upon the Lords day, or any other, and whether upon any certain day, or to be
left to the discretion of the governors of the Church to be observed as any
other occasion shall be offered, Fulk. annot. Apocalypse. 1. sect. 6.

Lastly, we showed Augustines opinion, in the first part of this question, how
he understands that saying, Psalm 118. This is the day which the Lord has
made, only of the Sabbath: thereby insinuating, that other holy days either
were not instituted of God at all, or else not with the like necessity.

THE FOVRTH PART, OF THE solemnities of Saints.
The Papists.
Marie Magdalene wrought upon him should be recorded and remembered, Matthew. 26.
verse. 13. Hereby we learn that the good works of Saints may be recorded to
the honor of Saints in the Church, whereof arise their commemorations and holy
days, Rhemist. annot. Matthew. 25. sect. 1.

The Protestants.
1. THe good works of Saints may be remembered to the honor of God, without
their holy days and commemorations: Christ instituted no holy day of Mary
Magdalene, nor commanded an image of her fact to be made, but a memory of her
in preaching the Gospel, Fulk. ibid. Secondly, we grant, that Christian
solemnities may be kept, as things indifferent, which the Church may retain or
abrogate as it shall seem best for edification, not observed of necessity as
a part of the worship of God, nor consecrate to the honor of Saints; seeing al
divine worship is wholly to be reserved to God, not to be given to any other:
For times and seasons, the scripture says, the Lord has put only in his own
power: Cont. Faustum lib. 2. cap. 21.
therefore he is only to have the honor of them, Act. 1.7. Thirdly, what honor
is due unto Saints Augustine shows: Colimus martyrs eo cultu dilectionis,
and societatis, quo and in hac vita coluntur sancti homines Dei. We do honor
Martyrs, with the service of love and fellowship, as holy men are honored in
this life. But it is not lawful to consecrate times and days to holy men
living, therefore neither to Saints departed: for one and the same kind of
honor is due to them both.

The Papists.
Mary Magdalene, Rhemist. Matthew. 25. sect. 1.

The Protestants.
THis is another principal fault, which we find and complain of in their holy
days: that they have pestred the Church with such a number of Saints and
Saints days. First, as we have partly showed before, they appointed a several
Saint almost for every purpose, as here we have set it down: Saint Leonard for
captives. Ex Tilemann. loc. 28.
Saint Rochus for the pestilence. Saint George for war. Saint Anna gives
riches. Saint Nicholas and Christopher for the sea. Saint Apollonia for the
toothake. Saint Otilia for the eyes. Saint Margaret for women in travel. Saint
Laurence keeps from the fire. Saint Catherine gives wit and learning. Saint
John against poison. Saint Quirine for the fistula. Saint Protasius and
Geruasius, help to bewray theft.


And thus is it true of them, as Jeremy complained of the Idolatrous
Israelites: that their gods were after the number of their cities, Ierem. 2.28.
In like manner also have they multiplied their Saints days: for beside the
festiuals of Christ, the holy Ghost, and of the Apostles, they have added these
besides.

Saint George his day. Corpus Christi. Assumption of Mary. Nativity of Mary.
Conception of Mary. The birth days of the Apostles. Magdalenes. Laurence. The
Dedication feast. Tilemann. loc. 26.
Martin. their holy days. Nicholas. their holy days. Catherine. their holy
days. Anne. their holy days.
Beside in the Dioces of Salisburge, fifteen festiuals of Saint Rubert, with
many more: whereof some of them are blasphemous, as to keep the Conception of
Mary, in remembrance that she was conceived without sin: some of them
fabulous and forged; as the Assumption of Mary, in memory of her Assumption in
body to heaven, which is a mere fable. But all the rest are idolatrous and
superstitious, ordained for the honor and worship of creatures. And thus have
they cumbred the people of God with their infinite observations: So that the
Lord says to them, concerning their feasts, as unto the Israelites: They are
a burden unto me, I am weary to bear them, Isai. 1.14.

In Augustines time, or who else it was that made those Sermons, when there
were nothing so many festiuals, as now among Papists, yet more then needed, he
writes thus in a sermon upon a festival: Laetus sum hodierno die propter
tantam festiuitatem: sed aliquantulum tristis, De diverse. sermon. 47.
quia non video tantum populum congregatum, quantus congregari debuit. I am
glad to day, because of this festival day: and somewhat grieved withal, that
the people resort not in such frequencie, as they should. We may see by this,
that even then the people began to wax weary of their many holy days.

The Papists.
THey enjoin sanctification and necessary keeping of all their festiuities
and holy days: and so make no difference between the observation of Rhemist.
Annot. Galat. 4. sect. 5.

The Protestants.
THere are no days necessary to be kept, but those that are of the Lords
appointment: the rest, being void of superstition, may be celebrated as
indifferent: and therefore not to be commanded with the like strictnes, as is
the Lords day. There is greater liberty upon holy days for bodily labor,
then upon the Sabbath: for bodily rest upon the seventh day is commanded
of GOD: bodily labor upon all other days permitted, and may without offense
of conscience be used, when it is not by the lawful authority of the
governors of the Church upon just occasion restrained, as during the time of
public prayers and fastes, hearing of the word, and such like.

The rest of the Sabbath, so far as it helps our preparation and fitnes to
spiritual exercises, and is a part of sanctifying the Lords day, binds
simply in conscience, because it is the commandment of GOD: but the rest
upon holy days does not in it self bind us, no otherwise then by reason of
offense, that may arise by our contempt of the constitutions of the Church.

We find that Simon Islip, Archbishop of Canturburie, directed his letters
patents to all Parsons and Vicars, wherein he straightly charged them and their
parishioners under pain of excommunication, not to abstain from bodily labor
upon certain Saints days, which before were wont to be hallowed and
consecrated to unthrifty idleness, Fox. page 393. Ergo, by their own judgment,
all the festiuities of their Church are not to be kept alike.

Augustine makes three degrees of festiual days: in the first and highest
degree he places the Lords day: Quomodo Maria virgo, matter domini,
principatum tenet inter omnes mulieres, ita inter caeteros dies, haec omnium
dierum matter est. As amongst women, the Virgin Marie, the mother of our Lord
is the chief, so this day is the mother and chief of al other days, speaking
of the Sabbath of Christians, de tempore sermon. 36.

In the next place or degree he puts the festiuals of Christ, and the holy
Ghost, as the commemorations of his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension: as in his sermon upon the Ascension day he thus says, Conditoris
basilica huius S. Leontij hodie depositio est: sed dignetur obscurari stella a
sole. To day we have the commemoration of the deposition or sepulture of Saint
Leontius the founder of this Church: But let not the star think much to be
obscured of the Sun. So in the third rank he counts the commemorations of
holy men, which unto the festiuities of Christ were but as the Star to the
Sun. We will add a fourth place or degree, distinguishing between the
commemorations of the holy Apostles, and other superstitious and popish Saints
days, which our Church has worthily thrust out at the doors.

AN APPENDIX TO THIS part of the vigiles and night watches annexed to
festival days.
The Papists.
1. THey were wont upon Saints eeues to give themselves to fasting, and
watching. But their night vigiles or watches they do not now so Bellarm. cap.
17. Yet they have not altogether left them, for they have their Nocturnes or
midnight mattens, and their prime hours in the morning. Rhemist. annot. Act.
10. sect. 6.

The Protestants.
THe Christians in time of persecution had their antelucanos hymnos, their
early and timely songs and hymns: they met together to worship God, before the
Sun rise, because they could not safely, neither were suffered to assemble in
the day time. But that is no reason, why now the Church should use vigiles or
nocturnes, seeing we now have free exercise of religion in the day time: no
more then Paul's example is to be urged, that prayed by the rivers side with
the people, and there preached unto them, because in Idolatrous cities they
could have no places of meeting. That therefore we now ought to do the like,
having Churches and Oratories to assemble in, Augustine, if the sermon be his,
thus witnesses: Iubente Ambrosio cessabant vigiliae Mediolani, quia cum
vigilabant per noctem, ad ecclesiam, Ad fratres in eremo. sermon.
ludendo and chorizando conueniebant. At Millaine by Ambroses commandment,
the vigiles ceased, because the people, when they watched, did come by night,
daunsing, and sporting and playing, to the Church.

The Papists.
2. THey have also another superstitious custom, to set up wax candles, and
Bellarmine would authorize this custom by the continual burning of the lamps
day and night, as he says, in the tabernacle amongst the Jews.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we say of this, as we did of the vigiles of the Church before:
that Christians in those days in their night assemblies used candle light: but
it follows not, that the vigiles being now left, we should burn candles at
noone day: and that this was their custom, to burn their lamps only in the
night, Augustine shows, where he speaks of those that did vow ceram ad
luminaria noctis, De tempore Sermon. 7.
wax candles for the lights of the Church in the night.

Secondly, it is utterly untrue, that the lamps in the Tabernacle burned all
day: the contrary is proved, that they were lighted in the evening, and so
burned all night, for those that kept the watch in the Temple, 2. Chron. 13.11.
and that in the morning again they were put out, 1. Sam. cap. 3. verse. 3. The
Priest shall set the lamps on fire, inter duas vesperas, between the two
twilights, that is, the evening and morning, Exodus 30.8. And he shall dress
them to burn from the evening to the morning, Leuitic. 24.3. That therefore
which the Jesuit made for an argument for himself, we will urge against him:
that seeing the lamps amongst the Jews, who abounded in types and ceremonies,
were burnt only in the night, and not upon the day; it is shame for those that
would be counted Christians, in superstitious customs, to exceed and go
beyond them.

THE FIFTH PART, OF LENT and Imber days.
The Papists.
1. THey hold, that the holy time of Lent, (as they do fondly call it, as
Moses, Elias, and our Savior Christ, that fasted 40. days, Rhemist. Matthew. 4*
sect. 2.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, that fasting of our Savior Christ, and the holy Prophets, was
miraculous, and no more to be imitated then Christ's walking upon the Sea, In.
Psalm. 90. praefat.
or raising of the dead, as Augustine says, Non tibi dicit, Non eris
discipulus meus, he says not, Thou shall not be my Disciple, unless thou
walk upon the sea, or raise the dead: but learn of me, because I am humble
and meek. Yet if any of them can fast so many days, as they did, without
eating any thing at all, we give them good leave.

Secondly, that it was not an Apostolic tradition, it appears, because it
was not uniformly kept of the Church, Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 26.
a long time after them: For as Irenaeus witnesses, some fasted one day, some
two days, some forty hours day and night. But if it had been necessarily
enjoined and prescribed by the Apostles, such variety of custom could not
have sprung up, at the least not have been suffered in the Church. Thirdly,
Epiphanius says, that the Wednesdaies fast was an Apostolic tradition,
Epiphan. Here Is. 75.
and to observe the feast of the six days of Easter, with bread, salt, and
water: which observations, are not kept amongst the Papists themselves, yet
have they as good testimony of antiquity to be Apostolic traditions, as the
Lent fast. Fourthly, in Augustines time there was no necessary enforcement for
every man to keep Lent: Si aliquis, says he, ieiunare non potest, eleemosyna
sine ieiunio bona est. If any man be not able to fast, Sermon. de temp. 62.
alms without fasting is good and profitable. Wherefore seeing the Lent fast
was then voluntary, it is evident that it was not an Apostolic prescription,
which should have bound all men necessarily.

The Papists.
2. A Second abuse in their fasting, is to appoint prescript times,
necessarily Acts. 13.3. They fasted and prayed, and laid their hands upon
them, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. FOr prayer and fasting to be used at such times as Ministers are
ordained, we doubt not but it is an Apostolik tradition, because we find it
written in the Acts of the Apostles: But it was fasting from all meat and
drink, which the Apostles used, not abstinence from flesh only, as upon your
Imber days. Neither do you observe those days of fast for any such purpose:
For your Imber days are kept amongst you, though there be no orders given in
the whole dioces.

2. Prescript and set times of civil abstinence from some meats, for the
benefit of the common wealth, as your Lent and Imber days, are still retained
in England, and no otherwise, we condemn not: But to appoint ordinary times of
necessary and Religious fasting, without special cause, was of the ancient
Church accounted heresy in Montanus.

This also was the practice of the Church of God in the old Testament, Eusebius.
lib. 5 cap. 18.
upon special occasion, not at set, and ordinary times, to enjoin public
fasting, as the prophet says, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast,
call a solemn assembly, Joel 2.15. which shows that their public fastes
were not usual and ordinary, but especially sanctified, and solemnly
proclaimed.

As for the fixed and set fasting days in the week, in Augustines time, only
the Churches of Rome kept the Saturdayes Fast, all the East Churches, and many
of the West observed it not: And whereas some alleged, that Peter fasted upon
Saturday, being the next day, which was the Lords day, to encounter with
Simon Magus, Augustine says, it was opinio plurimorum, the opinion of many,
quam tamen falsam esse perhibent plerique Romani: yet many of the Romans hold
it but for a fable. And so he generally concludes, concerning prescript days
of fasting. Quibus diebus non oporteat ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, praecepto
Domini vel Apostolorum no^ inuenio definitum: Upon what days we ought to fast,
upon what days not, I find it not defined by any precept given by our Lord or
any of the Apostles. Epistol. 86.

The Papists.
Lucerna in Heluetia, Fox. p. 867.
Anno. 1524. Abstinence also from some meats upon certain days for religion,
is warranted by the Rhemist: as God prohibited Adam the eating of some fruits
in Paradise for obedience, and in the law for signification, annot. 1. Timoth.
4. sect. 6.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, now Antichrist shows himself in his colors, making it as
lawful for him, to forbid the use of some meats for religion, now under the
Gospel, when God has made them all lawful and free, as God himself might
forbid the use of some, for obedience in Paradise or signification in the Law.
Secondly, S. Paul calls it the doctrine of devils, to command to abstain
from meats, 1. Timoth. 4.3. Again, let no man condemn you in meat and
drink. Colos. 2.16. The Rhemist. answer, that the Apostle speaks in the
first place against those heretics, that condemned meats as evil by
creation, such were the Manichees, and in the second, against the Judicial
observation of meats. But they only prohibit the use of some meats for the
chastising of the body.

Ans. First, not only the Manichees and other heretics preferred some meats
before other, as more holy, but even the Papists also in the prescript times of
their fasts, do command to abstain from meats for piety and religion: And
therefore they are counted most holy amongst them that never eat flesh. And
Durand testifies, that fish in interdict days, is rather used then flesh,
because flesh and not fish was accursed in the days of Noah. Durand. lib. 6.
cap. de alijs ieiunijs.
Yea they command abstinence from meats under pain of damnation: what is this
else, but with the old heretics to condemn the creatures of God themselves?
Secondly, the popish prohibition of meats, is more superstitious, then was the
Jews: For they prohibited such meats, as by the law were counted unclean,
as to eat beasts that died alone, or were torn with beasts, or strangled, or
touched any unclean beast, as likewise they enjoined penance to them, that
did eat or drink, where a dog or cat had lapped, or a mouse had been
drowned and such like, Fulk. annot. 1. Timoth. 4 sect. 6. I pray you how far
are they now from the superstition of the Jews? Nay they go beyond them: for
the legal difference of meats for signification, was instituted of God for
those times. But this superstitious distinction of meats under the Gospel,
which gives us the free use of all the creatures of God, which are sanctified
by the word and prayer, 1. Timoth. 4.5. is brought in by Antichrist, who is an
enemy unto God.

3 Neither do they abstain from flesh and other meats for chastising of the
flesh: for they permit the use of all other meats upon their fasting days,
that may provoke lust, flesh only excepted, as the eating of spices, and other
dayntie and delicate confections, the drinking of wine, and all kind of fish.
Even like as Augustine reports of the Manichees, that would drink no wine,
nor eat flesh: De morib. Manich. 2. cap. 13.
but in stead of wine they had Pomorum nonnullorum expressos succus vini
speciem satis imitantes, atque id etiam suauitate vincentes: the sweet liquor
of pleasant fruits like to wine in color, but excelling it in sweetness: and
for flesh they had their strange and exquisite fruits, with great variety of
dishes, seasoned and strawed with pepper. This was the Manichees fast: and this
is the popish custom in their fastings at this day. Again, if they forbear
some meats for chastisement of the body, why might it not be as lawful to
eat butter, and eggs, in the time of Lent, as upon other fasting days: but
that they make difference of the times, as one being holyer then an other, and
so also a difference of meats, some being more agreeable to holy times, then
other?

Wherefore to conclude this point: Civil abstinence from flesh, as for
policies sake, and the better mayntenance of the common wealth, that there
should be a vent for fish, as well as for flesh, and that every man might
live of his trade and calling: as also for the health of the body, to abstain
from hurtful meats: as likewise to keep a temperate and sober diet, and to
take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness: These kinds of abstinence, in
making difference of meats, we mislike not: but for piety or religions sake
to distinguish them, it is to too great superstition.

The Papists.
FOurthly, their religious kind of fasting they hold not to be a general
Timothy refrayned from drinking of wine, and in stead thereof used water, 1.
Timothy 5. verse 23. Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, for chastising of the body, it is lawful to abstain either
wholly for a time, or in respect of the quantity or quality of the meats,
which may more provoke carnal lusts, not in the prohibition of the whole kind,
as the Papists do of all flesh, be it never so gross or small in quantity.
Likewise it is lawful for chastising of a man's body to abstain from any
kind, as of wine, fruits, spices, flesh, so that the use of them be not
forbidden, as though in the very abstinence there were religion, Fulk. ibid.

2 But the true and properly religious fast of Christians, is a general
abstinence from all meats and drinks, during the time of such fasting: Esther.
4.16. Nehemiah. 9.4. Where the manner of their fast is described: how the law
was read unto them four times in the day, and as often did they worship the Lord
and confess their sins. It was the custom of the Church also in Augustines
time, in the days of fast, not to abstain only from flesh, or some certain
kind of meat, as the Papists use, but altogether to continue fasting till the
eeuen. Rogo vos (fratres) (says he) vt in isto sacratissimo tempore, exceptis
dieb. dominicis nullus prandere praesumat: De tempor. sermon. 62.
I pray you, brethren, that in this holy time, none of you presume to dine at
all, except it be upon the Lords days. Ergo, they that will keep a true
religious fast, if they are able, ought for the time wholly to absteyne.

The Papists.
Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 15. verse. 32. Anna, Tobie, Judith, Esther, served and
pleased God by fasting, Annot. Math. 15. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we doubt not, but that fasting is a work acceptable to God, being
referred to the right end, as to chastise and humble the body, 1. Corinthians.
9.27. and to make our prayers more fervent, 1. Corinthians. 7.5. But otherwise
there is no holiness or virtue in fasting of it self, neither is it by the
work wrought of any merit or worthiness: For our prayers, which are a more
principal work, then fasting is, yet of themselves by any worthynes in them,
are not regarded of God: for Solomon says, When thou hear, have mercy, 1.
King. 8.30. It is of the Lords mercy, that our prayers are heard, not of any
worthynes in them.

Augustine says very well, Si volumus been ieiunare a cibis, ante omnia
ieiunemus and a vitijs. De tempor. sermon. 64.
Quid prodest, pallidum esse ieiunijs, si odio and inuidia liuescas? What does
it help to fast from meat, if we fast not from sin? What avails it to be
pale and wan with fasting, if thou frettest with hatred and envy? Ergo, the
external or outward act of fasting of it self is little or nothing worth.

The Papists.
to transgress them: as one Laurence Staple was troubled and persecuted, anno.
1531. because in Lent having no fish, he did eat eggs, Fox. page 1043.
butter, and cheese: nay, they were so cruel, that hardly they suffered women
in childbed to have flesh in their houses: As anno. 1532. two young Gyrles
were constrained to abjure, page 1048.
because they were found upon Saint Peter's eeuen eating broth made of mutton,
their mother lying in childe-bed. How was poor Frebarne tossed too and fro,
page 1184.
and brought into great danger, because a pigge was found in his house in Lent
time, for the which his wife longed?

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, no positive law, not grounded upon scripture, can so bind any
person, that in the breaking of such he shall sin deadly: Fox. page 1110.
And of this sort is the fast of Lent and other days for religion, which were
ordained without authority of scripture: Lambert ad articul. 17. And seeing
the rest of the Sabbath, being the commandment of GOD, might yet upon
necessary cause be broken, as we have showed; how much greater liberty ought
the people to have had in the observation of those days, which were only
enjoined by men? for who sees not, that the rest in the Lords day being Gods
own appointment ought more surely to bind, then fasting upon forbidden days,
enforced by men? yet was it counted an heinous sin to eat flesh upon a day
interdict, and a small offense, or none, to violate the rest of the Sabbath.

2 Saint Paul could see no such necessity of fasting and abstinence, when he
wills Timothy to drink wine, and no longer water, for his infirmities sake,
1. Timoth. 5.23. But if there were religion in fasting and abstinence, it ought
not to be intermitted for the bodily health: for the less principal is to
give place to the greater.

In Augustines time also there was no such necessity: Qui ieiunare non
praeualet, in domo sua praeparet, quod accipiat: He that is not able to fast,
let him prepare in his house for his own eating. And again, Si possibilitas
non fuerit ieiunandi, sufficit eleemosyna sine ieiunio. Sermon. de tempor. 62.
If a man have not possibility to fast, in stead of fasting let him give
alms. What is become now of your Lent and Imber fastes, which you prescribe as
necessary to be kept of all?

THE NINTH QVESTION, CONcerning the Virgin Marie.
THis question stands of many parts: 1. Whether the B. Virgin Marie were
conceived without sin. Secondly, whether she vowed Virginity before the Angel
was sent unto her. Thirdly, of the assumption of her body into heaven.
Fourthly, of the dignity and preeminence that she has (as they affirm)
above all other Saints, yea, and the Angels to. Fifthly, of the merits of the
virgin Marie and of the Aue Maria.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE Virgin Marie were void of original and actual
sin.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Romans 5. sect. 9.

Answ. it is no more dishonor for Christ to be borne of a sinner, then to have
taken his flesh, and lineally descended, according to his humanity, of Thamar
that committed incest with Judah and Rahab which was an harlot: Math. 1.3.5.
Secondly, it makes more for the honor of God that Christ was borne without
sin of a woman which was a sinner, and more sets forth his power, then
otherwise, lest he should be thought to have derived his purity from his
mother.

2 They hold, that there was no actual sin in the Virgin Marie, no not the
lest and smallest sins, which they call venial, Rhemist. 1. John. 1. sect. 5.
She was especially protected, and preserved from sinning by the grace of God.

Ans. That God is able clearly to rid his children from sin, and to preserve
them from falling thereinto, we deny not: but, seeing you have no scripture
for this privilege, that should be bestowed only upon Marie, to be free from
sin: but rather the contrary is proved out of scripture, That all have sinned,
Romans 3.23. it is too rash and bold an assertion, contrary to the will of God,
to ascribe any thing to his power. He is as able to exempt all from sinning as
one: unless therefore you can show some especial warrant out of Gods word,
for Mary's freedom, by your reason, all the children of God shall be freed
from sin as well as Marie, because God is able to do it.

The Protestants.
THat the Virgin Marie was both conceived in sin, and was also subject to
actual sins in her life, as other of the children of God, thus out of the
scripture we do declare it.

1 How else can the word of God be true, that says, All have sinned, Romans 3.23.
and. 5.12. They will answer, that Marie had an especial privilege: then let
them show it out of the word of God, and we will believe: otherwise the general
conclusion must stand, that all have sinned. Again, Marie her self in her
song, calls Christ her Savior: Luke 1.47. Ergo, she was a sinner: for how
else could she be saved from her sins which she had not? If they answer as
they do, Fox. p. 801.
that Christ was her Savior only, because he preserved her from sin: We
do thus reply. First, that a Savior in scripture is defined to be he that
saves the people from their sins, Math. 1.21. not that preserves only.
Secondly, if Marie were free from original sin, as they say she was, she
needed not a Savior to keep her from sin, for she might have preserved
herself.

Arg. 2 Marie dyed, Ergo, she was a sinner: for sin brought death into the
world, Romans 1.5. If she had had no sin, she had not dyed. Christ indeed,
though he were no sinner, yet he bare our sins, and therefore dyed for us.

Christ checked and rebuked his mother, John. 2.4. Woman, what have I to do
with thee? Ergo, it seems, she was not without fault. Rhemist. answer: It
was rather a doctrine to others, to teach them not to do any thing for respect
of kindred, against reason, then a reprehension to Mary. We reply: But I pray
you, how could the Apostles learn to beware of that fault, if it had been no
fault in Marie? How could they be admonished in her, if she were not first her
self admonished? And the manner of speech shows, it was a rebuke, Christ
saluting her by no other name, then if he had spoken to any other woman.

Argum. 3. The Papists themselves are in a stagger, and dare not constantly
affirm, that Marie was conceived without sin, but put in this clause (as
many godly devout men judge) Rhemist. Romans 5. sect. 9. And Bellarmine says, in
maiori part Ecclesiae pie credi, that the greater part of the Church does so
godly believe, yet he dare not determine upon it himself, de cult. sanctor.
lib. 3. cap. 16. But why are they afraid to hold it as an undoubted truth,
seeing Pope Sixtus has clearly determined that it was so, forbidding the
Dominick Friars to preach the contrary, Fox. p 800.
and hereupon erected a new holy day of her conception? Here then they are
driven to a great straight: for either they must abolutely hold, that she was
not conceived in sin, against the Master of sentences, and Thom. Aquinas, with
other schoolmen, or else hold the contrary, and so confess the Pope to have
been in error.

Augustine says, beatior Maria percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo
carnem Christi: Materna propinquitas nihil Mariae profuisset, nisi foelicius
Christum cord quam carne gestasset. De sanct. virginit. cap. 4.
Marie was more happy in perceiving the faith of Christ, then in conceiving the
flesh of Christ: neither had it profited her to be the mother of Christ, if she
had not more happily borne him in her heart, then she did in her womb. But
what need had Marie to believe in Christ, if she had been pure from her
nativity, and had no sins to be forgiven her? Augustine yet more plainly
says, Maria ex Adam mortua propter peccatum Adae: Adam mortuus est propter
peccatum, and caro domini ex Maria mortua est propter delenda peccata. Marie
dyed being borne of Adam, In Psalm. 34. conci. 2.
because of the sin of Adam: Adam dyed because of his own sin: Christ dyed
in the flesh to take away our sins: Ergo, Marie by his sentence was borne in
the sin of Adam.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER Marie vowed Virginity before the Annuntiation.
The Papists.
Marie to the Angel, who told her, she should conceive and bear a son: How
can this be (says she) seeing I know no man? That is, she plainly declares,
she could have no child by knowing a man, because of her vow, for otherwise
she needed not have asked such a question, how a woman might have a son
promised her, if she had married to have carnal copulation. Rhemist. Luke 1.
sect. 13. Bellarmin. de Monachis. cap. 22.

Ans. First, Ambrose makes this to be the cause why Marie so answered, she had
read the prophecy of Esaias, that a virgin should conceive and bring forth a
son, and therefore knew very well, that this holy child should be otherwise
conceived, then by the knowledge or help of man, Fulk. ibid. Secondly, as also
the Angel delivering at once his whole message, and showing what manner of
child it should be: even the Son of the most high, who should sit on the
throne of David, and of his kingdom there should be no end: that is, that the
child should be the Son of God: she straightwayes conceived that such a holy
seed could not be borne of man, and therefore asks, how without man he might
be borne. Sic Calvin. Beza.

The Protestants.
THat Marie, as she was an entire Virgin before the birth of Christ, so that
she continued also a Virgin all her life after, we do verily think, and
condemn their opinion that hold the contrary: but that she vowed or purposed
Virginity, before the message of the Angel was brought unto her, it is rashly
without scripture, nay rather against it, affirmed.

Argum. 1. The text is plain, that they had a purpose to consummate their
marriage: When as Marie was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together*
Math. 1.18. Ergo, there was a meaning to come together, if she had not in the
mean time been found to be with child of the holy Ghost: for otherwise, it
should seem to have been a mockery on Mary's behalf, to promise marriage to
Joseph, without any purpose to perform the duty of marriage. But if it were
done with both their consents, then mocked they with God, who instituted
marriage for some end and purpose, which could not be attained out of marriage:
for they should have married neither for avoiding fornication, nor for
procreation, which are the two chief ends of marriage: as for the third, which
is mutual comfort, it arises of the former.

Argum. 2. It was not the manner among the Jews to vow Virginity, but it was
rather a shame and reproach to remain and die a Virgin: and therefore
Iephthaths daughter lamented her Virginity, Judge. 11.38. How then could Marie
be induced contrary to the custom of the Church, to vow Virginity? Yea
Augustine confesses as much: Hoc mores Israelitarum recusabant: The manners of
the Israelites did not suffer it, de Virginit. cap. 4. though he himself
els-where, and in the same place seems to incline to the contrary opinion.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE ASsumption of the Virgin Marie.
The Papists.
THey report the story of the death and departure of the Virgin Mary, after
Gethsemani: and for three days together the Angels were heard to sing
melodious songs: At three days end also Saint Thomas came; who being desirous
to see her body, and not finding it in the grave, they thereupon assuredly
deemed that her body was assumpted into heaven, Rhemist. Act. 1. verse. 14.

Argum. 1. It is best agreeable to the privilege of the mother of God, not to
see corruption, Rhemist. ibid. Seeing also her son was exempted from
corruption, and natura Mariae excipitur, the nature of Marie must be excepted:
caro enim Jesus est caro Mariae, the flesh of Jesus is the flesh of Marie. And
seeing Christ came to fulfill the law, which says, Honor thy parents: it is
very like, eum in morte speciali gratia eam honorasse, that he did honor her by
special grace in her death. These reasons and other are to be read in a forged
book amongst Augustines works, bearing title, De assumptione Mariae.

Answ. First, there is no credit to be given to the forged writings which
pass under the name of Saint Denis, and Athanasius, out of whom they do
report the assumption of Marie, nay their own lesson, which they read upon
the Assumption day, does control and confute the other. First, that story
says, that without doubt she was taken up in body. But your lesson leaves it
as uncertain, whether she were raised up in body or not. Secondly, the forged
story says, she was buried in Gethsemani, which was in mount Oliuet: your
lesson says, that the place of her burial is in the midst of the valley of
Iehosaphat, which is between mount Oliuet and the City, Fulk. ibid. Secondly,
it follows not, because Christ took flesh of the Virgin, that therefore she
should also as well be exempted from corruption: for he took flesh also of
David, and other his progenitors, who by the same reason should be made
immortal. And if she were privileged by being the mother of Christ, from
seeing corruption, why not also from having any sin? for her Son after the
flesh saw neither. Thirdly, Christ also both did and might honor his mother as
he was man, though so great a privilege be not granted unto her. The
reverence, which was to be done to his mother, was in regard of his manhood,
and so was he obedient unto them, Luke 2.51. and so long as he lived in the
flesh: and therefore he did care for her even upon the cross, commending her
to the disciple whom he loved. But he neither was to honor her as he was God,
and therefore not to free her from corruption, which had been a work of his
Godhead: and the natural affection and honor due unto parents cease after
this life. It were then too gross a conceit, to think that Christ has such
regard now of the virgin Marie in heaven, as he had of her, being his mother,
in the days of his flesh: for Christ, as he is not now known after the flesh,
2. Corinthians. 5.16. so neither knows he any after the flesh.

The Protestants.
THis uncertain report of the assumption of Mary, with other circumstances
thereof, we hold to be a very counterfeit story, and worthy of no credit.

Argum. 1. If it were a matter of such weight, as they make it, who have
erected a new found holy day of the assumption of Mary, surely the scriptures
would not have been silent therein: especially Saint John (as Augustine says)
to whose charge she was committed, would have left somewhat in writing of that
matter: for says he, Nullus fidelius id narrare potuerit, for no man could
more truly and faithfully make relation thereof. De sanct. sermon. 35.


Argum. 2 That general sentence pronounced upon Adam and all Adams seed, must
needs also take place in the virgin Marie, Thou art dust, and to dust shall
thou return, Genes. 3.19. Christ only is excepted, and that by the testimony
of the word of God: wherefore, unless this privilege of the virgin could be
proved out of scripture, as Christ's is, we must needs hold her subject to that
general law of corruption.

Augustine says, Assumptio eius in apocrypha non in catholica reperitur
historia: the assumption of Mary is found in an Apocryphal, that is, an obscure
and uncertain, not a Catholic or authentical story.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE HOnor and worship of the Virgin Marie.
The Papists.
Bellarmin. de Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 25. They call her, Regina mundi, scala
coeli, thronus dei, ianua Paradisi, The Queen of the world, the ladder of
heaven; the throne of God, and gate of Paradise: yea they give her jurisdiction
over her son, Iube natum, command thy son, Iure matris impera filio,
command thy son by the right of a mother. Coge Deum, compel God to be
merciful to sinners, Annot. Fulk. 1.15.

Again, they say, she is to be honored with the feasts of her Nativity,
Assumption, and Conception: for the other two, of her Purification, and
Annuntiation, are not proper to the Virgin, but concern Christ: the one his
Conception, the other his Presentation, Rhemist. actor. 1. sect. 7.

Argum. She her self prophecieth of all Catholic generations, that they
should bless her in keeping her festiuities and memorials: but if these
festiuities of her Conception and Assumption be not kept, she should have none
at all: and so be thought worthy of less remembrance, then any other Saint,
Galat. 4. sect. 5. Rhemist.

The Protestants.
1. WE do not celebrate any festival days in the honor of creatures,
neither of the Virgin Mary, nor any other Saint, but only to the honor of God:
and therefore the feasts of the Annuntiation, and Purification, may much better
be received, because they belong and are referred unto Christ, then the other
festiuities, of the assumption and conception of Mary, the institution whereof
was most superstitious: the one for the feigned assumption of her body, which
your own writers are uncertain of: the other to maintain the heresy of the
Franciscanes, that she was conceived and borne without sin. As for the
memory of the Virgin Mary, it may better be kept, then by such festiuities:
as our Savior Christ taught to keep the remembrance of Mary Magdalene, by
preaching the Gospel, Math. 26.13. Fulk. annot. Act. 1.7. And if they only are
Catholic generations, that call her blessed in keeping these festiuities in
her memorial: then there were no Catholic generations for many hundred years
after, and so do you condemn the age of the Apostles: for neither then, nor
many years after were these superstitious festiuities heard of. But Mary says
in her song, From henceforth, even from this time forward, shall all
generations call me blessed: so that, if her blessedness had consisted in the
memory of those days, they should immediately have been kept, especially the
day of her nativity, Fulk. Galath. 4. sect. 5.

2. We do allow all praise given unto the Virgin, without the dishonor of
God and her Son and Savior Christ: we do acknowledge the honor that God
vouchsafed her, not to be a meritorious or principal efficient cause of our
redemption, but only an holy vessel, and isntrumental cause of the
conception and birth of Christ, by whose only merit and worthiness our
redemption is perfited, as by a proper and principal, and only meritorious
efficient cause thereof. And therefore, those are blasphemous titles which are
given unto her, to call her the ladder of Heaven, and gate of Paradise, and
such like: and so in a manner to make her our redeemer. Augustine says, She
was more happy, in that she conceived the faith of Christ, then in conceiving
the flesh of Christ. De sancta virgin cap. 3.
If then these titles be unmeet for her, in respect that she received the faith
of Christ, which is common to all the children of God, then are they more unfit,
in that she conceived the flesh of Christ.

3. It is great presumption to think that the Virgin Mary may command her
son in heaven: seeing she had no authority to command him upon earth, in any
thing pertaining to his office, Ioh. 2.4. And now likewise that carnal respect
of children to their parents cease in the kingdom of God.

As for that superiority and higher kind of honor which she has above all the
Saints beside, we find no warrant out of scripture. She is respected now in
heaven, not as she bare the flesh of Christ, but as she lived by faith in
Christ: she also rejoiced in God her Savior. The scripture therefore makes
one condition and estate of all that shall be saved: and says generally of
all, of others as well as the Virgin Christ's mother, That they shall be as the
angels in heaven, Matthew. 22.30. Yea, our Savior shows, that Whosoever does
the will of God, is his sister, brother and mother, Math. 12.50. By the which we
learn, that other the faithful servants of GOD may by their faith in Christ,
be as well accepted of God, as if they had borne Christ in the flesh. Where
then is that high dignity, which she has, as the mother of Christ, above all
Saints? Augustine says: Tu concinis sine fine choris coniuncta, Angelis and
Archangelis sociata: Thou (O Virgin) do rejoice being joined unto the
heavenly quire, Sermon. 35. de assumpt. Mariae.
being associated to Angels and Archangels. He makes her not Lady or Queen
of heaven, but only a fellow companion of the Saints and Angels.

AN APPENDIX OR FIFTH PART OF THE Merits of the Virgin, and of the Aue Maria.
The Papists.
1. THey do teach and hold, that she only amongst all women deserved to

Argum. The Angel saluteth her, and calls her, Full of grace, which shows
the prerogative that she had above other women, and the worthiness that was in
her, Rhemist. Luke 1. sect. 12.15.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. We acknowledge that herein she was blessed above all other women, in
that she was chosen to be the mother of our Savior, and that she was endued
fully with the graces of the holy Ghost: but those graces she had not of her
self, but of the free gift of God, without her merits.

2. The word (...), signifies freely beloved, not full of grace, as it is
likewise taken, Ephesians. 1.6. (...). He has made us accepted in his beloved
Son.

3. She her self confesses her self in her song, to be of a low degree,
poor in spirit, and hungry, whom God in mercy looked upon, Luke 1.50.
whereas God sent away the proud and rich: as the proud Pharisie that thought
himself rich of good works, obtained nothing of God, Luke 18. Wherefore if
she had stood upon her own deserts, she had made her self rich, not poor:
neither should she have magnified the mercy of God, but his justice: for when
a reward is given according to desert, it is of his justice, and not mercy.

Augustine thus commenteth upon the words of her song, Magnificet animae mea
Dominum, and recordetur, quomodo nullis suis praecedentibus meritis, De sancta*
virginit. sermon. 35.
sed sola dei bonitate sit ab iniquitate saluata: Let my soul praise the Lord;
and remember, how that not by any merits going before, but through the only
gracious goodness of God, it is delivered from sin: Ergo, Mary not saved by
her merits, nor consequently the mother of Christ, by her merits, but only
by the mere favor of God.

The Papists.
2. THey much commend the often using of the Aue Mary, which is done (say

Argum. They be the very sum and abridgement of the whole Gospel: and
therefore to be used, Rhemist. Luke 1. sect. 11.

The Protestants.
1. You do shamefully abuse those words, in making a prayer of them, which was
but a form of salutation used by the Angel: neither can you say them in that
sense they were uttered in by the Angel. Also you offend in the vain
repetition of them upon your beads, as the heathen did, Math. 6.7. and in
committing idolatry, in the inuocating of the Virgin, and praying unto her in
these words: who is a creature and not a God to be called upon.

2. What mystery soever be contained in these words, yet the people understand
nothing at all. And though we deny not but that the words are holy and
mystical, yet it follows not that they should be used for a prayer.

3. What great account they make of the Aue Mary, it may appear by this: that
they think they may alter and change it, and add to it at their pleasure: as
by Pope Sixtus the 4. there was a clause more added unto the common Aue Mary,
in this manner: Hail Mary full of grace, the Lord is with thee, Fox. p. 800.
blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus
Christ, and blessed is Anna thy mother, of whom thy virgins flesh has
proceeded without blot of original sin. What a fearful thing is this, that
they should thus dare to add unto the scriptures? How can they now escape that
judgment that is threatened against all those that do add, or take ought to
or from the word of God? Apocal. 22.18.

Thus far of such questions and controversies, as concern the kingdom of
Christ, which is his Church: of the which we have now entreated at large: first
in general of the whole, and then of the several parts and members thereof in
order. Now follow those controversies, which belong unto the Priesthood of
Christ, the third excellent and glorious office of our Savior: which his
Priesthood is partly seen in his intercession and mediation for us, partly in
his sacrifice, where we are to handle the great and weighty controversies of
the Sacraments, by the which the sacrifice of his death is applied unto us.

THE TENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING THE INTERCESSION AND MEDIAtion of
Christ, whether he be only our Mediator and Intercessor.
The Papists.
THey seem in these very words to confess, that Christ is the only singular
Rhemist. annot. 1. Timoth. 2. sect. 4.

Argum. Christ is the only Savior and Redeemer of the world, yet the name of
Savior and Redeemer is given to men in the scriptures, as Iud. 3.9. Othniel is
called a Savior, Act. 7.35. Moses a Deliverer or Redeemer: and all this
without derogation to him, that in more excellent manner is the only Savior
of the world: Ergo, there may be also many mediators, in an inferior degree
to that singular mediator, to offer up our prayers, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. 1. If Christ be sufficient to procure all grace and mercy unto us, what
need then the mediation or invocation of Saints? for we must either doubt of
his power, in joining other helpers with him, or make question of his good will
and readiness to help us, in making other mediators unto him.

2. They make other mediators and intercessors beside Christ, even in that
high and singular degree: for not only Christ by their doctrine, by his
merits procures grace, but other Saints also by their merits are our
mediators: as it is plain to see in that popish prayer, Tu per Thomae
sanguinem, etc. By the blood of Thomas, which for thee he did spend, make us,
Christ, to climb, whither Thomas did ascend. In this blasphemous prayer and a
thousand such, they pray only to Christ as God, not as mediator, men departed,
and many of them no Saints, they make their only mediators by their own
proper merits. See Fulk. ibid.

Again, their Saints are not only intercessors for grace, but conferrers of
grace and help, which is the highest degree of mediation. They appoint
several patrones amongst the Saints for all purposes: S. Apollonia for the
toothach: Saint Rooke for the pestilence: Saint Petronill for the ague: Saint
Gregory for Scholars: Saint Morris for Soldiers: Saint Luke for Painters:
Saint Crispin for Shoomakers: Saint Nicholas for the sea: Saint Iodocus for
corn: Saint Vrbane for wine. And thus do they not only (as they bear us in
hand) pray for these graces and blessings, but they have power themselves to
bestow them.

Ans. 3. Concerning the name and title of Savior and Redeemer, we answer:
first, men are called in the Scripture, Deliuerers and Saviors, in respect of
some temporal deliverance, not of the spiritual or eternal redemption, which
belongs only to Christ: but you make your Saints mediators of eternal
redemption. Secondly, they whom the Scripture calls Redeemers and Saviors,
were appointed by God for such temporal deliverance: but you cannot show the
like appointment for Saints to be mediators of eternal salvation, though in an
inferior degree to Christ. Thirdly, seeing the name of God and Christ is given
to men in the scriptures, as to Princes and Prophets: why may you not as well
say, that there may be many Gods and Christ's properly, though in an inferior
degree to him which is only God and Christ, as to appoint other inferior
Redeemers, Saviors and Mediators?

The Protestants.
WE acknowledge but one only Mediator as well of intercession as redemption,
even Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom and through whom all our prayers and
supplications ought to be made: to him we only pray, as being one God with the
Father and the holy Ghost: by him and through him we only pray, as being the
only Mediator between God and man.

Arg. 1. S. Paul says, There is one mediator of God and men, the man Jesus
Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5. Hence we do frame this argument: The mediator between
God and men, must himself be both God and man: but so is none but Christ:
Ergo, he is the only Mediator.

Arg. 2. He is only the advocate and mediator for our sins, that is the
propitiation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2.1. Christ only is the propitiation for
our sins: Ergo, the only mediator.

Augustine thus writes upon this place: Si Apostolus ita diceret, etc. If the
Apostle had said thus: If any man sin, you have me a mediator with the
father, Cont. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and I do by my prayer obtain pardon for your sins (as Parmenianus in a
certain place makes the Bishop a mediator between the people and God:) Quis
sicut Apostolum Christi, and non sicut Antichristum intueretur? Who would
behold him as an Apostle of Christ, and not as Antichrist? It is then
Antichristian doctrine, in Augustines judgment, to make any other mediators or
intercessors beside Christ.

HERE FOLLOW SVCH CONTROVERSIES, as concern the Sacraments of the Church.
THE ELEVENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, OF THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.
THis Controversy contains diverse questions: first, of the nature and
definition of a Sacrament. Secondly, of the efficacy and virtue of the
Sacraments. Thirdly, of the number and order of the Sacraments, the difference
and preeminence amongst them. They thus follow in their order.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF THE NATVRE and definition of a Sacrament.
WE thus define a Sacrament, to be an outward sensible sign, representing an
holy, inward, and spiritual grace, instituted of Christ, to be used in that
manner he has appointed, to seal unto us the promises of God, and to assure
us of the remission of sins, by the righteousness of faith in Christ, Romans
4.11.

Some things there be in this definition, that are agreed upon between us and
our adversaries: as that the Sacraments are outward signs of spiritual and
holy graces, and that there must be a conueniencie and agreement between the
sign and the thing signified: that not every thing may be represented by a
Sacrament, but an holy and spiritual grace: that a Sacrament ought to be
instituted by a divine, not an humane authority, Bellar. de Sacram. in gener.
lib. 1. cap. 9

The several points then wherein we dissent from them, and which they mislike
in this definition, are these: First, concerning the authority of insti^uting
a Sacrament, which we affirm to be derived only from Christ, and manifestly
to be proved out of the scriptures. Secondly, of the form and manner of
celebrating the Sacraments. Thirdly, of the instrumental or ministerial cause,
which is the Minister. Fourthly, of the use and end of a Sacrament, whether it
be a scale of the promises of God, and instituted for that end.

THE FIRST PART, OF THE EFFICIENT CAUSE, that is, the author or institutor of a
Sacrament.
The Papists.
THey do willingly grant, that neither the Apostles then had, nor the Church
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 14. and 23.

Argum. The sacrament of Baptism, and of the Eucharist, were instituted
without express warrant of scripture: for at that time the new testament was
not written, when Christ ordained those mysteries: Ergo, for the other
Sacraments we need not the express commandment of scripture, Bellar. lib. 1.
cap. 14.

Ans. First, the traditions of our Savior given unto the Apostles concerning
those two Sacraments, were afterward written by the Apostles, and expressly
set down in scripture: and therefore we doubt not, but that they were of
Christ's institution. But your traditions being not committed to writing,
concerning your other forged sacraments, are justly suspected, seeing the
Apostles should have as well been charged with all the sacraments, if Christ
had instituted the^, as with only two. Secondly, how then follows it, the
word of God was sometime unwritten, therefore it is so still? or Christ, who
was the author of the word written, might institute sacraments without express
scripture: Ergo, the testimony of scripture is not necessary now?

The Protestants.
WE hold no sacraments to be of Christ's institution, but those only which the
scripture testifies to have been commanded by Christ, as Baptism, Math.
28.19. the Lords Supper, Luke 23.19. The other, which have no testimony of
scripture, were not appointed by Christ.

Argum. 1. S. Paul says, That the scriptures are able to make the man of God
absolute and perfect to every good work, 1. Timoth. 3.17. But how can the
Minister of God be perfectly furnished and prepared for the work of the
ministry, if he have not sufficient direction out of the scriptures
concerning the sacraments of the Church? for how can he absolutely execute
every part of his office, if he fail in the right use of the sacraments? Ergo,
seeing the scriptures are able to make him perfect, from thence he receives
sufficient instruction for the sacraments.

Argum. 2. Augustine says: Christus sacramentis numero paucissimis,
obseruatione facilimis, etc. Christ has joined his people together by the
sacraments, few in number, easy in observation: such are Baptism, and the
partaking of his body and blood: then it follows: Et si quid aliud in
scripturis canonicis commendatur: And if any other sacrament be commanded in
the canonical scripture, Epistol. 118. Ergo, we must attend upon the scripture
and written word of God, if we will be instructed aright concerning the
Sacraments.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE FORM OF A Sacrament, and the manner of consecration.
The Papists.
THe Sacrament is not consecrated (say they) by all the words of the
institution, the new testament, etc. And in Baptism these: In the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. These are the forms of the Sacrament,
and very words of consecration, though spoken in a strange tongue, without
further invocation of the name of God, or giving of thanks, or without a
Sermon, which we require (as they say) as necessary to the essence of a
sacrament, Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 11 sect. 11.15. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sacrament.
cap. 19.

Argum. S. Paul says, The cup of blessing which we bless, 1. Corinthians. 10.16.
The Apostle refers the benediction or blessing to the cup or Chalice, which
is nothing else but the consecration thereof, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, we deny not, but that to bless here does signify to sanctify
or consecrate: but that is not done by a magical murmuration of words over the
Sacrament, but by the whole action according to Christ's institution, in
distributing, receiving, giving of thanks. Secondly* as for the words which
Christ uttered in the institution, we rehearse them not, as a magical charm
to be said over the bread and wine to convert their substance: but to declare
what they are made to us by force of Christ's institution, namely, his body and
blood.

The Protestants.
WE do not hold, that it is an essential part of the Sacrament, always to
have a sermon before it, as they understand a sermon; which notwithstanding
were most convenient, and always to be wished: but this we affirm, that the
Sacrament cannot be rightly ministered, unless there be a declaration, and
showing forth of the Lords death, not only in the visible action of breaking
and distributing the elements: but also in setting forth the end of the Lords
death out of the word of God, with an exhortation to thankfulness, which is
always observed amongst us in the daily celebration and receiving of the
Sacrament. Concerning the words of the institution, we also grant, that they
are necessarily to be used in the celebration of the Sacrament: but not as the
Papists use them: For first, they make them not all of one value, but out of
the whole institution, pick out certain consecratorie words, as they call
them: as, This is my body, This is the cup: whereas the other words, Take ye,
eat ye, drink ye, do this in remembrance: do as well belong to the
institution, as the other. Secondly, they say, that the words of institution
do not serve any thing at all for the instruction of the people, to show them
the right use of the Sacrament, but only for benediction and consecration of
the elements, Bellarm. cap. 19. Thirdly, they do hold, that only by the
pronouncing of those words, the elements are consecrated: whereas by the whole
action, and cerebration of the Sacrament, the giving, receiving, invocation,
thanksgiving, according to Christ's institution, the consecration is performed
upon the elements, Fulk. 1. Corinthians. 10. sect. 4.

Arg. 1. That the words of institution rehearsed, do help as well to admonish
and stir up the people to a thankful remembrance of the death of Christ, as
to consecrate and bless the elements, it is manifest: whereas Christ says, as
the words are usually rehearsed, Do this in remembrance of me: and S. Paul
says, That by receiving the sacrament, we do show forth the Lords death, 1. Corinthians. 11.26. Ergo the people are by the words pronounced, instructed and
admonished, and taught the right use of the sacrament.

Argum. 2. that the words of institution do help toward the benediction or
consecration of the Elements, we deny not, but not by them alone, but prayer
also and thanksgiving, and the whole action beside of receiving. To the
consecration or sanctifiyng of any creature, two things are required: the word
of God, and prayer, 1. Timoth. 4.5. Neither the word sanctifies without
prayer, nor prayer without the word. Ergo to the sanctifiyng and co^secrating
of the sacrament, the bare rehearsal of the institution suffices not, without
invocation and prayer.

Augustine says, Accedat verbum ad elementum, et fiet Sacramentum. Let the
word be joined to the element, and it is become a Sacrament. And in an other
place, he shows what word he means: Faciente verbo, non quia dicitur, sed
quia creditur, hoc est verbum fidei, quod praedicamus. The word effects this,
not because it is spoken or uttered, but because it is believed: this is the
word of faith, says the Apostle, which we preach: thus far Augustine tract
in Johan. 80. Wherefore it is not the muttering of a few words in a strange
tongue, after the manner of enchaunters, that by any secret force given unto
them has power to consecrate: but the understanding, hearing, and believing
the institution of Christ, with calling upon the name of God, and thanksgiving
before him.

AN APPENDIX OF THIS PART, WHETHER THE form of words in the institution of
the Sacraments may not be by some addition, or other alteration changed.
The Papists.
THe words of institution may be changed two manner of ways: either
substantially, Bellarmine cap. 21. li. 1.

Argum. It is not lawful to add or take, to or from the words of scripture,
much less to change the words appointed to be used in the Sacrament. Bellarm.
ibid.

Ans. To add or detract to or from the word of God, with a purpose and intent,
to wrest it to a contrary meaning, and destroy the true sense thereof, cannot
be done without great impiety: and such is the manner of all heretics: But to
allege Scripture, in keeping still the full sense, though we miss of the
words, is not to be counted so heinous a sin: we see the holy Apostles in
citing textes of Scripture, do not always bind themselves to the very
words, as Act. 7.43. Heb. 10.5. The Apostle says, A body thou have given me:
In the Psalm we read, Mine ears have thou opened: diverse words, yet the
same sense.

Augustine says very well, they that understand the Scripture, though they
keep not always the words, are better then they that read and understand
not: De doctri. Christian. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Sed vtrisque ille melior, qui et cum volet, ea^ dicit, et sicut oportet,
intelligit: But he is better then both, that both remembers the words, and
keeps the sense too: yet he also deserves praise, that bears the sense in
mind, though he cannot the words.

The Protestants.
NO substantial change (we confess) is to be admitted in the form of
Institution, which may alter the sense: neither is any particular man by
himself to make any accidental change, and bring in a new form of words,
but the public and uniform order of the church must be kept, yea, and the
church likewise is bound both to reteyne the true sense, and, as near as may
be, the very words, but where occasion serves, to make some small accidental
change: of the words, the sense being nothing diminished, it is not condemned
as an unlawful and sinful act.

Argum. 1. The Evangelists report not all the same form of words, which should
be uttered by our Savior, neither yet S. Paul fully accords with them, in
the precise and strict form of institution: as by comparing of them together,
it may be seen, Mat. 26. ver. 27. Take, eat, this is my body. S. Luke. cap.
22. This is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. ver.
19. S. Paul. Take, eat, this my body which is broken for you, do this in
remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11.24. ver. 28. This is my blood of the new
testament, that is shed for many for the remission of sins. This cup is the
new testament in my blood which is shed for you. This cup is the new testament
in my blood, this do as often as you drink it in remembrance of me.

If it had been a sin, to have missed in some terms and sillables, no doubt
the spirit of God would not have suffered these holy writers to have made the
least escape. Is it to be thought a sin in the Church, which in stead of Take
ye, eat ye, in the plural number, has appointed the Sacrament to be
ministered particularly in the singular number, to every of the co^municants,
saying. Take thou, eat thou, drink thou? Wherefore all accidental change of
words carries not with it a guilt of sin. Cont. Donat. de baptis. li. 6. ca.
25


Augustine indeed says, Certa sunt verba euangelica, etc. The words of the
gospel are certain, whereby Baptism is consecrated. Tractat. in Johan. 80.
But yet he says else where, In ipso verbo aliud est sonus transiens, aliud
virtus mane^s: In the word spoken the sound which passes, is one thing, the
virtue or sense of the words which abides, is an other: It is then the sense
of the words, not the sound or sillables, that is certain and permanent.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE INSTRVMENTALL cause of the Sacraments, that is, the
lawful Minister.
SOme things are yielded unto of both sides: First, that no man ought to take
upon him to administer the Sacraments, unless he be thereunto lawfully called
and ordained by the Church, saving that they make exception of Baptism, which
in case of necessity, as they teach, may be given by the hands of lay men or
women: but of this matter we shall have fitter occasion afterward to consider.
Secondly it is agreed, that the efficacy or virtue of the Sacrament, depends
not of the faith or honesty of the Minister: but a faithful man may receive
the sacrament worthily, even at the hands of an unworthy Minister.

The Papists.
THe point of difference between us, is this: They do teach that the
efficacy, Intentionem faciendi, quod facit ecclesia, A full purpose and intent
in ministering the Sacrament, to do that which the Church does, that is, to
consecrate the elements, and to make a Sacrament, Trident. council. sess. 7.
canon 11. Bellarm. cap. 27. So that by this rule, if the Ministers intention be
not wholly upon the business he has in hand, it shall be no Sacrament.

Argum. If the Ministers intention were not necessary to make a sacrament, when
it chances that the gospel is read at the table by a Minister, there being
both bread and wine set before them, and he in reading says, This is my body,
and This is my blood, straightwaies all that bread and wine should be
consecrate, and become a sacrament, but because his intention is wanting, it is
none* Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. But what if the Minister should have a fantastical conceit and
intent, as he reads, to consecrate all the bread and wine upon the table,
then it should seem by your rule, that it must needs be a sacrament, which
were even as absurd a thing as the other? 2. There are other lets and
impediments, from having a sacrament at the table, the^ the intention of the
minister being wanting or kept back: for the elements are not consecrated, nor
the Sacrament made by the bare pronouncing of the words: but the whole
institution ought to be observed: there must be eating, drinking, taking, and
doing al in the remembrance of the death of Christ: there must be distributing,
receiving, invocation, tha^kesgiuing: the whole action in the sacrament, is the
consecration thereof: these things the^ being wanting, there can be no Sacrament.

The Protestants.
IF the Sacrament be administered aright according to the institution of Christ,
whatsoever the Minister be, howsoever affected, be he never so profane in his
heart, without any godly purpose or intention: yet to the worthy receiver it
cease not to be a Sacrament, Calvin. in antidot. council. Tridentin. sess. 7.
canon 11.

Argum. 1. The word of God, with what intention soever it be preached, yet may
have his effect, and work faith in the hearer. So Christ be preached (says S.
Paul) whether under pretense, or sincerely, I therein joy, Philip. 1.18. Ergo
the Sacraments also may have their efficacy, without the intent of the
Minister. argum. Lutheri.

Argu. 2. If the effect of the Sacrament consists upon the intention of the
Minister, then should every man be uncertain whether any thing be wrought in
him, or he have received any benefit by the Sacrament, because he knows not
the intent of another man's heart, and so should he be deprived of the spiritual
comfort, which he might reap by the Sacrament, Calvin.

Tractat* 5. in Johan.
Augustine says: Sacramentum Baptismi tam sacrum est, vt nec homicida vel
ebrioso ministrante polluatur: The Sacrament of Baptism is so holy, that it
cannot, either by a murderer or drunken person ministering it, be defiled. And
I pray you, is it not like to be a good intention, that should enter into the
hearts of such lewd and wicked men? Therefore without any good intention, even by
the hands of such, may the Sacraments be given.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER THE Sacraments be seals of the promises of God.
The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacram. cap. 14.

Argum. 1. If the sacraments confirm unto us the promises of God in his word,
then must they of necessity be more evident, and better known unto us, then is
the word of God: for that which is less known, and not so notorious, cannot
persuade us of that, which we have better knowledge of. But such are the
Sacraments, which are not so evident, being called mysteries of religion, as
are the words of God: Ergo Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. It is strange to see, that you should now contend for the evidence,
and plainenes of Scripture, which you have locked up from the people, with no
other pretense, then because they are hard and obscure, and dangerous to be
read of the simple. Secondly, you do not well in comparing the word and the
sacraments together: for they cannot be divorced or separated: for the word
gives life to the sacraments, the sacraments again give lively testimony and
witness to the truth of the word. But let this be the question, not whether the
writing by it self, and the seal by it self are of greatest force: but
whether an instrument with a seal be not of greater evidence and strength,
then without it: So the word of God, which does but beat upon the sense of
hearing, must of necessity, not in it self, but in respect of us, work more
effectually, being sealed by the sacraments, where we receive instruction by
two other senses of ours, the sight, and the taste.

The Protestants.
THat the Sacraments are ordained of God, to be pledges and seals of his
promises made unto us in Christ, that as verily as the external elements are
applied to the outward man, so our souls spiritually are refreshed with an
assured hope of the remission of our sins in Christ, and so the sacraments to
be seals only of the righteousness of faith, and not giuers or workers of
grace in us: it is evident out of the Scripture.

Argum. 1. Abraham received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.1. Circumcision then was to Abraham a seal of
the righteousness of faith, that is, that he was justified by faith. Ergo so are
all other sacraments.

Rhemist. Indeed circumcision was a seal to Abraham, for he was just before,
and received this sacrament, as a seal thereof afterward. But it follows not,
that it was so in all: for in Isaac his son, and so consequently in the rest,
the Sacrament went before and justice followed. annot. Romans 4. sect. 8.

Ans. 1. The Apostle sets forth the example of Abraham, to show how all men
are justified before God, and what is the use of the sacraments in all men: and
therefore it is no extraordinary or exempt case, but the common case of all the
faithful, that righteousness (says the Apostle) might be imputed to them also,
Romans 4. 11. Secondly, although Isaac with many other, were first circumcised,
and after justified: yet this is perpetual, they were no more justified by
circumcision, then Abraham, who was justified before he was circumcised, but by
faith only: and therefore the Sacraments are seals of the justice of faith,
whether the justice of faith go before, or follow after.

Argum. 2. Augustine says, In Isaac, qui octauo die circumcisus fuit,
praecessit signaculu^ iustitiae fidei, et quoniam patris fidem imitatus est, De
Baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
secuta est in crescente ipsa iustitia, cuius signaculum in infant
praecesserat. In Isaac, who was circumcised the eight day, the seal of the
righteousness of faith went before: and because he did follow his fathers faith,
as he grew, justice it self followed, the seal whereof went before in his
infancy. Ergo circumcision was a seal as well to Isaac as to Abraham, and so
consequently to all.

THE SECOND QVESTION, OF THE efficacy and virtue of the Sacraments.
THis question also has diverse parts: First, whether the Sacraments do give
or confer grace by the work wrought. Secondly, of the difference of the
Sacraments of the old and new testament. Thirdly, whether the Sacraments of
the new law do imprint a sign or character in the soul, that can never be
put out. Fourthly, of the necessity of the Sacraments.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE SACRAMENTS of them selves do give or confer
grace.
The Papists.
ex opere operato, by the work wrought, that is, by force and virtue of the
work and word done and said in the sacrament, Rhemist. Act. 22. sect. 1. So
that not faith only justifies, but the Sacraments also, and other works of
religion. Rhemist. Romans 6. sect. 5. The Sacraments then are immediate
instruments and efficient causes of our justification, not mediately, as they
nourish and increase our faith, but properly and in themselves: Faith in the
receiver gives no efficacy to the Sacrament, but only takes away the lets
and impediments which might hinder the efficacy of the Sacrament: as the
drynes of the wood makes it to burn the better, yet is it no efficient cause
of the burning, which is the fire only, but only a help. Thus they compare
the Sacrament working of it self, to fire that burns, and faith is as the
drying of the wood, but a disposing and preparing of the heart. Bellarm. lib. 2.
de sacram. cap. 1.

Argum. 1. Be baptized and wash away thy sins, Act. 22. ver. 16. The
Sacrament of Baptism does of it self wash away sins, Rhemist. And we see in
S. James, that remission of sins is annexed to the unction with oil,
Rhemist. 1. Timoth. 4.14. Ergo, the Sacraments give and confer grace.

Ans. 1. To the first we answer, that the text joins with the Sacrament, the
invocation of the name of God, to the which salvation is promised, Romans 10.13.
to wash away sins: wherefore that place makes nothing for your purpose.
Secondly, in the other place health of body is promised by the gift of
miracles* but remission of sins is said to be obtained by the prayer of the
Elders. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, Iam. 5.15.

Argum. 2. S. Paul. says, He has cleansed his Church, by the lauer of water
in the word, Ephesians. 5.26. Ergo baptism is an instrumental cause of our
justification. Bellarm.

Ans. 1. It is not unusual in the Scripture to call the sign or Sacrament by
the thing signified: as, Exodus 12.11. the Paschall Lamb is called the
Passover, whereas it was but a sign and memorial thereof. So Baptism is
called, The lauer of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. because it is a sure sign of our
regeneration by the holy Ghost. Secondly, the Apostle in this place expounds
himself: for he says, that We are washed by water in the word: that is, the
outward element does send and refer us to the word and promise of God,
whereof it is a seal.

The Protestants.
THe sacraments have no power to give or confer grace to the receiver:
neither are they immediate instruments of our justification: isntrumental
means they are to increase and confirm our faith in the promises of God: of
themselves they have no operation, but as the spirit of God works by them,
our internal senses being moved and quickened by those external objects.
Neither do we say, that the sacraments are bare and naked signs of spiritual
graces: but they do verily exhibit and represent Christ to as many, as by
faith are able and meet to apprehend him. So to conclude: look how the word
of God works being preached, so do the sacraments: but the word does no
otherwise justify us, but by working faith at the hearing thereof: So
sacraments do serve for the increase of our faith: faith is not a servant and
handmaide to the sacraments, (as the Jesuit declared by the homely similitude
of the fire and dry wood) but faith is the more principal, and the sacraments
have no other use or end, then as they are helps for the strengthening of our
faith. Grace of themselves they can give or confer none.

Argum. 1. Romans 1.17. The just shall live by faith: Ergo, he lives not, that
is, he is not justified by any work wrought, as by the sacraments, but only
by faith: faith therefore gives life and efficacy to the sacraments, it is
not contained absolutely in themselves. Again, Saint Paul says, That faith
was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, before he was circumcised, Romans 4.10.
Ergo, he was not justified by circumcision: no more are we by the sacraments:
but both he and we are justified only by faith.

Argum. 2. Saint Peter says, Baptism saves us, not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request unto God, by
the resurrection of Christ, 1. Pet. 3.21. Ergo, it is faith in the resurrection
of Christ, which works in us peace of conscience, and not the outward
washing, that saves or justifies, Kemnitij argum.

Augustine thus writes: Aliud est aqua sacramenti, aliud aqua, Tractat. in
Epist. Ioha^. 6.
quae significat spiritum dei: ista visibilis est, and abluit corpus, and
significat, quid fit in anima, per illum spiritum anima mundatur and saginatur.
The water of the Sacrament is one thing, the water which signifies the spirit
is another: the one is visible, and washes the flesh, and signifies what is
done in the soul: but by the spirit the soul is cleansed. The Sacrament of
Baptism then, by this fathers sentence, and so all other sacraments, do not
give grace, but signify only and represent grace.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE difference of the old and new Sacraments.
Rhemist. Heb. 10. sect. 3.

Argum. 1. They were but shadows of good things, not the image of the things
themselves, Heb. 10.1. They were but shadows and representations of the
sacraments of the new Testament. Ergo they had not the same efficacy or power.
Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. 1. Their sacraments were only shadows of Christ's sacrifice, not of our
sacraments, though these come in the place of the other, and are answerable and
correspondent unto them. Secondly, neither do the sacraments of the new
Testament give grace or justification, but are only lively testimonies of
grace and reconciliation wrought by the death of Christ. Thirdly, their
sacraments were as effectual to assure the Fathers of grace and remission of
sins by Christ, as our sacraments are to us. Fulk ibid.

The Protestants.
WE do hold and constantly affirm and teach, that the Fathers in the law
received no less the truth and substance of Christ by faith in their
sacraments, then we do in ours: although in respect of more clear and
lightsome signification, our Sacraments do far exceed theirs, and so also
may more lively stir up our faith: yet the substance and effect both of their
sacraments and ours, was all one and the very same.

Argum. 1. S. Paul speaks plainly, that the Israelites did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and all drink of the same spiritual rock, and the rock was
Christ, 1. Corin. 10.3.4. Therefore Christ was exhibited as well to them in
their sacraments, as he is in ours.

Bellarm. answers, They did all eat the same spiritual meat amongst
themselves, not the same together with us. So also say the Rhemists, that they
amongst themselves did all feed of one bread, and drink of the same rock.
The Apostle says not, that they and we do eat and drink of the selfsame
meat and drink. Rhemist. in hunc l^cum.

Ans. 1. Yes the Apostle says so in effect, that there is one and the self
same spiritual meat and drink to us all, both to them and us: for what do
we eat and drink but Christ? and so do they: The rock, says the Apostle, was
Christ. Secondly, Augustine says so expreslie, that they did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual cup, that we do: Quicunque
in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem, quem nos cibum spirituale^
manducauerunt: de vtilitat. poenitent. cap. 2. They which in the eating of
Manna did understand Christ, did eat the same spiritual meat that we do.
Ergo, Christ was as well present by faith to them in their sacraments, as he
is to us in ours.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE Character or badge, which (as they say) is imprinted in
the soul by the sacraments.
The Papists.
FIrst, there is a certain seal, and spiritual mark or badge, imprinted by
the sacraments, in the souls of the receivers, which can never be blotted
Rhemist. annotat. 2. Cor. 1. sect. 7. Trident. Council. sess. 7. can. 9.
Bellarm. lib. 2. de sacram. cap. 19.

Argum. 2. Corinthians. 1.22. He has sealed us, and given the earnest of the
spirit into our hearts. Likewise, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the spirit of God,
by whom ye are sealed against the day of redemption. This sealing is nothing
else, as they say, but an imprinting in the soul of this indeleble mark or
Character.

Answ. First, the Apostle speaks manifestly of the spiritual and inward
seal of the spirit of God, whereof Baptism is an outward seal in our bodies.
Secondly, it is an absurd thing to hold, that he that has utterly and
maliciously renounced Christianity, and blasphemed Christ himself, should
still retain this Character of Baptism, as a cognizance of his christendom.
Thirdly, Baptism is not reiterable, that is, to be iterated or repeated, not
because it leaves an indeleble character in the mind of the baptized; which is
but a mere devise and fancy: but because, as it suffices once to be borne in
the flesh, so once to be borne again, and to be regenerate by the spirit (of
the which regeneration, Baptism is a seal and pledge) it is sufficient. As
for confirmation, and orders, we acknowledge them to be no sacraments: and
therefore to have no such indeleble character.

The Protestants.
THat by Baptism and some other sacraments, there is imprinted in the soul a
mark or character, which can never be blotted out, no not by Apostasy: and
that this is the cause why Baptism cannot be iterated, we hold it to be a
mere device, and invention of men.

Argum. 1. Where the end and fruits of Baptism are utterly extinguished,
there can not remain any character or badge, or sign of Baptism: The fruits
of Baptism are repentance, and regeneration by the spirit: But it is possible
for these, in some that are baptized, to be utterly lost, as in them that fall
away by Apostasy, they cannot be renewed by repentance, Hebr. 6.6. therefore
in such, there is not to be found any character, badge or sign of Baptism,
which they have utterly renounced: only the memorial thereof is kept before
God, they being so much worse, then they that were never baptized, because they
have wilfully rejected their profession.

Argum. 2. The cause why Baptism is but once to be given, is not, as they
allege, because it leaves such a sure mark behind, so deeply dyed in the
soul, that it cannot be blotted out. There are other causes that come nearer
the truth: 1. As God is but one, who makes a covenant with us in Baptism, and
the faith but one, into the which we are entered by that sacrament: so Baptism
is one and the same, Ephesians. 4.5. 2. The institution of God is another cause,
who has appointed the other sacrament often to be received, 1. Corinthians. 11.25.
but for the iteration of Baptism, we have no such commandment. 3. Baptism
comes in the place of Circumcision: as that was but once administered, so
likewise it must be in the other. 4. In Baptism God makes a perpetual
covenant with us, which he always reme^breth, and therefore need not to be put
in mind, by the often using of that sacrament. These and the like reasons may
be alleged, why Baptism is not often to be required: and not that, which by
them without any ground is pretended.

Augustine is flat against them, for the iteration of confirmation: Manus
impositio non sicut baptismus repeti non potest. Quid enim est aliud, nisi
oration super hominem? The imposition of hands is not as Baptism, never to be
iterated again: for what is it else, but prayer over a man? De baptism. contr.
Donat. lib. 3. cap. 16. Confirmation in his opinion may be iterated, and
therefore imprinteth no such character.

THE FOVRTH PART, OF THE necessity of the sacraments.
THey willingly grant, that no sacraments are absolutely necessary in their
nature, but in respect of the institution and commmandement of God, for he is
as able to work without sacraments, as with them. In this point, we are
agreed: the points of difference are these.

The Papists.
1 THese 3. sacraments are absolutely and simply necessary, as they are
instituted Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacram. cap. 22.

The Protestants.
THough the sacraments being appointed for our comfort, are necessary and
profitable as wholesome means to be used for the increase of our faith, and
much to be desired and sought for: yet God has not laid such a necessity upon
any of them, as that the want of them should cause hazard of salvation. The
thief upon the Cross was saved both without Baptism and Penance: I pray you
what penance did Peter after his thrice denial of Christ, but that he wept
bitterly, and earnestly repented him of his fall? Such repentance we hold to
be necessary, but a sacrament of penance we acknowledge none. So the ordaining
of ministers to preach, is the ordinary means to beget men unto the faith:
yet many have been called without such preaching: as Paul was converted by the
voice of Christ from heaven, Nabuchadnezzar was called by the great miracle of
the preservation of the three children in the fiery oven.

So Augustine says, Vndique vocat nos Deus ad poenitentiam, vocat per
lectorem, vocat per tractatorem, vocat per intimam cogitationem* vocat per
flagellum correptionis, vocat per misericordiam consolationis: God calls us
every way to repentance; he calls, by the reader, by the preacher, by the
inward thought, by the scourge of correction, by the mercy of consolation: in
Psalm. 102. God therefore may call and instruct us by more ways then one, he is
not tied to any.

The Papists.
2 THe sacraments of the new law are necessary to salvation, that is, it is
impossible to obtain the grace of justification, by faith alone, without the
celebrating of the sacraments, sine sacramentis, aut eorum voto, or at least,
having a will, purpose, and desire to celebrate and use them, Council. Trident.
sess. 7. can. 4.

The Protestants.
A Necessity of the sacraments we grant, as also of other profitable means,
as of preaching the word, of prayer, and the like: but no simple or absolute
necessity, as we have said: neither are the sacraments necessary at all,
being ordained for no such use, to be means to apply the grace of
justification unto us: but our justification is only applied and apprehended
by faith, as Saint Paul concludes, Romans 3.28. that a man is justified by faith
only, without works of the law: yea, all works whatsoever are excluded, as
destroying grace, Romans 11. ver. 6. The sacraments are profitable instruments,
to stir up the gift of faith and other graces in us, but not by their proper
work to justify us.

De tempor. sermon. 53.
Augustine says: Primo fides catholica Christiano necessaria est, per ipsam
renascimur in baptismate, and salutem aeternam impetramus: First of al, the
catholic faith is necessary for a Christian, by the which in Baptism we are
borne again, and obtain eternal salvation. He says not that Baptism, but
that faith is necessary, and that it is faith which gives life to the
sacrament: it works not by it own proper act.

THE THIRD QVESTION OF THE number and order of the sacraments.
THE FIRST PART, OF the number.
The Papists.
THeir general sentence and opinion is this, that there are seven sacraments,
Council. Trid. sess. 7. can. 1.

Argum. The number of seven is mystical, prophetical, perfect: the Prophet
commanded Naaman to wash himself seven times, 2. King. 4. The Altar must be
cleansed seven days, Exodus 29.37. Job offered seven bullocks and seven rams
for his friends, Job 42. So in the Apocalypse. 7. Churches, 7. Angels, 7.
stars, 7. Candlesticks, 7. thunders, and the like: And why not also seven
sacraments? Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 26. Rhemist. annot. Apocal. 1. sect. 3.

Answ. First, the number of seven is sometime applied, to describe mysteries of
wickedness, as well as of godliness: As the beast with seven heads, Apoc.
17.8. is called a mystery, or as your vulgar Latin has it, a sacrament. And
with greater reason may we conclude, that this beast with seven heads, is
Antichrist, with his seven Popish sacraments: then you out of Naamans seven
times washing, can pick out seven sacraments. But if you will needs make a
mystery of seven: it may as well be a mystery of iniquity as of godliness,
even the mystery of the beast with seven heads, as we have said. Secondly,
what though the number of seven, and of some other numbers, be sometime
mystical and significatiue, when it pleases the Lord in his word so to
apply and appoint them? does it therefore follow, that men upon their own
heads, may superstitiously apply numbers to sacraments, prayers, fastings,
times, as though there were any religion in numbers, or that the Lord had the
rather respect unto such things because of the number?

The Protestants.
THis word or name, Sacrament, may be taken two ways: first, generally for
any mystical sign or symbol, which may represent an holy thing: and so we
will grant, that there may be not only seven Sacraments, but seven and
seven: which are more properly symboles and signs, then sacraments: As the
covering of the head in the woman is a symbol of subjection, 1. Cor. 11.10.
the Sabbath day a symbol or sacrament of the heavenly rest, Heb. 4. In this
sense Augustine calls the mystery of the Trinity a sacrament: yea he
says, the sacrament of fire, because therein in some sort, by the undivided
and inseparable properties thereof, the heat, light, De symbol. lib. 3. cap. 9.
and shyning brightness, the Trinity, says he, is shadowed forth. Wherefore
every sign or symbol of a holy thing, that has a spiritual signification,
either found in scripture, or devised by men, is not by and by a sacrament.

Secondly, if we will take a sacrament in the strict and proper sense, there
are especially three things required thereunto: First, that they do not only
signify, but exhibit and represent unto us after a lively manner, the
spiritual things which are signified. Secondly, they must have the institution
and perpetual commandment of Christ. Thirdly, the sacraments of the new law
must succeed in the place of the old. Hereupon we will infer, that there
are but two sacraments in the new Testament, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Argum. 1. These two alone are not only signs of heavenly things, but seals
and pledges unto us thereof, whereby our faith is strengthened, and our hope
confirmed in the promises of God: as the remission of sins is represented in
Baptism, Act. 2.38. the death of Christ showed forth in the Eucharist, 1. Corinthians. 11.26. The like commendation is not given of any other of their
sacraments.

Argum. 2. Christ only commanded these two sacraments to be used for ever in
his Church: to such spiritual purposes, as Baptism is instituted and
commanded, Math. 28.19. the Lords Supper likewise, Math. 26. Many other
ceremonies Christ used himself, as lifting up of hands, the tempering of clay
and spittle, his Apostles imposition of hands, and anointing with oil: But he
has not laid his commandment upon these ceremonies, enioyning us perpetually
to keep them* as he has charged us with the other two.

Argum. 3. The sacraments of the new Testament succeed in the room of them
of the old: Baptism stands in stead of Circumcision, the Lords Supper is
come in place of the Paschal Lamb. But they cannot show what old sacraments,
those five other newly invented, confirmation, orders, penance, matrimony,
extreme unction, do succeed and supply: Ergo, they are none. And beside, if
all these should be sacraments, and so seven in all: we should have more in
number then the Jews had, which is not to be admitted: for they had but two
ordinary sacraments, Circumcision and the Paschall Lamb: two extraordinary,
as their baptism in the red sea and the cloud, and their eating of the Manna,
and drinking of the rock, 1. Corin. 10.2.3. So they should have but four
sacraments, for your seven. Other legal rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices they
had, and many typical shadows and significations, but no more sacraments then
we have heard.

Augustine yields to have no more sacraments then only two: As Eua was made
out of Adams side as he was asleep: Sic ex latere domini dormientis in cruce
manauerunt sacramenta, ex quibus formaretur ecclesia: So out of the Lords side
sleeping upon the cross, the sacraments of the Church issued: that is, water
and blood: by the which he understands the two sacraments.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE order and degree of the sacraments among them selves.
The Papists.
Council. Trident. sess. 7. can. 3. In diverse respects one sacrament may excel
another, as Baptism excels the rest, because of remission of sins thereby
effected, or, as we say, represented. Orders excel, in respect of the
minister, because they are only, say they, conferred by a Bishop. Matrimony
excels, in respect of the signification, the conjunction of Christ and his
Church. But simply the Eucharist exceeds all, because of the substance of the
sacrament, the real and bodily presence of Christ. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 28.

Answer. First, that Baptism and the Eucharist exceed all the other, we do
easily admit; for we hold them to be no sacraments: and therefore we stand not
upon their several privileges. Secondly, neither Baptism is more excellent
then the Lords Supper, because it represents the remission of sins: for
that also is insinuated in the other: for how can we show forth the Lords
death, which is done in that sacrament, unless we call to mind the benefits
purchased by his death, as remission of sins? Neither does the Eucharist go
beyond Baptism, in regard of a more full presence of Christ: for he is not
otherwise present in one sacrament, then in the other, presenting himself in
both spiritually to be apprehended of the worthy receiver: as for that carnal
and gross presence of the body of Christ in the sacrament, we acknowledge
none: as afterward it shall more fully appear, when we come in order to that
question.

Augustine shows, that Christ is no otherwise present in the Eucharist, then
in the preaching of the word, for the manner of his presence: Eucharistia panis
noster quotidianus est, and quod vobis tracto, panis quotidianus est, De
diverse. sermon. 9.
and quod in ecclesia lectiones quotidie auditis, panis quotidianus est: the
Eucharist or sacrament of thanksgiving is our daily bread, that which I handle
and preach to you, is our daily bread, that which you hear read daily in the
Church, is our daily bread. If Christ then be no more really present in the
sacrament then in the word, what is become of the preeminence, that the one
sacrament in that respect should have above the other?

The Protestants.
THat the one sacrament should be so much extolled above the other, namely, the
Lords Supper to be preferred before Baptism, as the more worthy and excellent
sacrament, we find no such thing in the word of God: but that both of them are
of like dignity in themselves, and to be had equally and indifferently in most
high account: thus it is proved.

Argum. 1 They are both commanded and instituted by the same authority of our
Lord Jesus Christ: neither is one by the first institution advanced above the
other. Secondly, there is the same matter and substance of both sacraments,
Christ Jesus with all his benefits. Thirdly, one and the same end of them
both, which is the increase and strengthening of our faith in the promises of
God: Ergo, they are both of equal dignity and worthynes.

Let them say now, which is the more worthy thing, Baptism, or the word
preached: no doubt, they will prefer Baptism: for they hold that the
sacraments do give grace by the work wrought, and so does not the word: yea,
they are offended, because we say, that the sacraments are no otherways
instruments of our justification, then the word preached is, but that the one
works by the hearing, the other by the senses of seeing, handling, tasting:
but they all serve to one end, namely, to beget and increase faith in us. This
our assertion they utterly mislike, Bellarm. lib. 2. de sacram. cap. 2. Whereby
it appears, that they prefer Baptism before the word. We then thus reason
out of Augustine: He thus writes: Dicite mihi, quid plus videtur vobis, verbum
dei, an corpus Christi? respondere debetis, quod non sit minus verbum dei: Tell
me, which is the chiefer in your opinion, the word of God or the body of
Christ? (and that is the sacrament of his body:) ye must answer, that the word
of God is not inferior: Homil. 26. Hence we frame this argument: The word of
God is equivalent to the sacrament of the Lords body: Baptism is equivalent
to the word of God, by our adversaries own confession. Ergo, also it is of
equal value and dignity, with the other sacrament.

THE TWELFTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM.
THis controversy stands upon diverse questions: 1. Of the name and
definition of Baptism. Secondly, of the parts of Baptism. Thirdly, of the
necessity of Baptism. Fourthly, of the Minister of Baptism. Fifthly, of the
parties which are to be baptized. Sixthly, of the effects of Baptism.
Seventhly, of the difference of Christ's Baptism and John's. Eighthly, of the
ceremonies of Baptism.

THE FIRST QVESTION OF THE NAME and definition of Baptism.
COncerning the name, there is no question between us, for the name of
Baptism has the original and beginning from the scripture: Saint Paul uses
this word, Coloss. 2.12. We are buried with him through Baptism. And again,
Heb. 6.2. All the question is about the definition of Baptism.

The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Baptism. cap. 1.

The Protestants.
WE rather, according to the scriptures, define baptism, to be a sign or
seal of our regeneration and new birth, whereby we are assured, that as
verily by faith in the blood of Christ we are cleansed from our sins, as our
bodies are washed with water, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
So that Baptism does not actually bestow remission of sins by the work
wrought, but is a pledge and seal of the righteousness of faith, as Saint
Paul says of Circumcision: Romans 4.11. for it is not the washing of the flesh
by water, but the establishing of the heart with faith and grace, that saves
us, 1. Pet. 3.21. See this point handled more at large, Controuers. 11. next
before, quest. 2. part. 1.

Augustine says, Per fidem renascimur in baptismate: by faith we are borne
again in Baptism, De tempor. sermon. 53. It is then the proper act of faith, to
regenerate us, not of Baptism, the use and end whereof, is to strengthen and
increase our faith.

THE SECOND QVESTION OF THE PARTS, which are the matter and form of Baptism.
AS touching the matter, that is, the external element used in Baptism, there
is no question between us, but that it ought to be plain and common water,
Act. 10.47. Saint Peter says, Can any man forbid water, that these should not
be baptized? Wherefore we condemn the foolish and ungodly practices and
inventions of heretics, that either exclude water altogether, as the
Manichees, with others; or do use any other element, as the Iacobites, that in
stead of water, burned them, that were to be baptized, with a whot iron: or as
the Aethiopians, which are called Abissines, Bez. Matthew. 3. verse. 11.
that used fire in stead of water: misconstruing the words of the Gospel,
Matthew. 2.11. That Christ should baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire:
which is not literally to be understood, but thereby is signified the
internal and forceable working of the spirit, which kindles zeal and love
in our hearts as fire.

Concerning the form of Baptism: we all agree, that no other is to be used,
then that prescribed by our Savior Christ: to baptize in the name of the
Father, the Son, and holy Ghost: that it is neither lawful to change this
form in sense, as many heretics have done, nor yet in words, as to leave out
any of the three persons in Trinity, and inclusiuely to understand them by
naming of one: for whereas some allege that place, Act. 2.38. Be ye
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins; to prove, that
it is lawful only in the name of Christ to baptize, we are to understand,
that the form of Baptism is not in that place expressly set down, but the
scope only and end of Baptism, which is to assure us of remission of sins
in the name of Christ, as Beza very well notes upon that place. The point of
difference between us, concerning the form of Baptism is this.

The Papists.
THey are bold to affirm, that this form of Baptism, to baptize in the name
Matthew. 28. may be understood thus: to baptize them into the faith of the
Trinity, or by the authority of the Trinity. And it were sufficient, by
those words, to do and perform it in act, without saying the words; were it
not, that we have otherwise learned by tradition, that this very form of
words is to be kept, Bellarmine de baptism. lib. 1. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
WE need no tradition for this matter; the very form which is to be used in
Baptism, is plainly proved out of the Scriptures: for that commandment of
Christ, Go and baptize, etc. does necessarily imply a form of speech to be
used. We grant, that in the Scriptures, this word (name,) is taken for power,
virtue, authority, as Act. 3.6. In the name of Jesus arise and walk. So also,
as there is a Baptism with water, there may be a baptizing with fire, Matthew.
3.11. Wherefore if part of the commandment be to be taken properly and
literally, as this, Go and baptize, why not the rest also, In the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost? If then the whole commandment be properly and
plainly understood: how can they baptize in the name of the Trinity, unless
the Trinity be spoken and named?

Secondly, it appears also out of other places of Scripture, that this form
was used in the Apostles time: As Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water, why
these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as
we? As if Saint Peter should have reasoned thus: these have received the
gifts of the holy Ghost: Ergo, they may be also baptized in the name of the
holy Ghost. Likewise, Act. 19.2. When the brethren at Ephesus had answered
Paul, that they had not heard, whether there were a holy Ghost: he says unto
them, Unto what then were you baptized? By this interrogatorie it appears, it
was their manner to baptize in the name of the holy Ghost, and so consequently
of the whole Trinity. We have no cause then to fly unto tradition, this
matter being so plainly decided by the Scripture.

Augustine. tract. in Iohann 80. Upon those words of our Savior, John 15.3.
You are clean thorough the word, which I have spoken unto you. Detrahe verbum,
and quid est aqua, nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad elementum, and fit sacramentum.
Take away the word, and what remains in Baptism but bare water? let the word
be joined to the element, and it makes a Sacrament. The form then of
Baptism, is the word, which Christ spoke: and where else speaks Christ, but
in the scriptures? Ergo the form of Baptism, is the word of Christ,
prescribed and commanded in the scriptures. Away therefore with your uncertain
and deceitful traditions. Our Baptism is builded upon a surer foundation:
namely, the word of God.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF THE necessity of Baptism.
The Papists.
THey affirm, that Baptism is simply necessary to salvation by Gods
appointment: Council. Trident. sess. 7. can. 7. Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptism.
cap. 4.

Argum. John 3.5. Our savior Christ says, Unless a man be borne of water
and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD: Ergo it is
necessary to salvation to be baptized. Bellarm. ibid. Rhemist. in hunc locum.

Ans. First, it is not necessary by water here to understand material water,
but the purifying grace of Christ, which is called the water of life, John.
4.11. Water then is here added as an Epithete of the spirit, because it
cleanses and purges as water: as John 7.38. He that believes, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of waters of life. Quid aqua sit, says Augustine,
euangelium interroga. Inquire of the Gospel, what this water is. Then it
follows, Tract. in Epistol. Iohann. 6.
verse. 39. This spoke he of the spirit, which they that believed in him,
should receive. By water then it is no rare thing, to understand the spirit.
Secondly, Why may not water be here figuratively taken, to express the
working of the spirit, as fire is added to the spirit, Matthew. 3.11. He shall
baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. What greater necessity is there in
this place, to understand water literally, then fire in the other?

Thirdly, as you expound these words of Baptism, so ye do apply another
place, John 6.53. to the other Sacrament: Unless you do eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. If this be
spoken of the Sacramental eating and drinking of Christ, as the Rhemists take
it: then belike there is as great necessity of the Eucharist, as of Baptism:
and so indeed Augustine sometime thought, Cont. 1. Epistol. Pelag. lib. 4. cap
4.
that the one was as necessary to salvation as the other. Sine Christi carne
and sanguine, nec paruuli vitam habere possunt in semetipsis. Without the flesh
and blood of Christ, neither can infants have life in themselves. And therefore
it was the custom of those times, to give of the Sacrament to children:
Paruulis adhuc and infirmis, In Psalm. 64.
stillantur quaedam de sacramentis: some part of the Sacrament is instilled and
powered into the mouths of young and tender children.

But our adversaries in no wise will admit that the Eucharist is as necessary
as Baptism: wherefore they do thus comment upon our Saviors words: that
they also do eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, which join in
heart and desire to be partakers of the Sacrament, and so mystically, and
spiritually do receive it, Rhemist. John 6. sect. 8. And why, I pray you, may
there not be as well a mystical and spiritual receiving of Baptism without
the Sacrament, as of the Eucharist or Lords Supper, seeing this place, John.
6.53. does as necessarily enforce the receiving of this Sacrament, as that
place, John 3.5. does lay a necessity of Baptism?

The Protestants.
We acknowledge no greater necessity in Baptism, then in the other
Sacrament: both which we grant to be necessary as helps and proppes, and
profitable means to increase our faith: but not so simply necessary, as that
without them (there being no neglect, or contempt had of them) it were
impossible to be saved.

Argum. 1. The children of the faithful are holy already, even before they are
baptized: for they are within the covenant, and to them also belongs the
promise. The Lord says, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genes.
17.7. And Saint Paul says, that the children of the faithful are holy, 1. Corinthians. 7.14. If the Lord then be the God also of children, and if they be
holy, being borne of the righteous seed, how can they possibly perish,
although they die unbaptized?

Argum. 2. Circumcision was as necessary to the Israelites* as Baptism is to
us: but their children, which died before the eight day, when they were to be
circumcised, perished not: for David doubts not to say of his child that died
the seventh day, I shall go to him, he cannot return to me, 1. Sam 12.18.23.
He pronounces that the child was saved. Ergo, neither children dying without
Baptism now are condemned.

Argum. 3. The holy Ghost may be given without Baptism, so it be not
contemned and neglected, when it may be had: therefore life eternal may be had
without Baptism: for the holy Ghost is able without the sacrament, to
regenerate us, and bring us to eternal life.

The first is proved, Act. 10.47. Who can forbid water, that these should not
be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? They had the
holy Ghost before and without Baptism, as Augustine says, Adhuc loquente
Petro, Homil. 23.
non dico nondum imponente manum, sed nondum baptizante, venit spiritus
sanctus: While Peter yet spoke, before he laid on his hand, or Baptized them,
the holy Ghost came: Ergo Baptism not necessary.

Argum. 4. You your selves make two exceptions: of Martyrs and them that do
penance, which may be saved without Baptism: Ergo Baptism is not simply
necessary. And if our Savior speak of Baptism, John 3.5. as ye say he
does: there is no privilege for any, no not for Martyrs, for all must be
borne of water and the spirit: that is, say you, baptized. Neither are your
two exceptions general enough: for the thief upon the cross was saved, and
yet neither died a Martyr: for he himself confesses, that he was righteously
punished, Luke 23.41. neither did he any such penance, or made any such
satisfaction, as you require.

AN APPENDIX, WHETHER THE want of Baptism may be by any other means supplied.
The Papists.
Our adversaries make three kinds of Baptism, Baptismum fluminis, baptismum
the Baptism of water, the Baptism of blood, which is Martyrdom, and the
Baptism of the spirit, which is contrition and penance: by these two, the
first, say they, may be supplied.

They affirm, that Martyrdom, and penance or contrition, do by the very act
or work wrought remit sins, and justify the workers, and not in respect of
the faith only, which is in Martyrs or penitent persons. Bellar. cap. 6. lib.
1. de baptism.

Argum. The Innocents, which were slain by Herod, were saved only by their
Martyrdom, they had neither faith, nor works. So the thief upon the Cross
was not only justified by his faith, but by the act and work of contrition.

Ans. First, it is not necessary to hold all those children to be Martyrs, and
so to be saved: for Macrobius writes, that one of Herod's sons, which was
nursed in those parts, was slain among the rest: the infants which were saved,
were within the promise, and belonged to the covenant, and so could not be
lost: their salvation depended of their free election before God, it was not
purchased by the very act of their dying.

Secondly, the thief also upon the Cross was justified by his faith and
belief in Christ. And therefore Augustine does chiefly commend his faith:
Tunc fides eius de ligno floruit, quando discipulorum emarcuit: Then his faith
did as it were bud and flourish out of the tree of the cross, when the faith
of the Disciples withered.

The Protestants.
NEither the outward work of Martyrdom nor contrition do justify, or give
remission of sins: but the faith only of Martyrs and penitent persons,
whereby they apprehend Christ.

Argum. 1. Saint Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 13.3. That if a man give his body to
be burned, and have no love, it profits not. Ergo it is not the outward act
of Martyrdom, but an effectual and lively faith working by love, which
pleases God.

Argum. 2. Neither is the bare work of sorrow and contrition in it self
acceptable to God: for there is a worldly repentance that causes death, there
is a godly repentance not to be repented of, which works in us care, zeal,
fear, desire, which are the fruits of faith, 2. Corinthians. 7.10.11. Ergo it is
faith only that makes all our works to be accepted of before God: for
without faith, it is impossible to please him, Hebr. 11.6.

The Papists.
2. Martyrdom and contrition or conversion of the heart unto GOD, Bellarm.
ibid.

Argum. Martyrdom in the scriptures is rightly called a Baptism: as Christ
speaking of his death, says, I must be baptized with a Baptism, Luke 12.50.
And therefore it may fitly stand in stead of Baptism.

Ans. If every thing, that has the name of Baptism, may be used in place
thereof; then add unto your number of such devised supplies, the Pharisaicall
washing of cups, for they are called baptismata calicum, the Baptismes, or
clensings of cups, Mark. 7.4.

The Protestants.
WE need not any such supplies to make good the want of Baptism, neither is
it safe so to do.

1. It is great presumption and boldness, without warrant of Gods word, to give
the effect and blessing, which God has annexed to the Sacraments, to any other
external work: for what is this else, but to institute other Sacraments, then
Christ left? And shall we not think, that God by his spirit can better
supply the loss and the want of the Sacraments, then we by our own
inventions can help our selves?

2. Concerning contrition of the heart, if you understand by it true
repentance, and withal a vow and true desire to receive the Sacrament of
Baptism, which cannot be obtained because of some remediless necessity:
that in such a case it stands as auailable, as if a man had been actually
Baptized: for thus the Rhemists expound themselves, annot. John 3.2. I pray
you what greater necessity is there now of Baptism, then of the other
Sacrament? For this is true, and we willingly grant: that every man that shall
be saved, must either receive the Sacraments, or have a desire unto them: for
the neglect and contempt of the Sacraments without repentance is a sin
damnable. And thus you overthrow your selves, making Baptism necessary
without necessity.

De animae origin. lib 1 cap. 9.
3. Augustine admits none of these supplies, but only Martyrdom: Nemo fit
membrum Christi, nisi aut Baptismate Christi, aut morte pro Christo: No man is
made the member of Christ, but either by the Baptism of Christ, or in dying
for Christ: here Augustine makes but one supply of Baptism, they make two.
When men follow their own inventions, there can be no agreement.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, WHETHER women and Laymen ought to baptize.
The Papists.
eBllarm. cap. 7.

Argum. Exodus 4. Zipporah circumcised her son, and the Lord was pleased
therewith, and went away from Moses, whom he came against to have slain him.
Ergo women may as well now minister Baptism.

Ans. First, there is not the like strict necessity of Baptism, as there was
then of Circumcision: for if every man child were not circumcised the eight
day, the Lord threatened to cut him off from among the people, Genes. 17.14. But
Baptism is not tied or limited to any such time or number of days. Secondly,
there was great necessity, which enforced Zipporah to circumcise her child:
for they had neglected the time, and passed the stint of days: wherefore the
Lord struck Moses with sickness: and being not able himself to perform that
duty, his wife in great haste takes the child and cutteth him, to save her
husbands life: but she in great indignation cast away the foreskin from her,
knowing that she was constrained to commit an unwomanly act. There cannot be
any such necessity of Baptism, as there was then of Circumcision; which was
to be done within a certain compass of days. Thirdly, you may as well prove by
this example, that a woman may baptize, the Bishop, Priest, or Deacon standing
by (which notwithstanding you hold utterly unlawful) as that it is lawful for
her to baptize: For Zipporah did it in the presence of Moses.

The Protestants.
NEither lay men, of what calling soever, nor yet Midwiues, or any other women,
ought to be suffered in a well reformed Church to baptize infants: neither are
they authorized so to do amongst us.

Argum. 1. The commission and charge to baptize, was given only by our savior
Christ to his Apostles, and all lawful Ministers their successors, Matthew.
28.19. Ergo, Lay men and women, in baptizing, go beyond the commission of
Christ.

Argum. 2. The preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, are
and ought always to be joined together. And the care and charge of both is
committed to Pastors and Ministers lawfully ordained: Go, says our Savior,
and teach all nations, baptizing them, Matthew. 28.19. But it is not lawful for
women to preach the word, 1. Corinthians. 14. verse. 35. Ergo not to baptize.

Argum. 3 If it be lawful for such to baptize, it is only in the time of
necessity: but there is no such necessity, as we have showed of Baptism.
Ergo, it is not at all lawful for them.

Augustines judgment is this: if a Lay man do give Baptism: Nescio an pie
quis dixerit esse repetendum: I cannot tell, whether it may well be iterated
or repeated. He does not allow Lay men to baptize: but is of opinion, that
they are not to be baptized again, that receive Baptism at their hands. Yet
he speaks vncertainelie, (I cannot tell says he) and so we will conclude
with Augustine, Lib. 2 cont. Parmen. cap. 13.
Si Laicus baptismum dederit, nulla cogente necessitate, alieni muneris
vsurpatio est. If a Lay man do baptize, where there is no necessity, it is an
usurping of another man's office. But there is no such necessity to cause him
so to do: Ergo.

THE FIFTH QVESTION, OF SVCH AS are to be admitted to baptism. Of the Baptism
of Infants. part. 1.
THat infants are to be baptized, it is fully agreed and concluded between
us. Which point we do strongly maintain by the Scriptures against the
Anabaptists of our age. But herein we dissent from our adversaries.

The Papists.
Bellarmine lib. 4. de verbo dei. cap. 9.

The Protestants.
IT were very hard, if we had no more certain ground for the baptizing of
infants, then tradition, which is but a feeble weapon to fight against
heretics withal: we have manifest proofs out of Scripture for it.

First, they belong unto the covenant: Genes. 17. I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed: Ergo they have right to the sign of the covenant.

Secondly, they are called holy, which are borne of faithful parents, 1. Cor.
7.14. Ergo, are not to be denied Baptism.

Thirdly, they are redeemed by the blood of Christ, who died for all the
children of God, John 11.52. To them belongs the kingdom of God: Ergo also
Baptism, which is a pledge of remission of sins and eternal life.

Fourthly, it is also proved by the practice of the Apostles, who baptized
whole families, with all that thereunto belonged, Act 16.33.

Fifthly, Augustine also proves it out of Scripture, by comparing our Baptism
with the circumcision of the Jews: De baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Veraciter coni^cere possumus, quid valeat in paruulis baptismi sacramentum, ex
circumcisione carnis, quam prior populus accepit. How auailable Baptism is in
little ones, we may guess by the circumcision, which the former people in the
law received. Ergo not only by tradition, but chiefly by Scripture the
lawfulnes of childrens Baptism is confirmed.

The Papists.
2. Baptism, they say, gives grace and faith to the infant that had none
before, Rhemist. Galath. 3. sect. 6. This then is their opinion, that infants,
though actually and fully they have not faith, as other have, yet there is a
certain habit of faith and hope infused into them in Baptism, so that partly
they do believe of themselves, and partly by the faith of others, namely of
them that bring them to Baptism, Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptism. cap. 11.

Argum. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Romans 3.28. We
hold that a man is justified by faith. Ergo children, if they have no faith,
are neither justified, neither yet do please God, Bellarm.

Ans. First these places do as well prove that children have an absolute,
perfect, and actual faith: (for it is a perfect faith that justifies us, and
makes us acceptable to God) which I am sure our adversaries will not yield
unto. Secondly, the justification and salvation of children depends of the
free election of God, Romans 9.11. And that which faith works, in those that
are of understanding, the spirit of God is able to effect in infants, by some
secret way, best known to himself.

The Protestants.
THat infants neither have faith in themselves, nor yet are profited or
furthered to their salvation by the faith of others, it is thus proved.

Argum. 1. Saint Paul says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God, Romans 10.17. But infants can neither hear nor understand the word of
God: Ergo, no faith is wrought in them.

Argum. 2. There is no habitual or potentiall faith that pleases God: but the
justifying faith is always actual, working by love, Galath. 5.6. Ergo,
children have either no faith, or it must needs be an actual or working
faith.

Argum. 3. Infants are not justified, nor relieved or helped forward toward
their salvation by the faith of their parents, or Godfathers, when they are
baptized: for the Scripture says, The just shall live by faith, Romans 1.17.
that is, by his own faith, not the faith of another.

Augustine denies that children are illuminate in their minds, when they are
baptized: Si illuminati essent, ipsum baptismum laeti susciperent, cui videmus
eos cum magnis fletibus reluctari: If they were illuminate, they would
joyfully receive Baptism, which we see them to strive against with great
crying. And why should the Apostle say, Be ye not children in understanding,
De pecca. merit and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 26.
1. Corinthians. 14.20. if so be their minds were illuminate? Wherefore that
saying in the Gospel, says he, This is the light that lights every one
that comes into the world, John 1.9. Whereby they would prove, that children
do receive light at their very first coming into the world, is thus to be
understood, Quia nullus hominum illuminatur, nisi lumine illo veritatis,
because no man is lightened, but only by that light. What now is become of
that lumen fidei, the light of faith, which you say is infused into children in
Baptism.

AN APPENDIX, OF THE POpish use in baptizing of Bells.
The Papists.
Bellarmine flatly denies, that bells are baptized amongst them: but they are
only consecrate and hallowed for divine uses, as other Church vessels are, lib.
4. de Roman pontific. cap. 12.

The Protestants.
IT is a great shame for them, to deny so manifest a thing. For in the
halowing of bells, first, there were Godfathers chosen, secondly, they gave
names to the bells: thirdly, the bells had new garments put upon them, as is
accustomed to be done to Christians in their Baptism. Fourthly, the baptizing
of bells was only permitted to the Bishops suffragane, whereas their Priests
and Deacons did usually baptize infants: all this shows, that it was not
only a Baptism, which they bestowed upon bells, but in a more principal
kind, then common Baptism was. This was one of the greeuances, which the
Princes of Germany complained of in the assembly at Noremberge, Fox Martyrol.
p. 861. col. 1. edition. 4.
that the suffraganes exacted of the people such great sums of money for the
baptizing of bells: with what face then, can they deny this ungodly custom of
theirs, in Christening and baptizing of bells?

THE SIXTH QVESTION, OF THE effects and fruits of Baptism.
THe parts of this question are these: first, whether our sins are wholly
remitted, and clean taken away in Baptism. Secondly, whether Baptism serves
only for the remission of sins that are past. Thirdly, of the liberties and
privileges, which are obtained by Baptism: which parts are now severally to
be handled.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER IN Baptism our sins be clean taken away.
The Papists.
THe sins which are past, they affirm, not only by the grace of Christ Et
tolli omne illud, quod veram habet and propriam rationem peccati: And all that
wholly to be taken away, which has the nature and quality of sin, Council.
Trident sess. 5. Decret. de original. peccat.
For the concupiscence or original sin, remaining after Baptism, is now no
more to be called sin. In infants then newly baptized, there is neither
mortal nor venial sin, Rhemist. 1. John. 1. sect. 5.

Argum. The Scripture says, Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the world, Ioh 1.29. Christ does sanctify and cleanse his Church by
the washing of water, through the word. Ergo, by remission, sins clean taken
away, Rhemist. Romans 4. sect. 7. Ephesians. 5.26.


Ans. First, if sin in baptism were wholly removed, not only the guilt, but
the very stain and blot of sin: how comes it to pass, that many which are
baptized, do fall afterward into deadly sins, yea there is no man, that
lives without sin? If sin once have been utterly expelled and banished out
of the flesh, how comes it in again? if their justification have once
clearly rid them from sin, how can they be subject to it again? for the
grace of justification, being once obtained, can never be lost: the gifts of
God are without repentance. Romans 11.29.

2. The Scripture is true, that Christ by his blood, cleanses, washes, takes
away our sins: not by actually purging us from all corruption, but in freely
acquiting and discharging of us before God, both of the guilt and punishment of
sin: so the Scripture says, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven,
and to whom the Lord imputes no sin, Romans 4.7.8. Our sins therefore may be
truly forgiven, though some corruption of sin do still remain in us.

The Protestants.
THere are three things to be considered in sin. First, the stain or blot,
corruption or remnant of sin in us. Secondly, the guilt, fault, and offense
of sin. Thirdly, the punishment and stipend due unto it. By our spiritual
washing in the blood of Christ, whereof Baptism is a seal, both the guilt and
punishment of our sins are not only hid and covered in Gods sight (as our
adversaries do falsely charge us to say:) but they are truly forgiven us for
Christ's sake, and shall never be remembered any more. But yet there is left in
us some remnant of sin so long as we live in this flesh, which in the end
together with the corruption and mortality of the body, shall be clean
taken away.

Argum. 1. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us, 1. John. 1.8. Ergo, there are none living at any time void of
sin, no not in their Baptism. Saint Paul also exhorts to be renewed in
mind, and to put on the new man, and put off the old, Ephesians. 4.23. Ergo, there
remains some sin and corruption after Baptism: what need else this
renewing of the mind, and putting on the new man afterward?

Argum. 2. Original sin is not taken away in Baptism, therefore some sin
remains still: And that this original corruption is properly called sin
and is sin indeed, S. Paul shows evidently, Romans 7. ver. 7, 8. where he
names lust and concupiscence sin.

Augustine thus writes, Meminisse debemus peccatorum omnium plenam remissionem
fieri in Baptismo, Cont. Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 2^.
hominis vero qualitatem non totam continuo mutari: We must remember, that all
our sins are fully remitted in Baptism: but the quality of man (that is the
corruption, and stain or blot of sin) is not wholly changed.

THE SECOND PART: WHETHER Baptism serve only for remission of sins past,
and not for the sins also to come.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Heb. 10. sect. 4. The council of Trent holds them accursed, that
think all sins to be forgiven, fide Baptismi suscepti, by faith of Baptism
received, sess. 7. can. 10.

Hereupon their saying arises, that Baptismus est prima tabula post
naufragium: that Baptism is the first board of refuge after shipwreck: and
Poenitentia est secunda tabula post naufragium: penance is the second board of
refuge: So that if a man do fall after Baptism, he must use other helps and
means for the remission of sins: for Baptism is not available for sins
afterward committed, Bellarm. cap. 18.

Argum. It is impossible, says the Apostle, for them that have been once
lightened, and tasted of the heavenly grace, if they fall away, to be renewed
by penance, Heb. 6.6. that is, they which fall away from faith and grace, after
Baptism, cannot be baptized again, or be illuminated, or renouated, by so
easy a cleansing of sins, as the Sacrament of Baptism did yield: Ergo,
Baptism is not available for remission of sins, which men fall into
afterward, Bellarm. cap. 18.

Ans. The Apostle speaks not of this or that kind of Repentance, but
generally of all, showing, that there is no hope of remission nor grace to
repent left for those which fall into the grievous sin of Apostasy, which
he here describes, for they crucify again the Son of God, and make a
mock of him, ver. 6. And that the Apostle understands the sin of Apostasy,
and the sin against the holy Ghost, it appears by comparing that other
place, Heb. 10.29. with this: for there they are said, to tread under foot the
son of God, and to despite the spirit of grace. The Apostle then cutteth off
such from all hope of grace, and repentance: not only barreth them from some
special kind of repentance.

The Protestants.
THe external act of Baptism neither wipeth away sins going before, or
coming after: but it is the inward working of the spirit of God, which by the
virtue of Christ's death, testified and showed forth in Baptism, that washes
away our sins. And Baptism is a seal of remission of sins, for the
confirmation of our faith, even of those which are committed after Baptism, as
well as of sins done before: and although the ceremony of Baptism be not
repeated, yet the virtue of Gods spirit testified thereby, remains to our
lives end.

Argum. 1. Mark. 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.
We reason thus, Baptism is a seal of that faith, whereby men are saved, or
to the which salvation is promised: but that faith believes remission of all
sins, both past and to come: therefore Baptism also seals unto us the
remission of all our sins, going before or following after.

Argum. 2. Baptism is a sign and seal of our mystical washing in the blood
of Christ: But all our sins both before and after are washed away by the
blood of Christ: Ergo, Baptism does assure us of a perfect remission of all our
sins.

So says Augustine: Eodem lauacro regenerationis, and verbo sanctificationis,
omnia prorsus mala hominum regeneratorum sanantur, etiam quae posterius humana
ignorantia aut infirmitate committuntur. By the same lauer of regeneration, and
word of Sanctification, all the sins in men regenerate are healed, yea even
those, which by humane ignorance afterward are committed: Non vt baptisma,
quoties peccatur, toties repetatur, sed quia ipso, quod semel datur, fit, vt
non solum antea, verum etiam postea quorumlibet peccatorum venia fidelibus
impetretur. Not that Baptism, so often as a man sins, is to be repeated: but
by virtue of that which is once given, it comes to pass, that the faithful
have remission of their sins not only before, but also after. Ergo, Baptism
has it force not only for the present, but it reaches unto the time
following.

THE THIRD PART OF THE LIBERTY and privileges obtained by Baptism.
The Papists.
1. THey have defined, that a man, by Baptism, is not only debtor fidei, not
only a debtor of the faith, but is made a debtor to perform the whole law of
Christ, Council. Trident. sess. 8. can. 7. that is, Baptism is not only a
sign of free justification by faith, neither does he which is baptized
profess himself only by faith to be justified, Bellar. lib. 1 de baptis.
cap. 15.
but partly also by his works, and the keeping of the commandments of Christ.

The Protestants.
Ans. IN Baptism we make profession of our obedience, to die unto sin, and
rise up to newnes of life, Romans 6.2. yet not thereby to be justified: but in
being baptized we show our faith and hope, only to look for remission of
sins and salvation of our souls by the death of Christ.

Argum. 1. Circumcision, in place whereof Baptism is given to us, is called by
the Apostle a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4 11. not of the
righteousness of works: much more then is Baptism, which is a Sacrament of the
Gospel, a pledge unto us of the justice of faith.

Argum. 2. By Baptism we are freed from the curse of the law: for it is a
Sacrament of the death of Christ, and of all the benefits thereof: and Christ
by his death has borne for us the curse of the law, Galath. 3.13. But if by
Baptism we bind our selves to the observance of the law, to be justified
and find life thereby, we must needs fall into the curse, because we are not
able to keep the commandments. Wherefore seeing Baptism delivers us from
the curse, it also exempteth us from the works of the law.

The Papists.
Bellarm. cap. 16.

The Protestants.
Baptism only binds us to keep the commandments of God: and so far forth
also to obey men, as they command things lawful: but we must not be brought
in bondage to men's traditions and observations, seeing we are the Lords free
men, and by Baptism consecrate to his service.

Argum. Math. 28.19. Go and teach, baptizing them, etc. and teaching them to
observe all that I have commanded you. Ergo, Baptism binds us only to the
observation of Gods precepts. 1. Corinthians. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be
not the servants of men: Baptism is a sign of the death of Christ, the price
of our redemption. Ergo, we are freed from all mere humane service, in
receiving of Baptism. For this cause is it called the Baptism of Christ:
Cont. Petili. lib. 3.55.
Augustine says, Paulus dixisse legitur euangelium meum: baptismum autem
Christi nemo Apostolorum ita vnquam ministrauit, vt auderet dicere suum. Paul
is read to have said, My Gospel: but never any of the Apostles durst call the
Baptism of Christ their Baptism. Ergo, seeing it is the Baptism of Christ,
and we are only baptized in his name, not in our own name, or the name of
men: we must only hope to be saved by faith in him, and become his servants
wholly.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, OF THE difference between the Baptism of our Savior
Christ, and the Baptism of John.
The Papists.
THe Baptism of John (they say) was of another kind then Christ's Baptism
was, neither was it sufficient without Christ's Baptism, nor had the John, were
afterward admitted to Christ's Baptism, Council. Trident. sess. 8. canon. 1.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 20.21.

Argum. 1. Matthew. 3.11. John himself says, I baptize you with water: but he
shall baptize you with the holy Ghost: Ergo, John's Baptism and Christ's not
all one: for John's Baptism gave not the holy Ghost. Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. John speaks not of diverse Baptismes, but of diverse operations, and
ministeries, in one and the same Baptism: for John, as all other ministers
do, did but give water: and Christ working together with them, gives the holy
Ghost. But it will be answered, that John says not, he does baptize, but he
shall baptize: Ergo, Christ did not baptize together with John by his spirit.

Ans. The same John in another place speaks of Christ in the present tense.
John. 1.33. This is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost: Ergo, Christ did
both then baptize with his spirit, and afterward also more manifestly, when
the gifts of the spirit began to be shed forth more plentifully upon men.

Argum. 2. Saint Paul baptized twelve men at Ephesus with Christ's Baptism,
that had received John's before, Act. 19.4.5. Ergo, John's Baptism was not the
same that Christ's was, Bellarm.

Ans. There can be no such thing gathered out of that place; for those words in
the fifth verse: When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus, are part of the narration which Paul makes of John's manner of
Baptism: so that the sense is this, they that heard John's doctrine, were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. It is not so to be read, as though they
were baptized again of Paul, but he lays only his hands upon them, that had
before received the Baptism of John.

The Protestants.
THat John's Baptism was not diverse from Christ's Baptism, but was all one
with it in property and effect, and that they which were baptized by John,
were baptized into the name of Christ, and therefore needed not again to be
baptized; thus it is made manifest out of Scripture.

Argum. 1. John's Baptism differed not in the matter of the Sacrament, for he
baptized with water as Christ's Apostles did. There was also the same form of
both, the word of God: for John also taught the people to believe in Jesus
Christ that was to come, Act. 19.4. There was also the same scope and end of
John's Baptism: For he preached the Baptism of repentance, for remission of
sins, Mark. 1.4. Ergo, it was the same with the Baptism of Christ.

Argum. 2. If the Baptism instituted by Christ were another Baptism, then
John's was, and yet he himself was baptized of John: then it would follow,
that we are baptized now with another Baptism, then Christ himself was, for
he received John's Baptism: but this were very absurd, to say, that there is
not the same Baptism of the head and the members, of Christ and his Church:
Ergo, John's Baptism all one with Christ's.

Bellarmine denies, that the proper end and scope of John's Baptism was for
remission of sins: yet Augustine grants it, who notwithstanding being
carried away with the error of that time, does else where put some difference
between the Baptism of John and Christ: Si quis contendat in baptismo
Iohannis dimissa esse peccata, De Baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 14.
non ago pugnanter: If any man will contend, that remission of sins also was
given in John's Baptism, I will not be against it. There being then the same
proper end and scope of both these Baptismes, how can they choose but be all
one?

THE EIGHT QVESTION, OF the ceremonies and rites of Baptism.
The Papists.


First before Baptism, they have devised these toys to be used. First, they
do exorcise, conjure, and exufflate the evil spirit from the party to be
baptized. Secondly, they touch the ears and nostrels with spittle, that his
ears may be opened to hear the word, and his nostrels, to discern between
the smell of good and evil. Thirdly, the Priest signeth his eyes, ears, mouth,
breast, forehead, nostrels, with the sign of the cross, that all his senses
thereby may be defended. 4. Then hallowed salt is put into his mouth, that he
may be seasoned with wisdom, and be kept from putrifiyng in sin. 5. The
party is anointed then with oil in his breast, that he may be safe from evil
suggestions, and between the shoulders, which signifies the receiving of
spiritual strength.

Secondly, these ceremonies do accompany Baptism it self. 1. The Font and
water therein is consecrated and hallowed, in the name of the Father, the Son,
and holy Ghost. 2. He is thrice dipped in the water, to signify the being of
Christ 3. days in the grave.

Thirdly, after Baptism, they have this use, 1. He is anointed with holy
Chrisme in the top of the head, and thereby is become a Christian. 2. A white
garment is put upon him, to betoken his regeneration. 3. A veil is put upon
his head, in token that he is now crowned with a royal Diadem. 4. A burning
taper is put into his hand, to fulfill that saying in the Gospel, Let your light
so shine before men, etc. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Baptism. 25.26.27. Catechism.
Romans p. 310. Gabr. Biel. lib. 4. distinct. 6. qu. 3.

The Protestants.
AGainst these Popish ceremonies, which they use in baptism, we do reason
thus.

1 It is contrary to the rule of the Gospel, that there should be such types,
shadows, significations, brought into the service of God, as they make in
Baptism: for seeing we have the body which is Christ, all such shadows ought
to be abolished, Coloss. 2.17.

2 In one sacrament they have forged and found out many, as their chrisme,
oil, salt, spittle: which they make not only seals of holy things, but
giuers and conferrers of grace, which is more then any sacrament can have: and
it is contrary to the scripture: for the spirit of GOD is as the wind that
blows, where it lists, John. 3. It is not tied to creatures, elements,
external signs, as they include the spirit (as it were) in these outward
things, which have power (as they affirm) to give wisdom, strength, power
against the devil, and such like. But Saint Paul says, that the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, 2. Corinthian. 10.4. The means whereby Christans
both obtain spiritual graces, and shend them from evil, are spiritual: For
if in Christ Circumcision avail not any thing, which was notwithstanding
instituted of God: but faith is all in all, Galath. 5.6. Much more vain and
unavailable are the devises and inventions of men.

3 This beggarly company of ceremonies does also deface and impugn the sincere
and pure institution of Christ: None of all those ceremonies were used when
Christ himself was baptized, Math. 3. which notwithstanding had been most
fit, considering the worthynes of his person that was baptized. Neither did
Christ give any such thing in charge to his Apostles, but bids them only
preach, and baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Math.
28.19. nor yet were any such ceremonies in use in the Apostles time. Saint
Peter says, Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized? He calls not for oil, salt, spittle, or any such thing, but only
for water.

Augustine utterly misliketh this combersome rabble of needless ceremonies,
Epist. 119 cap. 19.
Ipsam religionem, quam Deus paucissimis sacramentis liberam esse voluit,
onerib. premunt, vt tolerabilior sit conditio Iudaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus
libertatis non agnouerint, legalibus tamen sarcinis, non humanis
praesumptionibus subijciuntur: They do cumber religion with their burdensome
inventions, which Christ made free with a very few sacraments: so that the
Jews case was more tolerable, who though they knew not the liberty of the
Gospel, yet were subject to the legal ceremonies, not to the inventions of
men.

And is it not even thus (I pray you) in the Popish Church? for never was
Jewish circumcision stuffed with the third part of ceremonies, which their
Baptism is defiled withal.

THE THIRTEENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER OR
EVCHARIST.
THis Controversy has two parts: First, of the sacrament it self. Secondly,
of the sacrifice, which they say, is offered up in the sacrament: which they
call the sacrifice of the Mass.

THE FIRST PART, OF THE SAcrament of the Eucharist.
THis part of the controversy stands upon diverse questions: First, whether
the body of Christ be really and substantially in the sacrament. Secondly,
whether the elements of bread and wine be changed, converted, and
transubstantiate into the very body and flesh of Christ. Thirdly, whether the
Eucharist remain a sacrament after the use and celebration. Fourthly, of the
outward elements in this sacrament. Fifthly, of the words of consecration.
Sixthly, of the proper effect of the Lords supper. Seventhly, of the manner of
celebrating it. Eighthly, whether it ought to be ministered in one kind.
Ninthly, whether it is to be adored.

THE FIRST QVESTION, CONCERNING the real presence of Christ in the sacrament.
The Papists.
IN the sacrament of the Eucharist, under the forms of bread and wine, by Fox.
113^. articul. 1. sex articul.
which was conceived of the virgin Marie; the same body, that is now in
heaven, Rhemist. Mat. 26. sect. 4. yet after another manner: For he is in heaven
according to the natural existence of his body: in the sacrament, he is really
present in his flesh, yet sacramentally by his omnipotent power, Council. Trid.
sess. 13. can. 1.

Argum. 1. The figures must be inferior to the things that are figured and
represented: the sacraments of the law were figures of the sacraments in the
Gospel: therefore they ought to be inferior. But unless the bread and wine should
be the very blood and flesh of Christ in the sacrament: their sacraments in the
law should not only not be inferior, but far superior to ours. As for example,
the Paschal Lamb is in nature to be preferred before bread, and the slaying of
the Lamb did more lively represent the death of Christ, then the breaking of
bread, the eating of flesh does also better set forth the spiritual
nourishing, then the eating of bread. Wherefore, unless we believe a real
presence in the sacrament; their sacrifices, in dignity and excellency should
far exceed and excel ours, Bellarm. lib. 1. de. sacram. Eucharist. ca. 3.

Ans. 1. It is not true, that their sacraments were figures of ours: But S.
Paul shows, that both their sacraments and ours do figure out and represent
the same thing, as the spiritual eating and drinking of Christ, 1. Corint.
10.2.3 Our sacraments are indeed figures correspondent and answerable to
theirs, and theirs also had a certain reference and relation to ours: but they
were not types of ours: for then our sacraments should be the body of theirs,
whereas Christ is the body both of their sacraments and ours. Saint Peter
says, that Baptism is an antitypon, a figure answerable to the saving of the
eight persons in the flood: 1. Pet. 3.21. They are correspondent one to the
other, and had mutual relation and respect one to the other. But that was not
properly a type of Baptism, but both Baptism and that are figures and signs
and lively representations of our salvation in Christ.

2. If the real presence of Christ only commends the sacrament, and
aduanceth it before the rytes of the law, which in all other respects are
better: by this argument Baptism still remains inferior to the sacraments of
the law: for you affirm no real presence in Baptism, as you do in the
Eucharist: and in all other respects it must needs give place to Circumcision:
for the cutting of the flesh is a more lively representatio^ of regeneration,
the^ is the washing by water: and the flesh of man is in nature more precious
then water. So by this reason, though you have won credit for the Eucharist,
yet you have lost it for Baptism.

3 We answer therefore, that although the real presence be set aparte, yet
our sacraments are more excellent then theirs. First, the price and worth of
things in their nature are not to be weighed in a sacrament, but they must be
considered in respect of the use, to the which they are ordained by the
institution. Flesh, you say, is better then bread: so is wine and milk better
then water in their nature: but in Baptism water is better then they, because
Christ has now set it apart for a more holy use. Secondly, the slaying of the
Lamb does more lively represent, say you, the death of Christ, then the
breaking of bread.

Answ. We grant, that if breaking of bread had been used in the law, it had
not been then so significant as the slaying of beasts: but the breaking of
bread now in the light of the Gospel, in this abundance of knowledge and
instruction, being a sign of a thing already done and finished, must needs be
more pregnant and lively in representation, then the killing of sacrifices in
the law, which were types of things to come, the mystery of the Gospel being
not yet opened to the world. Wherefore our sacraments are more excellent then
theirs, in respect of the more clear light and fuller signification, which
they have by the word of God, and the preaching of the Gospel joined unto the^:
We need not devise any other way of excellency for our sacraments, then this,
which we have said, agreeable to the scriptures, 2. Cor. 4.3. Galat. 3.1.

The Papists.
ARgum. 2. John. 6.55. Christ says, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink in deed: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him.

First, this place must be understood not of any spiritual eating or drinking
of Christ without the sacrament, but is properly meant of the manducation and
eating of him in the sacrament. First, Verse. 51. The bread, says Christ, that
I will give: he speaks of a thing to come, for the sacrament was afterward
instituted: but if this bread were to be taken for his word, and the eating
thereof for believing in him; in this sense the bread was given already.

Answ. Christ also speaks in the present tense, verse. 32. My father gives
you the true bread from heaven: and I am the living bread that came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, verse. 51. He
says not, he that shall eat, but, he that even now eats. And afterward he
speaks of the time to come; The bread that I shall give, because his death
and passion was not yet finished: therefore he says, The bread that I shall
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world: But he
speaks every where of the eating of his flesh in the present tense, verse.
35.50.51.53. which cannot be understood of the sacramental eating, the
sacrament being not yet instituted, but of a spiritual manducation.

The Papists.
SEcondly, those words being applied to the sacrament, must needs also be
understood properly and literally, for the very eating of the flesh of Christ,
and drinking his blood, not tropically, or figuratively.

1. The flesh of Christ, which Christ promises to give them to be eaten, he
prefers before the Manna, which their fathers did eat in the wilderness: the
true bread which he gives them, is more excellent then the bread of Manna. But
if the bread in the sacrament do but signify the flesh of Christ, and be not
it in very deed, it should be no better then Manna, which also did signify
and show forth Christ, Bellarm. cap. 6.

Ans. Christ compares not the spiritual substance of Manna, with his flesh
and blood, but the corporal food, which being received into the belly, and
not received into the heart by faith, has no power to give eternal life. For,
verse. 32. Christ says, that Moses gave them not Manna from heaven: Ergo, he
means the corporal food, not the spiritual substance of Manna, for as it
was a sacrament of Christ, it was heavenly bread. Again, verse. 49. Your
fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and dyed. He speaks of the material
food, for they that did Manna spiritually by faith, died not in soul.

Ans. Now on the contrary side we will prove, that this place contained in the
sixth chapter of John, cannot be so understood as they expound it.

First, Christ speaks not only of the sacramental eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood, but generally of the spiritual participation by faith,
whether in the sacrament or without, which is wrought in us by the holy Ghost.

1. If it be understood of the sacrament, then it will follow that no man can
be saved, unless he do receive the sacrament: for Christ says, verse. 53.
Except you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you cannot have life in you. This,
I am sure, they will hardly grant, that the Eucharist also should be
necessary, as they make Baptism, to salvation.

2. If Christ has relation to the sacrament, then must it of necessity be
ministered in both kinds, for in every place he joins both these together,
the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood.

Augustine also thus writes upon these words, Tract in Johan 26.
Hoc est manducare illam escam, and illum bibere potum, in Christo manner, and
illum manentemin se habere. This it is to eat that flesh, and to drink that
drink, to abide in Christ, and to have him abiding in us, but this may be done
without the sacrament, Ergo, it is not necessary to understand it of the
sacrament.

Secondly, though we should grant that this whole treatise John. 6. may fitly
be referred to the sacrament, yet the words must be taken figuratiuelie, for
the spiritual eating and drinking of Christ in the sacrament, and not
otherwise.

1 Verse. 35. Christ so expounds his own words: I am the bread of life, he
that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall not
thirst. To eat then, and to drink Christ, is to believe in him.

2 Christ understands another manner of eating of his flesh, then the
Capernaites did. But they imagined that Christ would give his very flesh and
blood to be eaten: And therefore they went away offended, and said, This is an
hard saying, verse. 60. Therefore Christ to correct their erroneous conceit,
says unto them, that his words were spirit and life, that is, spiritually to
be understood, verse. 63.

So Augustine interprets those words of Christ, as if he had said,
Spiritualiter intelligite, quod locutus sum, You must understand spiritually,
that which I have said. You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink
that blood, In Psalm. 98.
which shall be shed for you. Sacramentum vobis aliquod commendaui,
spiritualiter intellectum viuisicabit vos: I have commended a certain mystery
and sacrament unto you, which being spiritually understood shall quicken you.

The Papists.
ARgum. 3. Christ in the institution of this sacrament, said unto his Apostles,
after he had given thanks and blessed: Hoc est corpus meum: This is my body:
that is, that which is contained in this bread, or under the forms of this
bread, is my very body, Bellarm. cap. 9. So that these words must needs be
taken properly, not to be a trope or figure.

1 It is not the manner of the scriptures to set down flat precepts and
commandments, and directorie rules in obscure terms, or figurative speeches,
but plainly and evidently: therefore it is not like, that Christ, being now to
prescribe unto his Apostles the perpetual law and form of this sacrament,
would speak obscurely.

2 Though he spoke by parables and signs to the Pharisees, yet there was no
cause why he should so do, none being present but his Apostles, Bellarmin.
ibid.

Ans. 1. It is very well, that you will now (though I think unawares) grant
unto us, that the precepts and rules in scripture are set down simply and
plainly: wherefore the scriptures cannot be so hard and obscure, as you would
bear us in hand they are: for if the precepts and rules of faith be evidently
in scripture expressed, as you seem to confess, what reason have you to keep
back the people from the reading of scripture?

2 It is false that the scriptures use no figures nor tropes, in the
declaration of the laws and sacraments of the Church: for says not Saint
Paul, speaking of the sacraments of the Jews, Petra erat Christus, the rock
was Christ, 1. Cor. 10.4. that is, signified Christ? Likewise in the 17. verse.
We that are many are one bread: that is, our spiritual unity and conjunction
is represented, in that we are partakers of one bread.

3 Sometimes our Savior would speak darkely, being alone with his Apostles,
thereby to stir them up more diligently to attend unto his words, as when he
bids them beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mark. 8.15. Yet this speech
of our Savior Christ uttered in the hearing of his Apostles, This is my body;
was neither so dark nor obscure, that the Apostles need much be troubled
about the understanding. Nay, many things being spoken in borrowed and
metaphorical words, are uttered with greater grace, and carry a fuller
sense: When Christ said, I am the door, John 10.9. I am the vine, John 15.1.
he spoke by figure as he does here, for neither was he a vine, or a door, as
the bread was not his body: Yet which of the Apostles was there, that
understood him not, when he called himself a vine, and a door? Neither could
they doubt of our Savior Christ's meaning here.

Contra. Now on the other side, we will make it plain, that these words of
Christ, are spoken tropically:

1 Where Christ says according to Saint Luke, This cup is the new Testament
in my blood, Luke 22.23. we must needs admit a double trope or figure: for
first, the cup is taken for that which was contained in the cup. Secondly,
the wine in the cup was not the new Testament, but a sign of the new
Testament. If then in one part of the sacrament he spoke by a figure, why not
also in the other, when he says, This is my body, that is, a lively sign and
seal thereof?

2 It is no unusual phrase in the scripture, to say (this is) that is,
signifies as Genes. 17.10. Circumcision is called the covenant it self, where
it was a sign only of it. And Exodus 12.11. the Lamb is called the Lords
passover, which it betokened only: In the same sense Christ says, This is my
body: that is, exhibiteth and represents unto you my body.

Augustine so expounds these words, Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Aug. cont.
Adimant. cap. 12.
Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corpus sui: Christ doubted not to say,
This is my body, when he gave a sign and sacrament of his body.

The Protestants.
THat Christ is present with all his benefits in the sacrament, we do
willingly grant, neither do we think that the elements of bread and wine are
bare and naked signs of the body and blood of Christ, but Christ is verily by
them exhibited unto us, and spiritually by faith, we are truly made partakers
of his precious body and blood: not that Christ descends from heaven to us,
but we ascend by faith and in spirit unto him: yea, we confess as much as
Bernard says, whose speech they themselves allow, In sacrame^to exhiberi veram
carnis Christi substantia^, sed spiritualiter non carnaliter: that the very
substance of Christ's flesh is exhibited unto us in the sacrament, but
spiritually, not carnally. This Bellarmine acknowledges to be true, cap. 2.
lib. 1.
though he would not have the word (spiritually) to be used, lest it might
be, as he says, by us misconstrued. This then is our faith and judgment,
that we are verily in this sacrament engrafted into the body of Christ, and
do truly eat his flesh, and drink his blood: but all this is done
spirituallie only and by faith: As for their carnal eating and devouring of
Christ, we utterly reject, and condemn it.

Argum. 1. In the receiving of the sacrament there is a double conjunction, we
are joined to Christ, and make one body also amongst our selves: so says S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 10.16.17. We are made partakers of the body of Christ, and we
that are many are one bread, and one body: but our participation with the
mystical body of Christ is spiritual. Ergo, also our communication with his
natural body, Fulk. in hunc locum.

Arg. 2. If the body of Christ be in the sacrament, the^ is it eaten, and torn
with the teeth: And what is eaten goes into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught, Mark. 7.19. I pray you what is now become of the body of Christ?
does it pass the same way that other meats do?

Bellarm. answers, lib. 1. cap. 11. ad argum. 5. that they are the accidents
of the bread and wine which are eaten, and chawen, or rent by the teeth, and
not the body of Christ: and yet the body of Christ goes down into the stomach,
but no further: but when the forms of bread and wine begin to be corrupted
there, the body of Christ goes away, Bellarm. cap. 14.

Ans. 1. This is new learning, that the accidents of meat are chawen in the
mouth, and not the meat it self: and that the forms only, not the substance
is altered, and corrupted in the stomach. Say also that men are nourished with
accidents and not with the substance: If the priest chance to drink too deep
of the chalice, and so become drunk, I pray you what is it, that makes him so
light headed? Is it, think you, the accidents only of wine? Surely a drunken
man would not say it. If a Mouse chance to creep into your pixe, and fill her
hungry belly with your God-amight: what is it that the Mouse feeds upon? trow
you they be accidents only? for you say that the consecrated host goes no
further then the stomach: and yet it is too much that the housel of Christians
should be housed in a mouses belly. These are but ridiculous and light
questions, yet such, as have troubled your grauest and sagest heads, and
remain unanswered.

2. Bellarmin. denies, that the body of Christ being eaten, goes any further
then the stomach: But our Rhemists go further; they say, that we are made a
piece of his body and blood: They should rather have said, that his body and
blood is made a piece of us, Rhemist. 1. Cor. 10. sect. 5.
being converted into our substance. But silly men, we pity them: If we should
press them still with these questions, they would sooner run mad, then find
out any reasonable and sober answer for us.

Argum. 3. Christ in his flesh is ascended up to heaven, and there must remain
till his coming again, Act. 3.21. Again he says, The poor you shall have
always, but me always you cannot have, Mark. 14. Ergo, Christ being now in
his humanity in heaven, cannot be present in the sacrament upon earth.

Bellarmine answers, that the carnal presence of Christ does not draw him
out of heaven: his natural body remains there still: yet by his omnipotent
power, he can make his body to be in many places at once, cap. 14.

Ans. If Christ's body be in heaven and in earth, and in many places at once;
it must either be his own natural body which was borne of the Virgin Mary,
or he must every day create himself a new body: but this were to too absurd
to be granted, that every day there should be a new Christ. Neither can the
first be admitted: for a natural body has a natural presence: but so has not
Christ's body in the Sacrament: for it is not there naturally, being without
shape or form, neither visible nor sensible. And how can it stand with the
property of a true natural body, to be in a thousand places at once? for so
must Christ's needs be, and in more too, seeing he is kept and hanged up in
every popish Church. And further, if totus Christus, whole Christ, be in the
Sacrament, both with his body and soul: you must either grant, that there
are many whole Christ's, seeing he is in many places at once: or else if there be
but one whole Christ, his humanity must be dispersed every where as his
Godhead is: and so are you against your wills become Vbiquitaries.

Hearken what Augustine says: Ad Dardan. epistol. 57.
Cauendum est ne ita diuinitatem adstruamus hominis, vt veritatem corporis
auferamus: We must take heed we do not so maintain the divine nature of the
man Christ, that we take away the nature of his body.

Argum. 4. The fathers in the law did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink
the same spiritual drink in their Sacraments that we do, 1. Corinthians. 10.2.3.
but they did not eat the flesh of Christ, nor drink his blood, but only
spiritually by faith: Ergo, no more do we.

Argum. 5. There remained wine still after the consecration and distribution
amongst the Apostles: for Christ says, He will drink no more of the fruit of
the vine, Math. 26.29. So S. Paul calls the other element bread after the
consecration, 1. Corinthians. 10.17. We that are many are one bread, because we are
partakers of one bread. Likewise, cap. 11.26. Ergo, there remains still bread
and wine in the Sacrament. And therefore no body of Christ: for they cannot be
there both together, as they teach.

Lastly, we must understand, that this their devised and forged opinion of the
real presence of Christ, is of no antiquity in the Church: neither was there
any question about it for a 1000. years after Christ, til the time of
Berengarius, who lived about Anno. 1060. who was sore troubled, for maintaining
the truth against the carnal presence, and under Pope Leo the 9. and Nicholas
the 2. was constrained twice to recant: Fox. p. 1152
yet there was no public law or decree made in the Church concerning
transubstantiation, till the Council of Laterane, which was held under Pope
Innocent the 3. Anno. 1215.

And that this gross opinion favors not a whit of antiquity, Epistol.
it may appea^e by the resolute judgment of Augustine: Sacramenta ex
similitudine ipsarum rerum nomina habent, secundum quendam modu^ sacramentu^
corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, etc. The Sacraments, because of some
likeness, do bear the names of the things themselves: as the Sacrament of the
body of Christ is after a certain manner called his body.

Commentar. in Psalm. 3
Christus corporis sui figuram discipulis commendauit: Christ did commend to
his disciples a figure of his body. Quid paras dentem and ventrem? Creed, and
manducasti? Why do thou make ready thy teeth and thy belly? Believe in
Christ, and thou have eaten him.

Secundum praesentiam maiestatis semper habemus Christum, secundum praesentiam
carnis recte dictum est discipulis, Me semper non habebitis: According to the
presence of his Majesty we have Christ always: according to his carnal
presence, it was truly said to his disciples, You cannot have me always. By
these and many such places in this ancient father, it is manifest, that in
those days there was no such opinion held of the carnal presence.

AN APPENDIX TO THIS QVESTION, WHETHER it stand with the power and will of God,
that Christ's body should be carnally present in the Sacrament.
The Papists.
114. Error.
THere are two difficulties or impossibilities, which do hinder the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament: First, it would follow, that a
natural body, such as Christ's is, might be in two places at once: for they
say, that it is in heaven, and in the Eucharistall at once. Secondly, that a
natural body may be in a place, and yet not occupy or fill a place: for if
Christ's body be in the Sacrament, it occupies no place: the compass of a
thin and round cake is not answerable to the proportion of Christ's body.

Notwithstanding both these difficulties, it is agreeable both to the power and
good pleasure of God, that the body of Christ should be included in the
Sacrament, Bellarm.

Argum 1. It is possible for the body of Christ to be in many places at once,
and it also stands with his will: as Act. 9.4. Christ appeared to Saul,
either upon the earth, or in the air next to the earth: for how could he
either hear the voice of Christ sitting in heaven, or see the light so far
off? Ergo, Christ was in two places: he appeared to Paul upon earth, and he was
at the same time in heaven, from whence he shall not move till the day of
judgment, Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 3. Rhemist. Act. 9.
sect. 1.

Ans. First, the text is plain, that Christ spoke from heaven, from whence the
light shined, verse. 3. he was neither in the air nor upon the earth. Secondly,
do you make question, whether Paul could see a light, or hear a voice from so
far; 23.
seeing that the Sun, whose body is so far distant from us, does disperse
his beams over the face of the earth; and the voice of the thunder is hear^
^ery far? Will ye deny Christ to have that power, which we see to be in his
creatures? Thirdly, and why was it not as possible, that Christ from heaven
should be heard of Paul, as he was seen of Stephen sitting on the right hand
of God? Act. 7.56.

Argum. 2. The body of Christ may be where it pleases him, and yet shall not
need any natural place, or occupy any room: he is able to bring a Camel
through the eye of a needle, Math. 20.26. He also came through the doors in to
his Apostles, rose out of the sepulcher through the stone, was borne, his
mothers womb being shut: therefore he may as well, and is no doubt, present
under the shapes of bread and wine in the Sacrament, Rhemist. Math. 26. sect.
11. Bellarm. lib. 3. de. Sacram. cap. 6.

Ans. 1. Christ shows in that place, that it is as impossible for a rich man,
that is high minded, and trusts in his riches, to enter into heaven, as for a
Camel to pass through the eye of a needle: but it is possible with God to
give rich men humble and lowly minds, and so make them fit for his kingdom, as
to make the Camel less, and so draw him through a needle. It is not proved out
of this place, that God can or will draw the huge body of a Camel through a
needle, remaining still of that bigness: no more then that it is possible for
God, to bring a proud, rich, arrogant man to heaven, his affections not
altered: both these are impossible to God, because they are contrary to his
will and ordinance: the one is against the law of justice, to bring a wicked man
to heaven: the other against the law of nature.

2. For the other three examples: it is not proved out of scripture, that the
body of Christ pierced the doors, the grave, stone, or his mothers womb:
although the doors were found shut after Christ's entrance, the grave covered,
and his mother remained a Virgin still: for all these passages might give
place for a while to the body of Christ, and return again to their place: as
the red sea was divided till the Israelites passed, and afterward the waters
came together again. And concerning the last instance of the birth of Christ,
it is certain out of the scriptures, that Christ opened the womb of his
mother in his birth, Luke 2.23. Hitherto therefore they have proved nothing.

The Protestants.
Our adversaries do falsely charge us to say, that God can do no more then he
has done, or will do, Rhemist. Math. 26. sect. 11. This we say: that Christ is
almighty, and yet can do nothing against his own will, his word, or glory:
as to dishonor his glorious body, and to bring it within the compass of a
piece of bread, that it may be devoured of cats, dogs, rats, mice, or which
is worse, to be eaten of wicked men the members of the devil: although the
question be not so much between us, what Christ is able to do of his absolute
power, but what he will do according to his word, Fulk. Math. 17. sect. 1.

Argum. 1. It stands neither with the power or will of God, to do contrary
to his word: For it is impossible that God should lie, Hebr. 6.18. And this
thing, not to lie, is not a want of power, but a sign of greater power in God.
But it is plainly declared in scripture, that Christ has a true natural
body, and is in all things like unto us, Hebr. 2.17. Therefore neither can his
body, being a true humane body, as ou^s are, be in many places at once:
neither can it choose but occupy that room and place where it is. The Angel
said, He is risen, he is not here, Math. 28.6: but it had been no good
argument, to say, he is risen and gone to another place, and therefore he is
not here, if so be the body of Christ might be in many places at once. The
scripture then has defined it, that Christ's body is in one certain place:
wherefore to say, that Christ has a true natural body, and yet retains not
the natural properties of a body, is to speak contradictories, that he has,
and has not a true natural body: and this were to make God a lier.

Co^t. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 11.
Augustine says of Christ: Secundum corporalem praesentiam, simul in sole,
luna, cruce, esse non potest: Christ according to his corporal presence,
cannot be in the Sun, the Moon, and upon the Cross all at one time.

And concerning the other point, he writes thus: Spatia locorum toll
corporibus, Epistol. 57.
and nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt: Take away space of place
from bodies, and they shall be no where, and if they be in no place, then are
they not at all.

Argum. 2. The real and carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, is a
thing superfluous, needles, and unprofitable. First, the favor of God in the
remission of sins through Christ, is as well sealed unto us in Baptism, as
in the Lords Supper* what need then the carnal presence in the one more then
in the other? Secondly, that Christ is in body present in the Sacrament, is
not perceived by any sense: for they neither taste him, see him, nor feel him:
it must be then a work of faith: but by faith Christ is as well apprehended
being absent, as being supposed in this manner to be present: Ergo, this kind
of presence is needles.

Argum. 3. It is an inglorious, unworthy and unseemly thing, that the
glorious and impassible body of Christ, should be enclosed in the forms of
bread and wine, devoured and chawed, eaten and gnawed of mice, subject to mould
and rottennes, to be spilt upon the ground, burnt in the fire: for all these
inconveniences must needs follow upon the carnal presence.

Bellarm. It is no more inglorious or impossible for these things now to happen
to the body of Christ, the^ it was for him to be carried in his mothers womb,
to be swathed in swaddling bands, and to be subject to injuries which were done
to his body upon earth.

Ans. First, as though there be the like reason of the passible body of
Christ, while he lived in the world, which was buffeted, whipped, pierced with
nails, crucified; and of his glorious and impassible body now, that it may in
like manner be rent and divided. Secondly, neither was it possible that Christ's
passible body should be subject to the like infirmities, as to rottennes,
corruption, consumption in the fire, as his body is now in the Sacrament. If
it were then verified in Christ, Thou shall not suffer thy holy one to see
corruption: for his body did not putrify or corrupt in the grave: much more
is it true in the glorious body of Christ, that it cannot suffer any such
things: How then are you not ashamed to affirm, that the bread and wine are
made in the Sacrament, the very body and blood of Christ: seeing those
elements, if they be kept long, will wax sower, and mouldie, and fall to
corruption? which things once to think of the glorious body of Christ, were
great impiety. Leave off for shame then these your gross opinions, so much
derogatorie to the glory and honor of Christ.

THE SECOND QVESTION CONCERNING Transubstantiation.
The Papists.
IF any man shall say, that there remains the substance of bread and wine in
the Sacrament, after the words of consecration; or shall deny that the whole
Council. Tridentin. sess. 13. can. 2. Bellarm. lib. 3. de sacra. euchar. cap.
19. Rhemist. Matthew. 17. sect. 1.

Argum. 1. Christ transfigured his body marueilously in the Mount, as we
read, Math. 17. sect. 1. Ergo, he is able to exhibit his body under the
forms of bread and wine, Rhemist.

Ans. First, your argument follows not, Christ could give a glorious form to
his passible body: Ergo, he can take away the essential properties of his
natural body, and yet keep a true body still. Or thus, Christ could glorify
his body not yet glorified: Ergo, he can or will dishonor his glorious
impassible body: by enclosing it under the forms of base creatures to be
devoured of dogs and mice: which is honored and worshipped of the Angels and
Saints in heaven. Secondly, the question is not so much of Christ's power, as of
his will: therefore you conclude not aright, Christ is able to do it: Ergo, he
will.

Argum. 2. He that sees water turned into wine by the power of Christ, need
not to doubt how he changes bread into his body, Rhemist. Ioh. 2. sect. 2.

Ans. First, when you can bring any warrant out of scripture for your imagined
conversion, as we have for this miracle, we will give ear unto you. Secondly,
and when it shall appear to the senses, that the bread is changed into flesh,
as the water was known to be turned into the wine, by the color and taste: we
shall then no more doubt of this conversion of the bread, then they did of the
other of water. Thirdly, if Christ could alter and change the substances of
creatures: what reason have you to give such an omnipotent power to every
priest, with a few words to do as much, as Christ himself could when he was
present? Fourthly, all this proves but an ability and power in Christ, not a
will or purpose, to work any such change or conversion.

Argum. 3. Though the substance of bread and wine be changed, yet the forms
remain still for these causes. First, because if the forms also should be
changed, there should be no sensible sign left, and so no Sacrament. Secondly,
the faith of the receiver is the better tried this way: who believes the flesh
of Christ to be present, though he see it not. Thirdly, Christ would not have
the forms altered, because man abhors to eat humane flesh in the proper
shape, Bellarm. cap. 22.

Ans. First, your first reason is insufficient: for neither do the bare and
naked signs or accidents of the elements make a Sacrament, but the substance
of the^: for between the Sacrament and the thing thereby represented, there
ought to be some conueniencie and agreement: namely, as the body is nourished
by bread and wine, so does the soul feed upon the body and blood of Christ.
But they are not the accidents of bread and wine that nourish us, but the
substance: Ergo, not the accidents but the substance is the visible sign.
Likewise in Baptism, it is not the form or outward accident of water, that is
the sign, but the substance of water that washes.

2. It is a more lively operation of faith, to believe in Christ absent in
heaven, then present in earth, although he appear not to the senses. And
Christ is indeed properly the object of faith, as he is now in heaven: Hope
(says the Apostle) enters into that which is within the veil, whither our
forerunner Jesus is entered for us, Heb. 6.19. Faith and hope therefore do
lead us to things within the veil, that is, things in heaven, and not upon
the earth.

3. What a strange saying is this, that Christ gives his flesh to be eaten in
the Sacrament, yet hides it under the forms of bread and wine, lest men
should abhor to eat it? for is it to be thought, that Christ would command
any unseemly thing, or contrary to humanity? How could the Apostles command
the Gentiles to abstain from strangled and blood, Act. 15. when as, by your
doctrine, they did eat daily in their assemblies, the raw flesh and blood of
Christ? And how is it that Christ now forgets his own rule, He that does
the truth (says he) comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest? John. 3.21. But Christ now flies the light, and shrowdeth himself
under the shape of bread and wine, and will not show his flesh. These therefore
are but silly causes which you have rendered, why Christ would have the
substance of bread only changed, and not the accidents.

The Protestants.
AS the name of transubstantiation is strange, and newly devised: so is the
meaning thereof most unreasonable: that in the Sacrament, the substance of
bread should be converted into the body of Christ, the forms only remaining:
An opinion contrary to scripture, reason and common sense.

Argum. 1. As Christ said, Math. 26. (pointing to the bread) This is my body:
so he says, John. 6.35. I am the bread: but in this place he was not changed
into bread: why then in the other place should the bread be turned into his
body? for the speech is all one.

Argum. 2. The bread in the Eucharist after the consecration, is subject to
diverse changes and alterations, and so likewise the wine: for they may be
boiled and made hot, they may be infected with poison: for it is certain that
Victor the 3. Pope, and Henry the 7. Emperor, were poisoned with the
Sacrament: the wine may wax sower and turn to vinegar: the bread may putrify
and breed worms: Ergo, the substance of bread and wine remain still: for the
accidents cannot be subject to such alterations: and to say that Christ's body
may be thus handled, it were great impiety, Argum. Pet. Martyris.

Bellarmine answers: Materia substituitur a Deo in ipso instanti, in quo
desinunt esse illae species: God supplieth some other matter in the very
instant, when the forms begin to be changed, Cap. 24. argum. 6.

Ans. Is not here good gear, think you, that if a man should come to poison
the Sacrament, that is, the bread and wine, which are already consecrate, and
made the body of Christ, God should supply by a miracle some other matter for
him to work upon, and so God himself should be accessarie unto that wicked
act? Or if a silly mouse should be so bold as gnaw upon a consecrate Host,
that then likewise some other matter and substance should for that instant be
appointed: and so God shall make miracles for mice? And why, I pray you, may
not the substance of bread still remain, as well as another substance to be
put in the stead thereof?

Arg. 3. When Christ spoke these words, Hoc est corpus meum, the bread was
transubstantiate, before, or after, or while the words were spoken. Before,
they will not say, for the elements were not then consecrate: nor after, for
the^ Christ's words, This is my body, had not been true in that instant when
they were spoken. Neither was the transubstantiation wrought in the while of
speaking: for then should it not have been done all at once, but successively,
and one part after another, as the words were spoken one after another. But
this is also contrary to the opinion of the Papists, that would have it done
all together.

Argum. 4. It is against the nature and property of accidents and external
forms to be without a subject, or substance, wherein they should rest: such
are the whitenes and roundnes of the bread, the rednes and sweetness of wine: if
bread be gone, what is become of the roundnes and whitenes, and so of the wine.
If a man ask what round or white thing is this, or what red and sweet thing
is this, showing the cup: what shall be answered? we cannot say, it is bread,
or wine: for there is none left. And I am sure, they will not say, that the
body of Christ is either round or white, or such like: and yet somewhat there
must needs be, that must take denomination of these accidents.

Argum. 5. You say, the very flesh of Christ that did hang upon the Cross, is
in the Sacrament: but that cannot be: for that flesh Christ took of the
Virgin Mary: this sacramental flesh is made of bread: Ergo, it is not the
same flesh which was crucified upon the Cross.

Bellarm. The body of Christ is made of bread, but not as any matter or
material cause thereof, but as the wine was made of water by our Savior
Christ.

Ans. And I pray you how was the wine made of the water? was not the water the
very matter which was turned into wine? for one of these three changes and
mutations it must needs have: first, either the water was annihilate and
turned to nothing, and so the wine was created of nothing, which I am sure you
will not grant: secondly, or else there was a mixture of wine and water, the
one being mingled with the other: which is likewise false, for it was very good
and perfect wine: neither, I think, will you easily admit, that the body of
Christ and the bread are mingled together in the Sacrament. Thirdly, there
remains but the third kind of change, that is, the conversion of one
substance into another, as the water was changed into wine: and so is the
substance of bread converted into the substance of Christ's body, if you will
have any change at all: and thus Christ has gotten by your help a breaden
body: another from that, which he took of the flesh of the Virgin.

Lastly, the diversity of opinions, which this gross conceit of the carnal
presence of Christ has hatched, do easily show and demonstrate unto us, what
we are to think of this popish doctrine.

Some do hold, that the elements do still remain in their own nature in the
Sacrament, and that together with them the body of Christ is carnally present.
Others do teach, that there remains no more bread and wine, but only the
very natural body of Christ: of each opinion there are three sorts.

First, of them that hold the elements not to be changed. 1. Some are of
opinion, that the body of Christ and the elements are locally joined together,
either for that instant only, or else because of the vbiquitie and omnipresence
of Christ's humanity: of which opinion are the Lutherans.

2. Some there were, that thought only so much of the bread to be changed into
the body of Christ, as was received of the faithful: and that part which the
wicked received, to be bread still.

3. Others taught, that the bread was assumed in the Sacrament to the person of
Christ, even as his humanity: so that Christ was bread by consecration, as he
was man by his incarnation: an horrible and monstrous opinion, which is
fathered upon Rupertus the Abbot. Johannes Parisiensis also came near this
opinion, who likewise affirmed, that the bread was assumed to the person of
Christ, and united unto him, yet not immediately, as the other taught, but by
the mediation and means of the humanity of Christ.

Secondly, of those that maintain the conversion of the elements. First, some
would have the form only of bread changed not the matter, as Durandus.
Secondly, some contrariwise, would have the matter altered, and the form to
remain. Thirdly, the Jesuits affirm the bread wholly in substance, both in
matter and form to be changed, the outward forms and accidents only
remaining. ex Bellarm. lib. 3. de sacram, Eucharist. cap. 11.

Thus men, when they begin once to leave the truth, the Lord leaves them to
themselves, and they run mad in their own inventions, not finding any end:
and so it is justly come upon them, as S. Paul says of the heathen: Because
when they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful:
they became vain in their own imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness: when they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools, Romans
1.21.22. We therefore leaving these shalow pittes of humane inventions, which
will hold no water, will betake us to the fountain of truth. This then, to
conclude, is our definitive sentence, and full determination, according to the
Scriptures, that Christ indeed is verily present in the Sacrament, neither by
conversion of the bread into his body, either wholly, or in part, nor by
assumption of the bread to the unity of his person; nor yet by the conjunction
of his body and bread together* but he does verily exhibit himself, with all
his benefits, spiritually by faith, to be eaten and drunk of the worthy
receiver, as we have sufficiently proved before out of the Scriptures.

THE THIRD QVESTION, WHETHER THE Eucharist being once consecrated, be a
Sacrament, though it be neither eaten nor drunk.
The Papists.
THe elements in the Sacrament, that is, the bread and wine, being once
consecrate, hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, whether they be received or
not at that instant, but be reserved and kept in boxes, and pixes, and other
vessels of the Church, for days, weeks, months, to be carried solemnly to
those that are sick, and to be applied to other uses: are still the very body
and blood of Christ. Trident. Council. sess. 13. can. 4.7. Bellarm. lib. 4. cap.
2.

Argum. 1. Christ's words which were spoken over the bread, This is my body,
were true as soon as he brought them forth, before he said, Take, eat, and so
likewise of the cup: therefore it was a Sacrament, before they did receive and
eat it, and had been a Sacrament still, if it had not been received at all at
that time. Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. Those words of Christ, This is my body, were not spoken before he
brake the bread and distributed it: but first as S. Math. sets it down, he
brake the bread and gave it to his Disciples, saying: Take, eat, and then
follow those words, This is my body. Math. 26.26. which seem to have been
uttered even in that instant, when they took the bread, and began to eat it.

Secondly, the institution of the Sacrament consists partly of a promise,
partly of a precept: the promise is this, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body:
the precept, Accipite, manducate, Take, eat. Christ does no otherwise make
good his promise, then we perform the condition: unless therefore accordingly
we do take and eat it, it is not the body of Christ.

The Protestants.
THe Eucharist is no sacrament beside or without the use thereof: so that,
though some form of words be pronounced over it, if it be not received and
eaten and drunk, it is no sacrament: neither is that which remains after the
distribution, the Eucharist being ended, either of the bread or wine, any part
of the sacrament, but so much only as is taken and used.

Argum. 1. It is no Sacrament, unless it be used according to the institution
as Christ has commanded it: but to the institution it belongs on the behalf
of the Minister, to bless, break, and distribute it: on the behalf of the
communicants to take, 1 Cor. 11.24.26.
eat, and drink it: in them all, thereby to show the Lords death, and to do
it in remembrance of Christ. But this cannot be performed by using the words of
benediction only, but by the whole action: for how can they show the Lords
death, or do it in remembrance of Christ, unless they take, and eat? Ergo,
if it be not so used, it is no Sacrament.

Argum. 2. The Sacraments of the new testament are alike, and of one and the
selfsame kind, there is one way of instituting and consecrating both: but the
water in baptism is no part of the Sacrament, but during the solemn action of
baptizing* afterward it returns to the common use, so much as is not used.
Ergo, it is so also in the Eucharist: for as Christ says to his Apostles: Ite,
baptizate: Go and baptize, so that it was no Sacrament, unless some body were
baptized: even so he says, Accipite, ^anducate, Take, eat. No Sacrament then,
unless it be received and eaten.

And here I pray you, let it be noted, how well the Jesuits agree amongst
themselves: our Rhemists do commend the reserving also of the water in
baptism, and carrying of it home to give it the diseased to drink, annot. Iam.
5. sect. 5. Bellar. says, that Res permanens in baptismo, That the thing
permanent in Baptism, that is, water, which remains, is not the sacrament,
but ipsa actio, the action of baptizing it self, and allows only the
Eucharist to be reserved, and remain a Sacrament, Etiam extra vsum, Without
the use thereof, Bellar. li. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 3. But we have showed
already, that both the Sacraments are hallowed and sanctified alike, and that
both in the one and the other, the use only and present action according to
Christ's institution, makes the Sacrament.

In Augustines time some used to receive the Communion daily: but upon the
Sabbath or Lords day, it was commonly received of all: Quotidie Eucharistiae
communionem percipere, nec laudo, nec reprehendo, De ecclesi. dogmatib. cap. 54.
omnib. tamen dominicis diebus communicandum suadeo et hortor. Every day to
receive the Eucharist, I neither commend, nor dispraise it but every Lords day
I do persuade men and exhort all to communicate. It should seem then, that in
those days there was no such superstitious reservation of the Sacrament,
seeing every day, or at the least every Sabbath it was administered.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, CONCERNING the elements or material part of the
Sacrament, namely bread and wine.
The Papists.
1. The bread which is used in the Sacrament, ought to be unleavened: because
it is most agreeable to Christ's institution, who made the sacrament of
unleavened Israel for seven days together: and not only Christ, but all the
Jews at that time did keep the Passover: and the next day after, in the
which Christ suffered, was the first solemn festival day of the seven, being
the fifteenth day of the month, as it was commanded, Leuiticus 23.5. Rhemist.
1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 10. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 7.

The Protestants.
1. WE deny not, but that Christ used unleavened bread, at the institution of
his last Supper, having immediately before eaten the Paschall Lamb, which we
doubt not but he kept, according to the Law, with sweet bread: yet in the
time they are greatly deceived, affirming, that all the Jews eat the
Passover like wise over eeuen, and crucified Christ on the morrow, which
should have been, and was unto them (as they say) a chief festival day.

The truth is, that Christ eat the Passover the 14, day at eeuen, as it is
appointed in the Law: but the Jews had a contrary tradition: they would in no
wise keep two festival days together: and therefore because the sixteenth
day was their Sabbath, they would not have the feast of unleavened bread upon
the fifteenth day (though it were so appointed by the law) to avoid the
concurrence of two holy days together, but deferred it till the next day,
which was their Sabbath, and eat the Passover the eeue before, which was the
15. day at night; whereas Christ reforming that abuse, kept the Passover the
eeue before according to the Law, that is, the 14. at night: It appears then,
that the next day following, which we call Friday, wherein Christ was put to
death, was not kept of the Jews as a holy day.

First, the text says, they would not put Christ to death upon the feast day,
fearing the tumult of the people, Mark. 14.2. Secondly, if they had kept it
holy as the Law commanded, they should have done no servile labor therein,
that is, no work of the body, Leuitic. 23.7. But what could be a more servile
work, then to crucify Christ, to carry the Cross, and pitch it in the
ground, and such like; which the Jews would not have done upon that day, which
they were as straightly to keep as the Sabbath? It is also called the
preparation of the Sabbath, Mark. 15.43. Wherein they were wont to prepare
against the Sabbath what was needful: but such works of preparation could not
have been done in that great festiual day. Augustine also says, that the day
of Christ's suffering was not Pascha, sed praeparatio Paschae, It was not the
Pasch, but the preparation to it: De consen. Euangel. li. 3. cap. 13.
it is not therefore true that it was kept holy of the Jews, the day of
Christ's passion, neither that they did eat the paschall Lamb the same eeue
that Christ did, but the night following.

If they shall object that place, Mark. 14.12. where the Evangelist says, It
was the first day of unleavened bread, when Christ eat his passover: and
therefore all the Jews began then to eat sweet bread. We answer, that the
Evangelist has relation unto the right time of keeping the Passover, as it
was prescribed by the Law, and observed by Christ: not to the corrupt custom
of the Jews. Wherefore we grant that Christ might eat unleavened bread, but
not in such manner and order, as they say.

Secondly, it was not of the substance of the institution to eat unleavened
bread, no more then to eat it at night, and to receive it sitting, we are not
more bound to the one, then to the other. Again, Christ used unleavened bread,
because it was the usual bread at that time: so we do use that which is the
usual bread in our time. And S. Paul speaks of such bread, as was usual
among the Gentiles, when he says, The bread which we break, 1. Cor. 10.17.
Ergo, ordinary bread and leauened to be used, not unleavened.

The Papists.
2. COncerning the other element of wine, which is used in the sacrament,

Argum. Water gushed out together with blood, out of the side of Christ. Ergo,
wine and water is to be used together in the Eucharist, Rhemist. 1. Cor. 11.
sect. 10. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
1. WE deny not, but that of ancient time, in hot Countries, especially where
their wine was strong, they used to mix water with wine, in their common
drink, and thereupon they so used it in the sacrament: but it was never
generally the practice of the East Countries so to do: for the Armenians and
Iberians used not of ancient time to put water in the Cup in the ministration,
Fulk. nnot. 1. Corinthians. 1^. sect. 10.

Secondly, Be it that this mixture of wine were convenient to be used: you
cannot make such a matter of necessity of it, as to charge them with heresy,
and denounce damnation against them that keep not that custom, De co^nsecrat.
distin. 2. in glossa.
especially seeing your Canonists and schoolmen do grant that it is de
honestate tant^m, of decency only, not of necessity. And yet we are feign to
drink mingled wine many times against our wills: for the Minister need put in
no water, it is mixed to his hands many times. The Vintners craft stands very
well with popish profession.

Thirdly, we hold it rather to be a superstitious custom and contrary to
Christ's institution: for he in his last supper gave wine, not water to be
drunk, for he calls it the fruit of the Vine, which is wine and not water.

Fourthly, the water and blood which issued out of Christ's side, signify no
such thing, but rather as S. John expounds them: by water, is betokened our
washing from our sins, whereof Baptism is a pledge: by blood, the full
satisfaction that Christ has made for our sins, whereof the other sacrament
is a ^eale, 1. John. 5.6. This is that Jesus Christ, that came by water and
blood, not by water only, but by water and blood. By the which words the
Apostles meaning is not, that by the water and blood, which were shed upon the
cross, we should understand the Sacraments of the Church: but those spiritual
graces, whereof the Sacraments are lively signs, namely the satisfaction and
ransom of our sins by Christ's blood, and our ablution and washing from the
same.

Augustine picketh out no such fancy out of this mystery as you do, for the
mixture of wine and water: but he does more fitly apply it to the sacraments of
the church. E Christi latere dormientis in cruce promanarunt sacramenta
ecclesiae, in Psalm. 138. Out of Christ's side dying upon the Cross, issued the
sacraments of the Church: namely, Baptism, and the Eucharist. He draws not
both water and wine to signify one sacrament, but applies them to both.

THE FIFTH QVESTION, OF THE words of consecration.
The Papists.
THese words (say they) This is my body, to be spoken over the bread, and the
of the Sacraments and words of consecration: which being uttered, immediately
the elements are changed into the body and blood of Christ: wherefore these
words are not to be read historically for the instruction of the people, but
they are only consecratory words, to be pronounced over the elements:
Rhemist. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 11. Bellarm. lib. 4. de sacram. cap. 13.

Argu. If these were not the only words of consecration This is my body, and
if presently upon the uttering of these words the body of Christ was not
present: then should not the words of Christ be true, Bellarm. ibid.

The Protestants.
1. WE acknowledge no such consecration at all, by virtue whereof the elements
are converted and transubstantiate into the body of Christ, as we have before
showed. A consecration we grant, which is a setting apart of the elements,
which before were common, to holy uses, and by the vetue of Christ's
institution, to be made unto us signs of holy things.

Secondly, those are not the only words of consecration, This is my body, and,
This is the cup of my blood, and yet Christ's words shall be true: for we must
not dismember the sentence: Christ says, Take, eat ye, this is my body: it is
then made his body to be taken and eaten: by taking then and eating, the
elements also are consecrated, not only by saying of the words: ye must not
then divide the words of the institution, for then they shall no more
consecrate, then if you should pronounce but two of your consecratory words,
as, This is, or, My body, and leave out the rest.

Thirdly, that these are not the only words of consecration, it appears,
because both the bread was broken and distributed, and the Cup also, before
Christ spoke those words, as Math. 26.26. for first Christ says, Take, eat,
and, Take and drink, before he said* either, This is my body, or, This is my
blood: neither can ye well tell yourselues, which are your consecratory words
for the Cup, whether those that Matthew sets down, This is my blood of the
new testament: or as Luke has, This Cup is the new testament in my blood.
Nay, Bellarmine uses an other form beside these: Hic est calix^s^^ guinis*
This is the Cup of my blood, Bellarm. cap. 13.

Fourthly, we conclude then, that not only these words, but all the rest
belonging to the institution, are to be rehearsed in the Sacrament, both to
instruct the people, that they may know the right use of the Sacrament: and
they help also with the rest of the whole action, of taking, eating, drinking,
praying, thanksgiving, to consecrate and make the Sacrament, as we have showed
more at large before: controu. 11. quest. 1. part 2. to that place we refer
the Reader.

THE SIXTH QVESTION, OF THE PROPER effect and use of the Lords Supper.
The Papists.
THey do generally hold, that this Sacrament was not properly ordained
Trident. Council. sess. 13. can. 5. Bellarm. lib. 4. de sacram. cap. 17.

Secondly, they teach, that faith is not sufficient to prepare us for the
Communion: and although a man be never so contrite, quantumcunque se contritos
existiment, yet they must be thoroughly purged and absolved from their mortal
sins, before they come to communicate, Council. Trident. sess. 13. canon. 11.
Bellarm. ibid.

Argum. 1. They that receive the Communion, are one body as they are partakers
of one bread, 1. Cor. 10.17. but they which are in any grievous and deadly
sin, are not lively members of Christ, and of his mystical body: therefore
the sacrament does not profit them at all, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. Neither do we affirm, that men ought rashly and presumptuously to
come to the Lords table, but to repent them thoroughly of their sins, and to
have a steadfast and lively faith in Christ, who cannot be said, thus preparing
themselves, to remain in their sins: neither yet are they so fully acquitted
of them, that they need not to receive the Sacrament to their comfort, and to
strengthen their faith in the hope and assurance of the remission of sins.
Secondly, wherefore all this hinders not, but that they should be true members
of Christ's body, even having a troubled conscience, and laboring under the
burden of their sins: for the weak and sick parts of the body, are they
therefore no parts at all, because of their infirmities? Augustine says very
well, Cont. 2. epi. Pelag. 3.3.
Non filios diaboli faciunt quaecunque peccata, pecca^t enim et filij Dei: In
quibus non est fides, filij sunt Diaboli: Every sin makes not a man the child
of the devil, for the Children of God also sin: but they which have no faith,
are the sons of the Devil. Ergo, all sins cut not men off from the body of
Christ, but only the want of faith: they then that have sinned, and do repent
them and come with faith, are still the sons of God, and members of Christ's
body.

Argum. 2. There is not one and the same proper use and end of diverse
Sacraments: but Baptism is received for remission of sins. Ergo, the
Eucharist is not for that end, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. The death of Christ, and so remission of sins purchased by the same,
is properly represented unto us in both Sacraments: yet in a diverse respect:
for as to be borne is one thing, to be fed and nou^^shed is another: yet both
work the same thing in the body, though diversely: for the birth gives life,
meat and drink preserves it: the same difference is between Baptism and the
Lords Supper, they both are seals unto us of our justification, in the
remission of sins by Christ: but by Baptism we are initiated, regenerate and
borne anew, and engrafted into the body of Christ. The other sacrament does
confirm, increase, and nourish our faith, already begun and planted in us, for
the remission of sins, and all other benefits of Christ's passion.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we do truly affirm and teach, that an especial and principal use of
the Eucharist or Communion, is to strengthen and assure our faith of the
remission of sins: and yet we deny not, but that it has other uses beside:
for as in Baptism not only the washing away of our sins is showed forth,
but it also betokens our dying to sin, and rising to newnes of life, To.
6.3.4. So in the Lords supper whole Christ with all his benefits is exhibited
unto us, as it is a pledge unto us, not only of remission of sins, but that
Christ is become our righteousness and sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30. that he
will assist us with his spirit, and replenish our hearts with grace, Ioh. 4.14.
yea, the spiritual eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ, is a
pledge unto us of the resurrection, and of life eternal, Ioh. 6.54. But that
amongst the rest, it also assures us of remission of sins, thus it is proved.

Argum. Christ after S. Matthew says, This is the blood of the new testament,
that is shed for many for remission of sins, Math. 26.28. But the new
testament includes a promise of remission of sins, Iere. 31.34. Yea our
Savior sets it down in plain terms: for why else should our Savior make
express mention of forgiveness of sins, if this sacrament did not serve for
that use?

Secondly, we do hold, that to have a lively faith in the promises of God,
with repentance for our sins, and a full purpose to amend our lives, is a
sufficient preparation for the Communion: and that this sacrament is a
sovereign remedy for a troubled conscience. Neither ought men to refrain from
the Communion, till they have fully satisfied for their sins, as the Papists
teach, and are cleared in their conscience of all their sins: for so, few or
none at all, should be admitted to the Lords table: but in whom faith has
already wrought repentance in some measure, he may safely receive the sacrament
for his further comfort, and assurance of remission of sins.

Argum. John. 6.35. He that believes in me, says Christ, shall never thirst:
S. Paul also exhorts men to examine themselves, 1. Corin. 11.28. which is
nothing else, as himself expondethu it, then to prove whether they be in the
faith, 2. Cor. 13.5. Ergo, the examination or trial of faith, is a sufficient
preparation for the Lords table.

Augustine says, Ad Deum acceditur, fide sectando, cord inhiando, charitate
currando. We come or have access unto God in following him by faith, seeking
him in our heart, and running to him with love, In Psalm. 33. concion. 2. Ergo,
by faith we have access unto God, Romans 5.2. but a lively faith, which works
by love, Galath. 5.6.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, OF THE manner to be observed in receiving the communion.
The Papists.
1 THey hold it in no wise lawful for Christians, otherwise then fasting to
Council. Constantiens. sess. 13. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 22.
ratione. 4.

The Protestants.
1 WHat they here understand by necessity, it may be doubted, seeing they
themselves will not grant the like necessity to be in the Eucharist, as they
say there is of Baptism: All sacraments, we grant, are necessary, that is,
profitable, expedient, requisite, so often as they may be had: But none so
necessary, that the want thereof unto a faithful man, that in heart does wish
and desire them, can be any hindrance to his salvation.

2 That it is lawful for any man to eat before he come to the communion, if
his stomach be weak, and not able to fast so long (for otherwise, if a man can
abstain, we wish him so to do rather) Saint Paul shows, writing to the
Corinthians, 1. cap. 11.34. If any man be hungry, let him eat at home. Some of
them, he says, came hungry, some drunken, verse. 21. the Apostle commends
neither, but tells them, if they be hungry, they have houses to eat in.
Again, in that our Savior Christ after supper instituted the sacrament, it
does evidently declare unto us, that it is no sin to eat or drink before we
receive the sacrament.

Augustine says, Neminem cogimus dominica illa coena prandere, sed nulli etiam
contradicere audemus: Epist. 118. cap. 7.
We compel none to take the Lords Supper in dinner while, or after dinner,
neither dare we forbid any so to do: so he makes it a thing indifferent, to
communicate fasting or otherwise.

The Papists.
2 THey bind the people only once in the year to receive the communion
Council. Trident. sess. 13. can. 9.

The Protestants.
2 THis decree of theirs is contrary to the practice of the Apostles, whom the
Rhemists confess to have ministered the sacrament to the Christians daily,
Annotat. Act. 2. sect. 6. So expounding the words of the text, They continued
daily in breaking of bread.

2. It seems also to be contrary to Saint Paul's rule, who speaks of often
communicating: Do this, says he, as often as you drink it, 1. Corinthians. 11.25.
For seeing the eating of that bread, and drinking of that cup, is nothing
else, but a showing forth of the Lords death till he come: who sees not, that
it ought oftener then once or twice in the year to be received, seeing the
death of Christ ought continually to be remembered, and showed forth?

3 Therefore Augustine does boldly reprehend their custom that content
themselves with once receiving in the year: Si panis quotidianus est, cur post
annum illum sumas? accipe quotidie, quod quotidie tibi prosit: If it be thy
daily bread, why do thou take it but yearly? take that daily and
continually, which may profit thee daily, In Luke sermon. 28.

THE EIGHT QVESTION, OF Receiving the Sacrament in one kind.
The Papists.
Council. Trident. sess. 21. can. 1. And whosoever says, that the Church has
erred or done amiss, in decreeing that lay men and the Clergy not saying
Mass, should receive in the one kind, that is bread only: Or that it is
lawful for them to communicate in both, contrary to the determination of the
Church: let him be accursed, Council. Trident. sess. 21. can. 2. Rhemist. John.
6. sect. 11. Bellarmin. lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 20.

Argum. 1. Christ is all and whole in every part of the sacrament, his blood
by a certain concomitance is in the bread, and his flesh by the like
concomitance is in the cup, for otherwise Christ should be divided: But every
spirit, says the Apostle, that dissolueth Jesus, is of God, 1. John. 4.3.
Wherefore he that receives in one kind, is as well partaker of whole Christ,
and of the full grace and effect of the sacrament, as if he received in both,
Bellarmin. cap. 21.

Ans. 1. We deny any such concomitance of the blood and flesh of Christ in the
sacrament: for he is not in his carnal presence with his very flesh and blood
there included, as we have showed before: the bread and wine are signs only
of his body and blood, and therefore Christ is not divided, they being the
signs only and not the thing signified.

2 The place alleged out of Saint John is greatly abused and corrupted by
them, while they choose rather to follow their old blind latin translation,
then the authentical Greek text: the words in the original are, Every
spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ: not, every spirit that dissolueth:
And this may appear to be the true reading, by the opposition in the former
verse, Every spirit that confesses Jesus, is of GOD: therefore this is the
best reading, Every spirit that confesses not Jesus: as being set opposite
and contrary to the other verse. Again, the Rhemists understand this place
after their own reading, of the dissoluing of the humanity and divinity of
Christ: not of any such separation of the flesh and blood of Christ, as
Bellarm. supposes.

3 This their device of concomitance ouerthwarteth the institution of Christ:
For he says, the bread is his body, the wine his blood: but by their rule, the
bread is his blood, and the wine his body. And be it granted, that the blood
of Christ is in the bread, yet how can any man be said to drink it in bread? We
use to eat bread, not to drink bread: his blood therefore cannot be there,
because it cannot be drunk there.

Argum. 2. Luke 24.30. Christ brake bread to his disciples, Act. 2.42. the
Apostles brake bread: Ergo, to communicate in one kind is grounded upon the
example of Christ and his Apostles, Bellarmin. lib. 4. de Eucharist. 24.
Rhemist. John. 6.11. And Christ says, Whosoever shall eat this bread, shall
live for ever, John 6.58. Ergo, it is sufficient to receive in one kind.

Answer: 1. To the two first places, we say, that it is not necessary to
understand the breaking of bread in the sacrament: but the usual bread rather,
which was accustomed in their daily repasts and feasts after thanksgiving to
be broken. Or, if we take it for the sacrament, the breaking of bread is by a
Synecdoche taken for the whole mystery, as it is an usual phrase of speech in
scripture: for otherwise we will conclude as well, that Christ and the
Apostles did but consecrate in one kind, which they hold for a great
absurdity, as that the other received but in one kind: But their opinion is,
that although the people must communicate in one kind only, yet the Priest
must consecrate both, Rhemist. annotat. John. 6. sect. 11.

2 To the second place we answer: First it is not understood of the
sacramental eating of Christ, but of the spiritual manducation of him, which
may be done without a sacrament: For whosoever eats this bread, shall live
for ever: but whosoever eats the sacrament, shall not live for ever.
Secondly, seeing the eating and drinking of Christ are so often joined in this
chapter, as verse. 53.55.56. they might well know, that drinking is here to be
understood, though it be not expressed.

Argum. 3. In many countries there is no wine to be had, as in the cold
Northerly countreies: and therefore they cannot communicate according to the
institution: whereupon that there might be an uniformity in all Churches, it
is most meet that where wine may be had, they should notwithstanding be
content to receive it in one kind, Bellarmin. cap. 28. Also there may arise
much inconvenience in granting the cup to the people, as in spilling and
sheading the wine, which after consecration is the blood of Christ, Rhemist.
annot. John 6. sect. 11.

Answ. 1. As in some countries there is no wine to be had, so we find that
in certain places and regions of the world there is no bread, such as Christ
used, Lib. 1. cap. 27.
made of wheat or the like grain: as in some places amongst the West Indians,
they have a certain kind of bread made of roots called Cazabi, as Benzo
witnesses. Wherefore by this reason of uniformity, we should not communicate
at all, either in bread or wine, seeing that as some countries are destitute
of wine, so other are of bread: but all this not withstanding, the sacrament
may be duly administered in all places in both kinds: and where they have
neither bread nor wine, neither can possibly provide them, they may safely use
such other elements, as do stand them in the like stead: as in the place of
bread, that which comes nearest to the use thereof: and for wine, some other
precious liquor, that is to be had, as in Russia in stead of wine they use a
certain drink like unto that which we call Metheglen.

2 As for the other reasons of the inconveniences in spilling the wine, shaking
the cup, the hanging of it on men's beards, and other such frivolous
allegations: as they were no let or hinderance, why Christ notwithstanding did
not institute the sacrament in both kinds, and the Church accordingly observed
it, as we read, the Corinthians did communicate in both kinds: so ought they
to be no reason, why Christians should not receive in both kinds now.

The Protestants.
WE hold it to be an Antichristian practice of the Church of Rome, to take
away from the people the cup in the sacrament: for although they sometime
minister the cup to the people, yet they use no consecration over it, neither
give it as any part of the sacrament, Fulk. annotat. 1. Corinthians. 4.10. sect.
4. They do therefore offer great wrong to the people of God, in depriving them
of the one half of the communion.

Argum. 1. John 6.53. Christ says, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of
man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Here we see both eating and
drinking are joined together: Ergo, Christians ought to do both. This place
makes strongly against our adversaries, who do expound it of the sacramental
eating and drinking of Christ.

Argum. 2. Christ instituted the sacrament in both kinds, giving charge and
commandment to all Christians in the same manner to celebrate it: for he
says, Drink ye all of this. If our adversaries answer, as they do, that
this was spoken to the Apostles: by the like reason they may say also, that
when Christ said, Take, eat; he spoke unto his Apostles, and so the people
should neither receive bread and wine, but the Ministers only.

Again, Saint Paul, the best expounder of our Savior Christ, declares the
right use of the Lords Supper in both kinds for all Christians: for he
writes to the whole congregation, and Church of the Corinthians, not to the
Pastors and teachers only: and to every Christian he says, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, verse. 28.

Argum. 3. The Priest that says Mass, you allow to consecrate and receive in
both kinds, because he must express lively the passion of Christ and the
separation of his blood from his body in the same: Rhemist. annotat. John.
6.58. By the same reason all the communicants ought to receive in both kinds,
because they do all show forth the death of Christ, and sheading of his
blood in the sacrament: 1. Corinthian. 11.26. And seeing the cup is a sign
of the blood of Christ shed for remission of sins, Math. 26.28. for as much
as the thing signified, that is, the remission of sins, in the blood of
Christ, is common to all faithful Christians, why should they not as well be
partakers of the sign?

Argum. 4. This prohibition for lay men, not to receive in both kinds, is but
a late devise of the Church of Rome, not past two hundred year old, decreed
no longer ago then in the Council of Constance, Fox. page 1150. yet after
that, he Council of Basile granted the use and liberty of the cup to the
Bohemians, Fox. page 694.

Thus they take upon them to overrule men's consciences, now restrayning, now
again granting liberty, binding and loosing at their pleasure.

In Augustines time there was no such separation of the cup from the bread:
but both were indifferently used in the communion: Cum cibo and potu, says he,
id appetant homines vt neque esuriant, neque sitiant, Tract. in Johan. 27.
hoc veraciter non praestat, nisi iste cibus and potus, etc. As men by their
meat and drink do provide, that they neither hunger nor thirst: so this
spiritual meat and drink works the same effect in us. Whereupon it
follows, that seeing in the sasacrament is contained and signified the full
and sufficient nourishment of our souls by the flesh and blood of Christ, it
must needs be resembled by the outward full sufficient nourishment of our
bodies, which is not by eating alone, but by eating and drinking.

THE NINTH QVESTION OF THE adoration of the Eucharist.
The Papists.
Trent, that the Eucharist should be adored even with the highest degree of
worship, ( Cultu latreiae) which is proper to God: that it should also be
carried about in solemn processions, to be showed to the people, to be
worshipped and adored of them. And whosoever holds the contrary, they
pronounce accursed, Trident. Council. sess. 13. can. 6.

Argum. 1. Hebr. 1.6. Worship him all ye Angels. Ergo, Christ in the sacrament*
and wheresoever else his person is, ought to be adored of men and Angels,
Rhemist. ibid. This Saint Paul means, they say, by discerning the Lords
body, 1. Corinthians. 11.29. that is, adoring, worshipping it, and making prayers
unto it, Rhemist. ibid.

Answ. 1. We deny Christ to be present in the sacrament really, corporally,
substantially: therefore it is not to be adored: 2. Although the body of Christ
were present in that manner under the accidents of bread and wine, yet unless
Christ be so present, that the elements or the accidents of the elements be
joined and united unto him in one person, as the Godhead and humanity make but
one person, he is no more to be adored, then God the father is to be
worshipped in the Sun or Moon, in the which he is verily present. But to say
that the visible forms and elements are joined in an hypostaticall union to
Christ, as his humanity is to his Godhead, it is great blasphemy. 3. A
reverent estimation and discerning of the Lords body we grant in the
sacrament; in preferring the elements before all other meats and drinks,
because of their mystical signification, as we prefer the mystical washing
in Baptism before all other: but to kneel, hold up the hands, and to
worship a piece of bread, we count it gross and abominable Idolatry.

The Protestants.
THat the sacrament is not to be adored with any godly worship, but only to be
duly reverenced as an holy mystery: thus we prove it by the word of God.

Argum. 1. In the first instituting of the sacrament, the Apostles received it
sitting, not kneeling, by taking of it, not lifting up their hands to it.
Ergo, they did not adore it, neither is it by us to be adored.

Again Christ commands us, only to Take, and eat and drink, and to do
all in remembrance of him: the sacrament therefore was appointed to be eaten
and drunken, not to be carried about, or to be gazed upon, or to be kneeled
unto.

Argum. 2. Christ, as we have showed, is no otherwise present in the Eucharist,
then in Baptism. But the water in Baptism is not to be adored: Ergo, neither
the bread in the sacrament.

Augustine did not so much as dream of any adoration of the sacrament: A
Cerere and Libero Paganorum dijs, long absumus, quamus panis and calicis
sacramentum nostro ritu amplectimur: We do not worship the heathenish Gods of
corn and wine, Ceres and Bacchus, although after our manner we embrace the
sacrament of the bread and of the cup. His meaning is, that Christians do not
worship bread and wine in the sacrament, as the heathen did, Cont. Faust.

In sacramenti sanctificatione and distributione existimo Apostolum proprie
iussisse fieri (...) orationes, 1. Tim. 2.1. Quod vero quidam codices, non
habent orationes, sed adorationes, non arbitror scienter interpretatum: In the
consecrating and distributing of the sacrament, I think the Apostle bade
orations or prayers to be made, not as some do unlearnedly interpret,
adorations or worshippings, Epistol. 59. Ergo, he approves not the adoration
of the sacrament.

AN APENDIX, OR TENTH PART, whether the wicked do receive the body of Christ.
The Papists.
THe wicked, they say, do in the sacrament eat the true flesh of Christ and

Argum. They are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1. Corinthians. 11.27.
How can they be guilty of that, which they have not received? And again, by
the unworthy receiving of no other sacrament, is a man made guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, but only here: Ergo, the wicked are partakers of his
body? Rhemist. annot. 1. Corint. 11. sect. 16.

Answer: 1. The wicked may be guilty of the body and blood of Christ in
unworthy receiving the sacrament, though Christ be not corporally present: Even
as he that contumeliously receives the seal of the prince or abuses his
image, is guilty of the Majesty of the prince, though he have not hurt his
person. 2. He also may be guilty of the blood of Christ, that despises
Baptism, which he received as a sign of his washing in the blood of Christ.
And so the Apostle says of wicked men, that fall away from Christian religion,
that they crucify again to themselves the Son of God, Heb. 6.6.

Augustine also brings in Christ thus speaking to the wicked in the day of
judgment, Grauior apud me est, peccatorum tuorum crux, in qua inuitus pendeo,
quam illa, in quam tuimisertus ascendi: the cross of thy sins, whereby thou
did crucify me, was more grievous unto me, then the Cross, to the which for
thy cause I was lifted up: Sermon. 181. cap. 7. de tempor. Thus we see, that
wicked men by their sinful life may crucify Christ, though they can offer no
violence to his body.

The Protestants.
THat wicked men and Infidels, cannot in any sense be partakers of the true
body and blood of Christ, thus it is proved.

Argum. 1. By faith only are we made partakers of the body and blood of
Christ: but this faith the wicked cannot have. The first part is proved out of
the Gospel: He only that drinks of the blood of Christ shall never thirst
again, John 4.14. He that shall never thirst, must believe in Christ, John
6.35. Ergo, he only that believes does drink the blood of Christ. So
Augustine says, Nolite parare fances, sed cor, non quod videtur, sed quod
creditur, pascit: do not prepare your jaws, but your heart, it is not that
which is seen, but what is believed, that nourishes: Ergo, Christ must be
received by faith: therefore Infidels or unbelievers cannot receive him.

Argum. 2. Whosoever eats the flesh of Christ and drinks his blood, shall
have eternal life, John 6.54. But the wicked have not eternal life: Ergo,
they neither eat nor drink Christ.

Augustine says, De mensa dominica sumitur quibusdam ad mortem, quibusdam ad
vitam: Tract. in Johan. 26.
res vero, cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam; nulli ad exitium,
quicunque eius particeps fuerit: From the Lords table some do receive unto
life, some unto death: but the thing, whereof it is a sacrament, works in all
to life, in none to death, whosoever are partakers of it. But the body and
blood of Christ are the things signified in the sacrament: Ergo, whosoever
receives them, has life thereby; the wicked then receive them not.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CONTROVERSY, CONCERNING the Popish Mass.
THis part likewise comprehends diverse questions.

1 Of the diverse representations of the death and sacrifice of Christ.

2 Of the sacrifice of the Mass, the name thereof, and of the sacrificing
priesthood.

3 Of the virtue and efficacy which they falsely ascribe to the Mass.

4 For whom the sacrifice of the Mass is available: whether for the quick
and the dead.

5. Of private Masses.

6. Of the manner of saying and celebrating Mass.

7. Of the ceremonies which they use in the idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass:
some go before: some are observed in the celebration thereof.

8. Of the form of the Mass, which consists partly of the Canon, and of the
preface to the Canon, where we are to show the foul and heretical blasphemies,
which in great number are belched out by them in the Mass. Of these now in
their order.

THE FIRST QVESTION OF THE DIVERSE representations of the death of Christ.
The Papists.
THey are not contented with that one lively representation of the death of
Christ, which is exhibited in the Lords Supper, but they have brought in
simplex repraesentatio, a simple and plain representation of the death of
Christ, which is done so often as the Sacrament is received: the second is
Repraesentatio ad vinum, A lively and full representation of Christ's death:
which they do use yearly to set forth by solemn gestures, apparel, and
other ceremonies upon Good Friday, as it is commonly called, before Easter,
when they do make nothing else but a Pageant play of the Sacrament: the third
representation is also a sacrifice beside, and that is the sacrifice of the
Mass, Bellarm. de Missa. lib. 1. cap. 1. The Rhemists make a fourth
representation beside, which is in the solemn receiving of the Communion at
Easter: So then first, Christ's death is showed forth by the Sacrament of the
Eucharist all the year long as it hangs in the pixe, or when it is carried
to house the sick, Catechism. Romans page 408. Secondly, it is represented once
in the year by their solemn Pageant upon good Friday, when there is no
Sacrament consecrated, but an histrionicall expressing by certain gestures and
actions, the manner of Christ's crucifying. Thirdly, in the continual sacrifice
of the Mass, Christ his death is represented. And lastly, in the solemn
receiving at Easter: for then especially, the mystery of Christ our Paschall
lamb is commended to the people to be eaten with all sincerity in the
Sacrament: and so do the Rhemist. expound that place of Saint Paul, Let us
keep feast or holy day, not with the leaven of malitiousnes, 1. Cor. 6.8.
literally applying it to the feast of Easter, Rhemist. in hunc locum.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we are taught by the word of God, that by eating the bread, and
drinking of the cup in the Sacrament, not by gazing, looking, lifting up,
turning, hanging up bread in pixes, or by any such means, but only as we have
said, is the Lords death showed forth and represented, 1. Corinthians. 11.26. We
acknowledge therefore one only Sacramental representation of Christ, and no
more in the Lords Supper: the sacrifice of the Mass we judge to be an
abominable idol, as afterward shall be showed.

Secondly, it is a foul absurdity to make any representation of Christ's
death, by bare gestures, shows, and actions of the body without any
Sacrament, as they do in their popish pageants upon Christ's Passion day: for
at that time there is no Sacrament consecrated, Eckius. cap. 15. But the
Priest, by certain gestures and motions of the body, in bowing, bending,
casting abroad his arms and such like, does resemble Christ crucified,
Bellarm cap. 1. But to call this a lively representation being done without a
Sacrament, and the other in the Sacrament, simplicem repraesentationem, but a
simple and plain representation, is too great presumption: wherein they prefer
their own superstitious devises, before the ordinance of Christ.

Thirdly, that place of Saint Paul is unfitly applied to the celebration of
Ester: Augustine expounds it far otherwise: Diem festum celebremus, non
vtique vnam diem, sed totam vitam in azymis synceritatis and veritatis: Let us
keep holy day, not one only day, but all our life long, in the unleavened
bread of pureness and truth. So then in Augustines judgment, the Apostle had
no relation to any certain time, which he would have kept holy: but to the
reformation of the whole life.

THE SECOND QVESTION, OF THE sacrifice of the Mass and the Priesthood thereto
belonging.
THE FIRST PART, OF THE name and term of Mass.
The Papists.
Missa the Mass, Quia oblatio and preces ad Deum mittantur, Hugo, de S.
Victore. Others, quod Angelus a Deo mittatur, quisacrificio assistat* Because
an angel is sent of God to be assistant at the Mass. Thom. Aquinas. 3. part.
quaest. 83. artic. 4. Some, of the hebrew word Missath, Deuteronomy. 16. which
signifies an oblation: Some, ex missis donarijs, and symbolis, of the gifts
and offerings sent or put in before the Communion. But what beginning soever it
had, they do now generally take the Mass, for that solemn action, whereby
the Sacrament is made a sacrifice, and offered up to God. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
missa. cap. 1.

The Protestants.
WE do not greatly force upon this name: for both the name and the thing is
abolished from our hearts and mouths; and we trust in God, we shall never
have occasion to know it again. But howsoever it is, this name Missa, Mass,
cannot signify any such thing as they pretend.

1 For it seems that Missa was derived, a dimissione populi, of the dimission
or sending away of the people: and so was taken generally for any congregation
assembled either to pray, or sing Psalms, or for any other religious duty:
As yet to this day in the Dutch language (Mess) signifies any solemn
frequencie or congregation of the people. In this sense Cassianus understands
Mass, that is, for the dimission of the people: De canonicis orat. lib. ^.
cap. 7.
speaking of him that comes not timely to the hours of prayer: he would
not have him to enter in, but stantem pro foribus congregationis missam
praestolari debere: he ought standing without the doors to wait for the
miss of the congregation.

2 Augustine takes this word Missa generally for the leiturgie or service of
the Church, as sermon. de tempore 251. if that Sermon be Augustines. Sunt aliqui,
and maxim potentes huius mundi, cum veniunt ad ecclesiam, non sunt deuoti ad
lauds Dei celebrandas, sed cogunt presbyteru^ vt abbreuiet Missam: there are
some, and commonly the great men of the world, which come not to Church with
any devotion to sing praises to God, but they constrain the presbyter or
Minister to make short Mass. Here this word Mass signifies the whole
leiturgie, as singing of Psalms, and praising God; not any sacrifice or
oblation: for then he would have said, Cogunt sacerdotem, not presbyterum, They
constrain the priest, not the Minister. Wherefore as the sacrifice of the
Mass is of no great antiquity, so neither is the name in that sense.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE sacrifice of the Mass.
The Papists.
CHrist, they say, at his last Supper, did offer up his own body and blood in
Council. Tridentin. sess. 22. cap. 1. And the same body which Christ offered up
upon the cross, is daily offered up by the ministry of the Priests, the
difference only is in the manner of offering, Council. Trident. ibid. c. 2. The
eternity and proper act of Christ's Priesthood, consists in the offering and
sacrificing of the body and blood of Christ in the forms of bread and wine in
the Church, Rhem. Heb. 7. sect. 8. And we mean always of Priest and sacrifice
taken in their own proper signification, ibid. sect. 7. In the Eucharist then
there is a true sacrifice of the very body and blood of Christ offered up to
God, by the hands of the Priest, in the forms of bread and wine, Bellarm. cap.
5.

Argum. 1. Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: but the proper
act of Melchisedechs priesthood did consist in sacrificing in the forms of
bread and wine: Ergo, the eternity of Christ's priesthood stands in the
sacrificing of his body and blood in those forms: there does therefore still
remain a proper external sacrifice in the Church, Rhemist. annot. Hebr. 7.
sect. 8. Bellarm. cap. 6.

Ans. 1. We confess, that Melchisedech was a type of our Savior Christ, and
that he was a Priest after Melchisedechs order: but not in any such respect,
for offering in bread and wine: for the text says, he brought forth bread and
wine, he offered it not: he brought it forth for the refreshing of Abraham, and
those which were with him, Genes. 14.18.

2. He brought forth bread and wine, and not the forms only of bread and
wine, therefore your sacrifice in the forms only is not after his order.

3. If Melchisedechs bringing forth of bread and wine were a sacrifice or
oblation, and a type of the like sacrifice to continue for ever in the Church,
it must also have been a propitiatory sacrifice for the remission of sins,
as they say the sacrifice of the Mass is, which was thereby signified: but
there is no propitiatory sacrifice for remission of sins, without shedding
of blood, Hebr. 9.22. Therefore Milchisedechs act, being without blood, was no
such sacrifice, and consequently none at all.

4. The Apostle to the Hebrews shows, wherein Christ was a Priest after
Melchisedechs order, Heb. 7. First, in that Melchisedech was both king and
Priest, verse 2. so is Christ. Secondly, in respect of the eternity of his
Priesthood: we do not read either of the beginning of his days, or end of
his life, nor of any change of his priesthood, verse. 3. Al which is most
truly verified in Christ. Thirdly, Melchisedech was a type of Christ, and his
Priesthood of Christ's, because of the excellency thereof above the Leuiticall
Priesthood: for Leui paid tithes in Abraham to Melchisedech, and therefore
was inferior, and was blessed of Melchisedech in Abraham, the less of the
greater: so is the Priesthood of Christ advanced far above Aarons order. If
in any other material point Melchisedechs Priesthood had resembled Christ's,
as in this oblation of bread and wine, the Apostle would not have omitted it.

5. Therein consisted the proper act of Melchisedechs priesthood, for the
which he received tithes of Abraham: but, as the Apostle says, he received
tithes, and blessed Abraham, Heb. 7.6. Ergo, the tithes were due not for any
sacrifice which he offered, but for his blessing. The same therefore was the
proper act of his Priesthood.

Argum. 2. They allege that place, Heb. 8.3. Every high Priest is appointed to
offer gifts and hosts, wherefore it is necessary that he also have somewhat
to offer. Christ then has a certain host in external and proper manner, as
other Priests have, but this visible and external act of sacrificing he does
not exercise now in heaven: therefore it must needs be meant of the
perpetual oblation of his body and blood in the Church: for somewhat he must
always have to offer, Rhemist. Hebr. 8. sect. 3.

Ans. 1. The Apostle says not, that it is necessary that Christ should still
have somewhat to offer in sacrifice: but that it was needful for him to have
somewhat, which he had already offered: for the verb (...), signifies not
the present tence, but the time past: whereby is understood the oblation which
he had already offered once, and which need not be repeated, Hebr. 7.27. For
as herein he is like to other Priests, that he must have somewhat to have
offered, so is he unlike also in this, that they by reason of their infirmity
had need to offer often: but Christ our high Priest did it but once, as in that
place the Apostle shows.

2. The gift which the Apostle in this place attributes to Christ, Verse. 2.
was his body, which he calls the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pight and
not man. But that body of Christ, which they say is offered up in the
sacrifice of the Mass, is not of that nature: for it is made by the ministry
of man: for every one of their sacrificing Priests is able to make the body of
Christ: but this body, which Christ had to offer, was made only by God,
without the help of man, as the Apostle says. Again, say, if you dare, that
the body which you offer, is the true Tabernacle and temple of God: for then
it would follow, that God dwells in temples made with hands, that is, by the
ministry of man, contrary to the Scriptures: seeing you affirm that the
body of Christ is no otherwise present but by the ministry of the Priest.
And what a goodly Tabernacle is this for God, think you, which you shut up in
a pixe, and hang up in your Churches? A mouse may eat it, the fire may consume
it, corruption may take it: would God suffer his Tabernacle thus to be defiled?
Wherefore upon these premises we conclude, that what you offer in your popish
sacrifice, cannot be the proper gift belonging to Christ's Priesthood.

Argum. 3. The Apostle says, Hebr. 13.10. We have an altar, whereof they have
no power to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle. Ergo, we have not only a
common table to eat mere bread upon, but a very altar in the proper sense to
sacrifice Christ's body upon. Rhemist. annot. Hebr. 13. sect. 6.

Ans. First, the Apostle speaks of the sacrifice of Christ's death, whereof we
are made partakers by faith: which they can reap no benefit by, which remain
in the ceremonial observations of Leuiticall sacrifices. Christ therefore is
our Priest, altar and sacrifice: for verse 12. the Apostle makes mention of
the sufferings of Christ: he means not then the Communion table, which is
improperly called an altar, or any material altar beside, but the altar only
of Christ's death. Secondly, if wheresoever in Scripture this word (altar) is
read, it must be taken for a proper material altar, we shall have also a
material altar in heaven, Apoc. 8.3. which I am sure they will not grant.
Thirdly, the Apostle says, We have an altar, which is but one, whereas popish
altars are many: it cannot therefore be understood of such altars.

The Protestants.
THat there are spiritual sacrifices remaining yet unto Christians in the
exercise of religion, we do verily believe, being so taught by the Scriptures:
such are the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, Heb. 13.15. The sacrifice
of alms and distribution, verse 16. the mortifying also of the flesh, is a
kind of crucifying, and so a spiritual sacrifice, Galat. 6.14. And in this
sense we deny not, but that the Sacrament may be called a sacrifice, that is,
a spiritual oblation of praise and thanksgiving: but that there is a proper
and external sacrifice, as in the law of Goats and Bullocks, upon the cross
of the body of Christ: so in the Eucharist, of the same body and flesh of
Christ: we do hold it for a great blasphemy, and heresy.

Argum. 1. The very flesh, and true natural body of Christ, is not, as we
have showed before at large, in such carnal and corporal manner present in
the Sacrament: therefore it cannot in the Sacrament be sacrificed, and offered
up.

Argum. 2. This sacrificing of the body and blood of Christ is contrary to
Christ's institution: for he says only, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye: he
says not, Sacrifice ye, or lift up, and make an oblation of my body. Neither
do those words, hoc facite, do this, give them any power to sacrifice: for
to whom he says, Eat ye, drink ye, to the same also he says, Do ye.
Wherefore, if do ye, be as much as, sacrifice ye: all Christians, for whom
it is lawful to eat and drink the Sacrament, by this rule have authority to
sacrifice. Again, the words are, Do this in remembrance. We remember things
absent, and which are already done and past: if then there be a present
sacrifice in the Sacrament of the body of Christ, it cannot properly be said
to be a memory of his sacrifice.

Argum. 3. The Apostle says, that Christ need not to offer himself often,
but that he has done once in the end of the world, Heb. 9.26. And with one
offering, has he made perfect for ever them that are sanctified, 10.14. Ergo,
Christ cannot be sacrificed again: for that were to make his sacrifice upon
the cross imperfect.

Bellarmine answers: that the Apostle here speaks of the bloody and
painful sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, which was sufficient once to be
done: but this takes not away the unbloody sacrifice, which is but an
iteration of the former, whereby the fruit and efficacy of that first
oblation is applied unto us, Bellarm. lib. 1. de miss. cap. 25.

Ans. First, the Apostle excludes all manner iterations of the sacrifice of
Christ, for otherwise, if Christ should now be often howsoever sacrificed, the
difference would not hold between the sacrifices of the law which were often
done, and the sacrifice of Christ, which was once to be performed: for their
sacrifices were also in a manner iterations and commemorations of the sacrifice
of Christ. The Apostle then thus reasons, They had many iteratiue and
commemoratiue sacrifices of Christ's death: Ergo, we have not now. Secondly,
that is but a foolish and false distinction of the bloody and unbloody
sacrifice, as they understand it: for there can be no proper unbloody
sacrifice of Christ, neither could he be offered up, otherwise then by dying,
Heb. 9.27.28. Therefore he is not offered up in the Sacrament, because now he
dies not. Thirdly, neither need we invent a new kind of sacrifice, for the
application of Christ's death: for to that end Christ has appointed the
preaching of the word, and instituted the Sacraments: whereby the death of
Christ with all the benefits thereof, are most fruitefully applied unto us,
Galath. 3.1. 1. Corinthians. 11.26.

Argum. 4. Augustine in a certain place allegorizing the parable of the
prodigal child, thus writes, Vitulum occidit, Ad fratres in erem. sermon. 27.
quando in sacramento altario memoriam passionis in mente renouauit: He slew
the fat calfe, when he renewed in the Sacrament of the altar the memory of
his passion in his mind. He calls it the Sacrament, not the sacrifice of
the altar: and it only brings to our mind the memory of Christ's passion
and sacrifice: there is then no oblation or sacrifice in the Sacrament, but
only a commemoration of Christ's sacrifice, which we deny not.

AN APPENDIX OR THIRD PART, OF the name and office of Priests.
The Papists.
AS they do falsely teach and persuade, that there is yet remaining a proper
Melchisedechs rite, in offering up the body and blood of Christ in the forms
of bread and wine, Rhemist. annot. Hebr. 7. sect. 7. Wherefore they which
minister under the Gospel, are worthily called Priests: which word does so
certainly implie the authority of sacrificing, that it is by use made the
only English of Sacerdos, Rhemist. act. 14. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we hold it to be a great blasphemy to say, that the Priesthood and
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, is not that sacrifice or Priesthood into
the which the old sacrifice and Priesthood was translated and changed. The
Apostle proves the contrary: for that sacrifice, whereby the new Testament is
established, is that, whereunto the old sacrifice and Priesthood is
translated: but this is done by the singular sacrifice of Christ, who is the
surety of a better testament, Hebr. 7.23. Ergo, his singular sacrifice upon
the cross, is that whereinto the old Leuiticall sacrifices are changed, and no
other. Again the Priesthood after Melchisedechs order is that, into the which
the old Priesthood is changed: but the Priesthood of Christ upon the Cross
was after that order. Ergo. But here they are not ashamed to deny, that the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross was after Melchisedechs order, but do most
impudently and blasphemously affirm, that it was after the order of Aaron,
Heskin. lib. 1. cap. 13. And thus every vile massemonger shall be more properly
a Priest after Melchisedechs order, then Christ himself.

Secondly, none but Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: for
unto whom the Lord said, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, to him the Lord says also in the same Psalm, Sit thou at my
right hand, Psalm. 110. But this cannot agree to any popish Priest: therefore
not the other. Again, the Apostle makes this difference between the
Priesthood of the law and the Gospel: because then there were many Priests,
they being prohibited by death to continue: but Christ is the only Priest of
the New Testament, because he dies not, Heb. 7 23.24. If they answer, as they
do, that although there be many Priests, yet it is but one Priesthood,
because Christ concurreth with them in the acts of the Priesthood, Rhemist.

We answer, first, Christ concurreth with his faithful ministers in the acts
of their Ministry: but no such Priesthood do we acknowledge. Secondly, so
Christ concurred in the acts of the Leuiticall Priesthood, and the sacrifices
of the law that were rightly offered: wherefore this concurrence of Christ
does no more take away the multitude of Priests in the Gospel, then it did in
the law.

Thirdly, concerning the name of Priests in their sense, as it implies an
authority of sacrificing, we utterly abhor it: secondly, but as it is derived
of the Greek word (...)* which signifies an Elder, we refuse it not, but wish
rather, that it had not bin abused in common speech to signify popish
sacrificers. Thirdly, as for the word ( sacerdos) which may be englished a
sacrificer, we find it no where in the New Testament given to the ministers of
the Gospel, and so much Bellarmine confesses, cap. 17. And therefore unfitly
and improperly agrees unto them. If some of the fathers have confounded the
names of Sacerdos and ( Presbyter) they are not to be commended. The word
Sacerdos, a sacrificer, being a proper name of the Leuitical Priests, cannot
properly be attributed to the Ministers of the Gospel. To conclude, this word
(Priest) as it is the English of (Sacerdos) we do not approve: but as it
gives the sense of (Presbyter) from whence it is derived, we condemn it not:
for so it signifies nothing else but an Elder. If common use of speech have
drawn it to a contrary sense, it would be amended.

Quaest. euangelicar. lib. 2. quaest. 40.
Augustine says, Sacerdotiu^ Iudaeorum nemo dubitat, etc. No faithful man
doubts, but that the Priesthood of the law was a figure of the royal
Priesthood in the Church, whereby all that pertain to the body of Christ are
consecrated. He acknowledges no other Priesthood abiding in the Church, then
that whereby all Christians are made Priests, to offer spiritual sacrifices
unto God through Christ.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF THE VERTVE AND efficacy falsely ascribed to the
sacrifice of the Mass.
The Papists.
1. THey blasphemously affirm, that it is a sacrifice propitiatory, that is,
auailable ex opere operato, by the very work wrought, remission and pardon of
all their sins. Trident. Council. sess. 22. can. 3.

Argum. Christ himself says in the institution, This is my blood shed for you
for the remission of sins: Ergo, the sacrifice of the Mass is available for
remission of sins, Bellarm. lib. 2. de miss. cap. 2.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, Christ instituted no sacrifice, as we declared before, but only a
Sacrament in remembrance of his death and passion. Secondly, the Sacrament
rightly administered, serves to assure our faith of remission of sins by the
death of Christ: but it does not by it own virtue confer remission of
sins, neither profits by the work wrought: for the Apostle says, That
without faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11.6. wherefore no action
is accepted of God not proceeding of faith.

Argum. The Apostle says, Where there is remission of sins, there is no more
sacrifice for sin, Hebr. 10.18. Seeing then remission of sins is fully
obtained by the death and sacrifice of Christ, there can be no more sacrifice
for sin: Ergo, the Mass is no sacrifice for sin.

The Papists.
2. THe sacrifice of the Mass is not only propitiatory for sins, but
available Bellarm. cap. 3.

Argum. S. Paul wills, That prayers and intercessions should be made for all
men, especially for Kings, that we may lead a godly and a peaceable life, 1.
Timoth. 1.1. These are the prayers which are made in the celebration of the
Mass, Bellarm.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, the Apostle speaks generally of al prayers, made by whomsoever,
as it appears, verse. 8. Therefore this place is unfitly applied to the
prayers of Priests in the Mass. Secondly, this place proves, that temporal
benefits are obtained by faithful prayers, not by the sacrifice of the Mass,
which S. Paul never knew. Thirdly, Augustine indeed expounds this place of
the public prayers of the Church used in the administration of the Sacrament:
for he calls it, Epistol. 59.
Domini mensam, the Lords table, not the altar: he means nothing less then
your popish Mass

Argum. It is contrary to the institution of Christ, to apply the Sacrament
for any such temporal or external use. It was ordained to be received in
remembrance of Christ's death, to assure us by faith of remission of sins, and
other spiritual blessings: not to give us assurance of health, peace, life,
prosperity: for the obtaining of such blessings, according to the will of God,
other means are appointed. The ministry of the Sacraments no more serves
for such uses, then the preaching of the word.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, FOR WHOM THE sacrifice of the Mass is available.
The Papists.
Paul wills prayers and supplications to be made for all men, 1. Timoth. 2.1.
Bellarm. cap. 6.

Secondly, the sacrifice of the Mass is available for the dead which are in
Bellarm. cap. 7. Council. Trid. sess. 22. can. 3.

Bellarm. cap. 8.

Argum. The Apostles taught the Church to keep a memory or invocation of the
Saints in this sacrifice, and that there should be special prayers for the
dead: for these and such like were the things (no doubt) that S. Paul says he
would set in order when he came, 1. Cor. 11.34. Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. 1. To the place out of Timothy we have answered before, that it is
understood generally of all prayers made by the faithful: neither does it
follow, it is lawful to pray for all men, and therefore the Sacrament is
available for all men: for these are two diverse things: prayer is an effect of
our faith, the Sacrament is an instrumental or ministerial cause of our faith.

2. It is too great boldness for you, without scripture, to affirm, that these
superstitious rites of yours were those very orders which the Apostle promised
at his coming to establish: but either they were such as partained not to the
administration of the Sacrament, or were but accidental orders meet for the
Church of Corinth, and not necessary for all times and places.

The Protestants.
FIrst, the Sacrament (for sacrifice we acknowledge none) is only ordained for
their comfort that do receive it: neither can one receive the Sacrament for
another, no more then he may be baptized in the stead of another.

Secondly, neither does the celebration of the Sacrament profit the dead, as
we have showed before, that it is in vain to pray for them.

Thirdly, neither are the Saints, either then or at any other time to be prayed
unto, or either by this, or any other religious worship to be honored.

Argum. All these superstitious obseruances are clean contrary and repugnant
to the institution of Christ. First, he says, Take ye, eat ye, do this:
wherefore to their comfort only the Sacrament works, that do receive it,
and are doers in that action: the benefit thereof then is not extended to the
absent, but only to the partakers. Secondly, the dead can feel no comfort by
it, because they can neither eat nor drink it, nor be doers therein. Thirdly,
Christ says, Do this in remembrance of me: he says not, in remembrance of
Angels, Apostles, Saints: but only of me. Therefore it is contrary to the
institution to use any commemoration of Saints in the Sacrament.

Augustine says, Quis offeret sacrificium corporis Christi, nisi pro ijs, qui
sunt membra Christi? Who will offer the sacrifice of the body of Christ, but
for the members of Christ? Lib. 1. de origin. anim. cap. 9. Therefore the
Sacrament can not be celebrated for Pagans and Infidels, who are no members of
Christ.

Again, he says: Nos Martyribus non constituimus templa, sacerdotia, sacra
aut sacrificia: We do not erect either temples, priests, service or sacrifices
to Martyrs, De ciuitat. dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. Ergo, it is not lawful to use
the Sacrament for the honor of Saints.

THE FIFTH QVESTION OF private Masses.
The Papists.
IF any man shall say, that private Masses, wherein the Priest alone by
himself Council. Tridentin. sess. 22. can. 8.

Argum. The sacrifices of the law were sacrifices, before the people did eat
thereof: so the substance and making of a medicine is one thing, the
ingredience, or taking of it, an other: Ergo, neither is receiving part of the
substance or making of the sacrifice of Christ's body, but a consequence only:
therefore there may be a sacrifice and sacrament without it, Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 14.

Ans. First, we deny that there is any sacrifice in the Eucharist, but a
Sacrament only: and therefore the comparison holds not between a sacrifice,
which consisted both of oblation to God, and the participation of the people
that offered, and the Sacrament which Christ in his institution offered not to
God, but to his Disciples. Secondly, neither does the similitude of a medicine
conclude: for you cannot prove that the Sacrament not received has virtue in
it, as a medicine has: for faith is requisite to the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament, which is not necessary in the applying of a medicine: and yet it is
not properly called a medicine, unless being made, it be also applied, and
being received does heal.

The Protestants.
WE utterly condemn the superstitious practices of popish priests, who do use
to communicate alone in their Masses, the people standing by* gazing and
looking upon him: yea you might have seen many Masses said in one Church at
once, almost in every corner one, no person being present for the most part,
but the priest and his boy.

Argum. This private receiving of the Sacrament is contrary to the institution
of Christ, who says, speaking to many, Take ye, eat ye, and divide this
amongst you: there must be then a division and distribution. Saint Paul also
says, We that are many are one bread and one body, in as much as we are
partakers of one bread, 1. Corinthians. 10.17. Ergo, many must communicate
together^ For the Apostle speaks not of the mystical communion of the
faithful in this place, which do all make but one body in Christ, (for so we
do communicate with the Church by faith, not only in the Sacrament, but
without it) but of the Sacramental communion of as many as receive together:
for how else can they be said to be partakers of one bread, or loaf, unless
they receive together.

Augustine says, that, Sacramentum benedicitur, sanctificatur, and ad
distribuendum comminuitur: Epistol. 59.
That the Sacrament is blessed, sanctified, and broken to be distributed: Ergo,
where there is distribution, there must be many to receive.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING THE name of the Sacrament.
The Papists.
136. Error.
THey utterly mislike these names of the Sacrament, that it is called amongst us
the Lords Supper, or Communion: belike (say they) they will bring it again to
the Supper, or evening service, Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 6. And the name
Communion, is as ignorantly used of them, thereby making the people believe,
that many should communicate together, 1. Cor. 11. sect. 24. they should rather
use the names of the Eucharist, Mass, or Leiturgie.

The Protestants.
FIrst, for the name of the Lords Supper, we do learn of S. Paul so to call
it: When ye come together, (says he) this is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1. Corinthians. 11.20.

Rhemist. The Apostle calls their feasts of love, which they were wont to
make after the receiving of the Sacrament, the Lords Supper, coenas dominicas,
because they were made in the Lords houses, which were called Dominicae: he
means not the Sacrament.

Ans. First, there were then no such distinct places, as Churches, and
Oratories for the service of God, which began to be built many years after,
but they assembled together in their own houses. Secondly, if their
loue-feasts were called the Lords Suppers, it would follow that they never had
them but at night, and that then also the Sacrament was celebrated about the
time of their feasts, which must be at the eeuentide. But this, I think, they
dare not affirm* that they celebrated the Sacrament at night: wherefore the
Apostle cannot mean any other Supper, but that which was instituted by Christ,
as it follows, verse. 23.

Augustine calls it the Lords Supper, Coenam manibus suis consecratam
discipulis suis dedit: His Supper being consecrated, In Luke ser. 33.
he gave with his own hands to his Disciples. And although we sat not down
at that feast: Ipsam coenam tame^ fide quotidie manducamus: Yet we eat that
Supper daily by faith.

2. The name Communion, the Apostle also himself uses: he calls it (...),
The communion of the body of Christ, 1. Corinthians. 10.16: so does Augustine name
it, Communionem corporis Christi. de ciuit. Det. 20. cap. 9.

3. As for the names of Eucharist, and Leiturgie, we mislike them not, being
understood in their own sense: but because they are Greek and not understood
of the people, we use them not. The horrible sacrilege of the Mass, is the
cause also why we use not that term.

THE SIXTH QVESTION, OF THE MANNER OF saying and celebrating Mass.
The Papists.
IT is not necessiarie that the Mass (or as we call it, the Sacrament) should
be said or done in the vulgar and familiar speech, but for the greater
reverence, 137. Error.
to be kept in the Latin tongue, they say, it is more convenient: and that the
words of consecration should not be uttered in a loud and audible, but in a
soft and low voice, Bellarm. cap. 11.12.

Argum. Christ for the space of three hours, being so long upon the Cross,
uttered nothing in the hearing of the standers by, but 7. short sentences:
Ergo, in the sacrifice of the Mass, it is not necessary to utter all in the
hearing of the people, Ibid.

Ans. First, they have not proved by this example, that the Priest should
mutter and mumble to himself; but the contrary rather: that either he must
altogether hold his peace, or else speak aloude; unless they can show that
Christ spoke some words secretly to himself. Secondly, we must not fetch the
right use of the Sacrament of our own heads, from the example of Christ's
sacrifice upon the Cross: but we are commanded to resort for direction, to the
institution in his last Supper, 1. Corinthians. 11.23.

The Protestants.
FIrst, for the Sacrament or any other part of the service of God to be
ministered in an unknown tongue, is contrary to S. Paul's rule, who would have
al things to be done in the Church to edifying, and in such sort that the
unlearned might say, Amen, 1. Corinthians. 14.16. But the people cannot be edified
by a language which they understand not: nor yet can say, Amen unto strange
prayers. But of this matter we have already elsewhere entreated more at large.

Secondly, it is also contrary to S. Paul's rule, that the Priest should mutter
to himself, and not speak aloud in the hearing of the people: for he says,
Ye do show forth, (...), annuntiatis, preach or declare the death of Christ,
so often as ye receive it, 1. Corinthians. 11.26. But they do not annuntiare, that
is, preach, set forth, and declare the death of Christ, that speak only to
themselves.

Augustine says, Populus cum episcopo orat, and quasi ad eius verba
subscribens respondet, Cont. Parmenian. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Amen: The people prays with their pastor, and subscribing to his words, say,
Amen. But how can the people say, Amen, where nothing is heard, or subscribe in
their hearts unto it?

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, OF THE CEREMOnies which they use in the idolatrous
sacrifice of the Mass.
The Papists.
Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 18.

The Protestants.
FIrst, for diverse causes we do condemn and reject these superstitious vsages
of the Papists: 1. Because of the superfluous and unnecessary number of them,
fewer by a great deal may serve for the Communion to be kept, after Christ's
institution: neither do we read, that Christ at his last Supper used any
such, who notwithstanding would not have left out any thing requisite and
needful for the Sacrament.

2. The superfluous and excessive cost, in making so many Church vessels of
gold and silver, so many Mass garments of silk, fine linen, embrodered with
gold, pearl, and precious stones, was both an intolerable burden to the
Church, at whose charge such things were provided, and a great deal more
costly, then became the simplicity of the Gospel.

3. Convenient vessels and instruments, which are necessary for the
administration of the Sacrament, with other seemly ornaments: as a decent
covering for the Communion table, a clean and hansome vessel to keep the
wine, a cup of silver for the distribution, clean linen napkins for the
bread: such instruments and ornaments of the Lords table we condemn not, but
use them our selves: yet none of them for such ends or purposes, as they
pretend, to discern the body of the Lord by them: as though they were
ordained to wait and attend upon the bodily presence of Christ, which they
have falsely imagined: but we use them for decency and order sake, and due
reverence, which is to be yielded to so great mysteries.

In the Apostles time they had no consecrated Altars, but Communion tables, 1.
Cor. 10.21. neither is it like that they used vessels of gold or silver in the
Lords Supper, when they had neither silver nor gold in their purses, Math.
10.9. Wherefore such things are not necessary for the discerning of the Lords
body.

The Papists.
2. THere are other ceremonies, which they observe and use in the very action
it self and celebration of the Mass: as the diverse gestures of the Priest, to
lift up his eyes, and cast them down again, and to lift them up the second,
the third time: sometime to cast abroad his hands, to close them again, to
warble with his fingers, to bow, to bend, to ducke, to turn on this side and
on that, now on the right hand, again on the left: to sigh, to smite upon his
breast, to lift up the Chalice, and show it to the people, and set it down
again: as also the dividing of the host into three parts, which signify three
parts of the Church, in heaven, in earth, and in purgatory: the rinsing of
part thereof in wine, and eating part dry, the washing of his fingers before
consecration: kissing of the altar, the patten, the book, the paxe: sprinkling
of holy water, censing of odors, crossing the chalice, the bread, their mouth,
breast and face, which sign of the cross they make above twenty times in one
Mass while: Add also unto these, their tedious and yrksome songs, the rude
noise and vnedifying sound of strange instruments, and the whole course of
their Mass music set forth in a strange language, and endited to the honor
of Saints. All these superstitious rites, with diverse more, vain, unfruitful,
abominable, they notwithstanding with force and maine defend and maintain,
Bellarm* lib. 2. de missa. cap. 14.15. Council. Trid^ntin. sess. 22. ca^. 7.

The Protestants.
1. THis multitude of humane inventions, agrees not with the institution of
the Lords Supper: for we read not of any such kissing, kneeling* becking,
bowing, or the like ridiculous gestures to have been used, when our Savior
instituted the Supper, nor afterward by the Apostles to have been practiced*
wherefore we contenting our selves with the plain institution of Christ, do
worthily reject all such toys.

2. Most of these gestures are impious, and tend to idolatry in the adoration
of bread and wine, which are but creatures: and they are all frivolous and
hypocritical, stealing away true devotion from the heart, and making men to
rest in the outward gestures of the body. Augustine says very well: Corpus
genibus flexis prosternis, collum curuas in oratione, video vbi iaciat corpus,
sed quaero vbi volitet animus? Thou bowest the knee, bendest thy body in
prayer stretchest out thy neck, I see where thy body lies: but what is
become of thy soul?

3. Concerning Church songs and Music, Augustine thus writes: S^brie
Psallimus in Ecclesia diuina cantica Prophetarum: Epistol. 119 cap. 19.
We sing treatably and soberly in the Church the divine songs of the Prophets.
Two conditions he requires: first, that we sing holy Psalms taken out of the
scriptures. Secondly, that they be sung treatably and distinctly: Etiam illic
(says he) si sonum non sensum libido audiendi desideret, Cont. Julian. lib.
4.14.
improbatur: Even in good songs, if we follow the sound, not the sense, it is
to be discommended: but in popish songs neither of these conditions is kept:
for both the dittie, for the most part, is idolatrous, stuffed with invocation
and adoration of Saints, and the note is so divided and drawn out in length,
that nothing can be understood.

THE EIGHT QVESTION OF THE FORM OF THE Mass, which consists partly of the
Canon, partly of such things as are rehearsed before and after the Canon.
THE FIRST PART OF THE PRAYERS WHICH go before the Canon of the Mass.
WE do not utterly condemn whatsoever is said or sung in their Leiturgie or
Mass: for as they have their introite, so we do bid the people, after due
preparation, in our Communions to draw near. We have also our Confiteor, a
confession of sins to be said before the Communion. Other forms also, which
have been used of ancient time, we do not refuse: as Dominus vobiscum, The
Lord be with you: Kyrieeleson, Lord have mercy of us: Sursum corda, Lift up
your hearts: with Alleluia, praised be God, and Sanctus, Sanctus, holy, holy:
and Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God on high: the preface also to the
Communion, Vere dignum, and iustum est, It is meet, right, and our bounden
duty: And we use also the Lords prayer after the distribution. These forms
we mislike not, using the same our selves, which notwithstanding we borrowe not
from them, but from the ancient and purer ages of the Church. But the
corruptions, additions, immutations, which are used by them in these prefaces
to the Mass, we do utterly condemn, as their introite and confiteor, is
stuffed full of idolatry, and invocation of Saints: their Kyrieeleson is 9. times
repeated in an unknown tongue Elevation and adoration was brought in by Pope
Honorius, anno. 1222. the Agnus was devised by Pope Sergius, ann. 700. the Pax
by Innocentius, plura apud Foxum. p. 1403.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE Canon of the Mass.
The Papists.
1. FIrst, the form of their Mass they have (they say) by tradition from the
Apostles: Rhemist. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 22.

The Protestants.
THeir own authors do testify, that every patch of their Mass was thrust in
by Popes later then the Apostles: as by Leo the 1. Gregory the 1. Gregory the
3. Innocentius the 3. Honorius the 3. with many other: yea, Gregory the 1.
confesses, that one Scholasticus made the most part of the Canon. Ergo, it was
not devised by the Apostles. Bellarmine answers, that Gregory sets not
down any one man, by this name Scholasticus, but means generally some
notable learned man: and in this sense S. Peter, says he, which was the author
of the Canon, may be called Scholasticus, Bellarm. cap. 19.

Ans. This devise of the Jesuit is rather to be laughed at, then to be
confuted: who ever heard before, that S. Peter and the other Apostles were
Scholastici, Schoolmen? what is this else, but to set the spirit of God to
school, in saying that the Apostles being men endued with the holy Ghost, were
brought up in Schools? Again, Gregory finds fault with the said
Scholasticus, that in composing the Canon, he would put in his own prayers, and
leave out the Lords prayer: but if this Scholasticus had been Peter, I think
Gregory would not have been so bold, as to have rebuked him.

The Papists.
2. THe Canon of the Mass (they say) is perfect and absolute, 140. Error.
void of all error, and therefore not to be changed or abrogated, Council.
Trident. sess. 22. can. 6. Bellarm. cap. 21.

The Protestants.
But we on the contrary side, more truly and agreeably to Scripture, doubt not
to say, that there can be nothing more corrupt, abominable, fuller of all
impiety, heresy, lying, then is their idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass: as it
shall now more particularly appear, by the collection of the several errors.

THE ERRORS AND BLASPHEMIES that are to be found in the Canon of the Mass.
1. THe Priest speaking of the bread and wine, thus says, Which we offer unto
thee for thy holy Catholic Church: and again afterward, Which we offer for
the redemption of their souls. What great blasphemy is this, to offer bread
and wine for the redemption of the Church, for the which Christ in great love
offered up himself?

2. The Priest says, Worshipping the memorial of the Virgin: But Christ
instituted the Sacrament to be kept in remembrance of himself, and not for the
worship of Saints.

3. By whose merits and prayers, namely of the Saints, grant we may be
defended. Thus the merits and prayers of Christ are excluded.

4. We beseech thee (says the Priest) to receive this oblation, which we
beseech thee in all things to make blessed: Here the Priest is made a mediator
between Christ and his Father: desiring God to sanctify the body and blood of
his son.

5. Who the next day before he suffered: But the Scripture says, The same
night, For this is my body: Here they have put in enim, of their own, and
left out, quod pro vobis datur. Such is their boldenes, that they are not
ashamed to change the words of our Savior Christ.

6. He says further: The holy bread of eternal life, which vouchsafe thou
with a pleasant countenance to behold: The bread of eternal life is Christ
himself, if this be he, how dare ye presume to offer him up to his Father?

7. As thou did vouchsafe to accept the righteous gifts of Abel, and the
sacrifice of Abraham. Here the sacrifice of Christ is compared to the
sacrifice of beasts: and the Priest seems to attribute as much efficacy to
the one, as to the other.

8. And the holy sacrifice which thy high Priest Melchisedech did offer unto
thee. This is a plain untruth, and a flat lie, as we have showed already, that
Melchisedech sacrificed bread and wine.

9. Command thou these to be brought by the hands of thy holy Angel, unto the
high altar in heaven. What an absurd thing is this, that he should desire that
to be carried into heaven which he eats and deuoureth? And if this be the
body of Christ, what need the help of an Angel to carry it up to heaven? is
not Christ able to lift up his own body? or what need that to be conveyed to
heaven, which was never from thence?

10. As many of us as shall receive thy Sons body and blood: And yet for the
most part none receive but the Priest: and when the people do communicate, the
wine they have not: how then can he say, As many?

11. Remember, O Lord, the souls of thy servants, which rest in the sleep of
peace, and grant them a place of refreshing and rest: Here is an other error
contrary to the Scriptures in praying for the dead, and the prayer also is
contrary to it self: for first he says, they rest in peace, and yet afterward
prays for their refreshing.

12. Vouchsafe to give some portion with thy Saints: And why does he not rather
pray to be admitted to the fellowship of Christ?

13. Deliver us by the blessed intercession of the Virgin: What then is become
of Christ's mediation and intercession?

14. Let this mingling together of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
be unto me salvation of mind and body: Then is not Christ's blood shed upon the
Cross the full sufficient and perfect salvation of mankind, if there be an
other salvation beside.

15. Grant me so worthily to take this holy body and blood, that I may merit
to receive forgiveness of sins: O sinful man, how can thou merit that
which is Christ's only gift?

16. Let the priest bow himself to the host, saying, I worship thee, I
glorify thee, I praise thee: What monstrous Idolatry is this, thus to worship
a piece of bread?

17. Let this communion purge us from sin: If they mean the principal
purging of our sin, so does Christ only purge us, Heb. 1.3. If they
understand the instrumental means of our purgation, so are we purged and
justified only by faith, Romans 3.28.

18. Respect not my sins, but the faith of thy Church: By this reason one may
be profited by an others faith: which is contrary to the Scriptures: the Just
shall live by faith: his own, and not an others.

19. Let us worship the sign of the Cross: What I pray you will not these
Idolaters worship?

20. Let this sacrifice which J have offered, avail to obtain remission of
sins: If the Mass be available for this end, wherefore then died Christ?

Thus we see with how many and what great and horrible blasphemies this popish,
nay rather, devilish canon of the Mass is stuffed: indeed it is an epitome
and abridgement of Papistrie, the marrow, sinews, and bones of their
idolatrous profession: yea the very darling of the popish Church: it is the
very proper badge and mark of a papist. He that hates the Mass, hates the
whore of Babylon: he that loves the Mass, cannot love the truth.

If then I should be demanded at once, which of all popish blasphemies and
heresies I think most abominable, contrary to the faith, and to be abhorred of
all good christians: (though I know that there are many of this kind) yet I
would redily answer the Mass: the invention whereof, I am well assured, cannot
be ascribed but to the devil himself, the author of all lies and blasphemies.

I conclude therefore with that saying of Gregory, as he said concerning the
word, Antichristus: so may I in as good sense of this word, Missa, as it is now
understood of Papists. Si spectes quantitatem vocis, duae sunt syllabae; si
pondus iniquitatis, est vniuersa pernicies. If you mark the quantity of the
word, it stands but of two syllables: but if we respect the weight of
iniquity, it contains all impiety and ungodliness.

Soli Deo immortali Patri, Filio, cum Spiritu sancto sit honor et imperium
sempiternum.
THE THIRD BOOK OR CENTVRIE, CONTAINING A THIRD HUNDRED OF POPISH ERRORS, AND
HERESIES, ABOUT the controversies of the five Popish Sacraments, and of the
benefits of our redemption, and concerning the person of Christ,

CONSISTING OF SEVEN SEVERAL CONTROVERSIES THE 14, 15.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. in
number.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man. 1592.

To the right honorable Sir Robert Cicil Knight, one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
BOth that general love (right honorable) which the Church of God does bear to
your worthy and honorable Father, for his sincere and sound affection to
religion, and the dutiful reverence which our university of Cambridge, and
generally the whole company of Students does owe unto him as their singular
good Patron, have moved and caused me at this time, to commend this last part
of this work to your Honor his son: of whose love also unto the Gospel,
following your Fathers steps, we are all persuaded, and conceive no less
hope of your honorable favor to learning: I have (as your Honor sees)
undertaken an hard piece of work, and thrust my shoulders under an heavy
burden: for in this work I have taken upon me, to discover and lay open all
popish Heresies, and Errors, to portraite and decipher the whole body of
papistrie, to spread abroad the whore of Babylons skirtes, that her filthiness
may appear: to uncover her whorish face, which masked under the visour of the
Church, and religion: for we may say to them, as Leo Bishop of Rome did
sometime to certain Heretics: Ecclesiae nomine armamini, sed contra Ecclesiam
d^micatis: You are armed with the name of the Church, and yet you fight against
the Church.

This difficult matter being thus by me enterprised, I have exposed my self to
the obloquie and evil speech of two sorts of men: against whom in the defense
of this work I must crave your Honors aid and protection. The first sort, is of
our hollow hearted Countrymen, that have English faces, but Romish hearts, who
will forge cauillations (I know) against these labors of mine: and not cease
to accuse me of lying and falsehood, as not having truly and indifferently set
down the opinions of the popish Church. To meet then with those slanderous
accusations, let such men know that I have been most careful and circumspect
in this behalf, throughout this whole work, not to charge them with any
opinions, which I have not gathered out of their own writings, and alleged
their own Authors for them: so that with a good conscience I can protest
before God (that one day shall open the secrets of our hearts) that to my
knowledge I have not any where used any forgerie, cauilling, or deceit, in
setting down their assertions: and I would to God their writers were as free
from this fault, and as indifferent in alleging the sentence of our Church,
as we do deal plainly with them. But as for them, it is a shame to see, how
without all fear, the Rhemists in their annotations upon the new testament,
do belly and slander our Church: I will for example sake note a few places.

They charge us to say, that God is the author of sin, annot. Math. 13. sect.
2. which blasphemy is further off from us, then it is from them: though we
grant, that nothing is done in the world beside the will of God, not by his
permission only.

That we affirm all things to be easy in Scripture, annot. Luke 6. sect 1.
whereas we say only, that the doctrine of faith is plainly declared in
Scripture: and deny not, but that many things are therein hard to be understood.

That we should say, that the preaching of the Law, and the judgment to come,
makes men hypocrites, Act. 24. sect. 2. whereas we hold the preaching of the
Law to be necessary to bring men to repentance: but justification by keeping
the Law, which they teach, we utterly condemn.

That we condemn good works as sinful, Pharisaicall, hypocritical, annot.
Romans 2. sect. 3. whereas we acknowledge them to be the good gifts of God, the
fruits of justification, the way wherein all Christians must walk to
salvation: we only exclude them from being any cause of our justification
before God.

That we allow no fasting, but moral temperance, and spiritual fasting from
sin, Act. 13. sect. 5. whereas we do acknowledge a Christian use of fasting
and abstinence from all meats and drinks, for the taming of the flesh, and
making us more fit to pray: not an abstinence from flesh only, as they do
superstitiously practice.

That we should say, man has no more free will, then a piece of clay, Romans 9.
sect. 7. whereas we only say, that our free will has no power or strength at
all, to will or do the thing that good is, without the grace of God.

That Calvin holds Christians children to be so holy, that they need no
baptism, annot. 1. Cor. 7. sect. 11. Whereas Calvin clean contrary reasons
thus against the Anabaptists, That children ought therefore to be baptized,
because they are holy, as S. Paul says: And such slanderous accusations they
have published against us, which would require a several treatise to be set
forth at large.

Let indifferent men now judge (comparing their writings with ours) which of us
has dealt most untruly, and unfaithfully each with other: and whether we have
not more just occasion to complain of them, then they of us. But to let
accusations go, I would desire them rather to listen to the words of
exhortation, that they would but indifferently weigh with an equal balance of
Christian judgment, what is set down on both parts in this book: I trust if
they be not wilful and obstinate in their opinions, that they may in time
conceive some better liking of the truth.

Augustine in a certain place makes mention of drunken Polio, Cont. Just.
Pelag. lib. 1
who one a time came from his pots and riotous company to Xenocrates school,
to laugh the grave Philosopher to scorn: but it fell out to his good far
otherwise: Ad extremum totum se illi, ad quem deridendum venerat, discipulum
tradidit: But Polemo being clean changed by Xenocrates speech, became his
Scholar whom he went to scorn: and whereas he came drunk, he returned sober.
So I wish that our English recusants would but take up this and such other
books into their hands, if it were but to scorn them, God may so work with
them, that their scorning shall be turned into a love and lyking of the truth.
And I further say unto them, as Augustine to the Pelagians: Quod dicimus,
orent, vt aliquando intelligant, non litigent, vt nunquam intelligant, quod
dicimus intendant, non contendant, illuminentur, non calumnientur.

An other sort of men there is beside these (Right honorable) against whom I
must arm my self: they are such, as are given to extenuate, Cont. 2. epist.
Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 1*
disgrace, and discommend the labors of others. Me thinks I hear them thus
to give out of me. He has taken a matter in hand above his strength, some of
his writings are extant already, we know what he can do, he is like to perform
no great matter, and what does he? he does but abridge other men's writings, he
brings nothing of his own. To these accusations I thus answer: First, I
confess my strength to be small of it self: yet God by weak means may work
great things. Some Pamphlets of mine, I confess, are abroad unworthy this
learned age, though perhaps befitting the person that wrote them, his time and
age, and the occasion considered. But I say rather with August. I count my self
in the number of those, qui scribendo proficiunt, et proficiendo scribunt,
which profit in writing, and by profiting write. Secondly, concerning my labor
and pains taken in this work I boast not; he that thinks it light, let him
try first himself before he give his judgment: the weight of this burden he
only knows that felt it, and God that gave strength to bear it: but as for
my part, I hunt not for the praise of men, I desire only to profit the church
of God: I had rather men should hold their peace then flatter. It is very well
said of him, Augustine lib. 2. de Sermon. dom.
Si inter quos viuis te recte viuentem non laudauerint, illi in errore sint: si
autem laudauerint, tu in periculo es. I had rather other me^ should be in a
small error, then I in great danger. Epictetus wise saying is much commended:
(...), sustine, abstine, sustain, and abstain I would we might part it
between us: sustine has been mine, I have endured the labor* I would abstine
might be theirs, that they would abstain from ill speaking.

Lastly, if I have taken upon me more then is performed, I have done foolishly:
for that old verse might have warned me sufficiently, Sumite materiam vestris,
qui scribitis, aptam -- viribus. But I trust, by the gracious assistance of
God, I have in some small measure accomplished, that I would, and I say with
Augustine, Gratias ago Deo, qui quantum voluit donando, quod voluit, fari
promisit, et v^i voluit tacendum, linguae terminum posuit. For it is God that
gave me strength to proceed so far as I have done, and has set me my bounds,
which I should not pass: for no m^n may exceed the line and measure of his
gifts, 2. Corin. 10.14.

Thus I end, commending these my labors to the charitable and christian
judgment of the Church of God, whom I desire to profit, and to your Honors
protection, whom I wish in virtue and honor to tread your Fathers path, and
both of you to live so long as it pleases God, to his glory, and the comfort
of his Church, and afterward to be everlastingly rewarded in heaven, through
the only merits of Christ Jesus, to whom be praise for ever.

Your Honors to command in the Lord Christ, Andrew Willet.

HERE ENSVE THE CONTROVERSIES OF THE FIVE OTHER POpish Sacraments: Penance,
Matrimony, Confirmation, Orders, Extreme Unction.
THE FOVRTEENTH CONTROVERSY, of popish Penance.
Unto this controversy belong these questions following,

First, of the name Penance, whether it be rightly given.

2. Whether that which they call Penance, but we much better, Repentance, be a
Sacrament.

3. Whether there be any other Sacrament of repentance beside Baptism.

4. Of the essential parts of penance, as the matter and form, and of the 3.
material parts, Contrition, Confession, Satisfaction: with an appendix, whether
repentance go before faith.

5. Of Contrition, 1. The cause thereof, 2. The quantity thereof, 3. Whether it
be joined with faith, 4. Whether it be satisfactory, 5. Whether contrition be
necessary for venial sins, 6. Of contrition which only proceeds of fear.

6. Of Auricular confession, 1. Whether it be necessary, 2. whether it be a
divine ordinance, 3. To whom it is to be made, 4. Of the time.

7. Of satisfaction, with the several branch^s of this question.

8. First, of penal injunctions, 1. Whether necessary, 2. By whom to be
imposed. Secondly, of indulgences, 1. Whether there be any such, 2. The ground
of them, 3. In whose power they be.

9. The circumstances of penance, 1. Their habit, 2. Their works, 3. Of the
time of their penance.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF THE name of Penance.
The Papists.
THe Latin word Poenitentia, which they translate, Penance, being derived of
poena, does signify (say they) not only confession and amendment of life,
but contrition and sorrow for the offense, and painful satisfaction, Bellarm.
lib. 1. cap. 7.

Argum. Math. 11.21. the word must needs signify, sorrowful, paineful, and
satisfactory repentance, Rhemist. Math. 3.2.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe place quoted out of S. Matthew, proves no such thing: where our
Savior says, that Tire and S^don would have repented in sackecloth and ashes:
which is no satisfaction for sin, but an outward sign of true sorrow for
sin.

Argum. The Greek word every where used, is (...), which signifies as
Laurentius Valla notes, eme^dationem mentis, the change or amendeme^t of the
mind; and no such outward satisfactory penance as they pretend. Wherefore it
is more fitly englished, Repentance. And although the Latin word Poenitentia
do not properly express the Greek word, to the which resipiscere, and
resipiscentia, repentance and to repent do better answer: yet agere
poenitentiam, in Latin, is not to do penance, as the Rhemists translate it,
but is all one, as to say, repent, yea, and so the Rhemists themselves read, be
penitent. Mark 1.15. and not, do penance. And Act. 11.18. they translate,
poenitentiam, repentance.

De poenitentia, ca. 9.
Augustine thus takes this word poenitentia, Recte poenitens quicquid sordium
contraxit, oportet vt abluat saltem mentis lachrymis. The true penitent man
must at the least wash away his sins with the tears of the mind. If then
repentance be in the soul, what is become of this outward satisfactorie
penance?

THE SECOND QVESTION, WHETHER THERE be any Sacrament of penance.
The Papists.
Receive ye the holy Ghost: whose sins ye remit, they are remitted: whose
sins ye retain, they are retained. Ioh. 20.22. The faculty of the
Priesthood consisting in remitting of sins, is here bestowed upon the
Apostles, Rhemist. annot. Ioh. 20. sect. 5. Hereupon they are bold to
conclude, that penance is truly and properly a Sacrament, Council. Trident.
sess. 14. canon. 1. Bellarm. lib. 1. de poenitent. cap. 10.

Ans. 1. If the power of remission of sins were here first instituted, how
could the Apostles baptize or minister the Lords supper before, without power
to remit sins to the penitent? Christ therefore in this place does but renew
and confirm the authority of their Apostleship, which was granted to them
before, Math. 18.18.

Secondly, this power here given, is principally exercised by preaching of the
word of God, and denouncing publicly or privately the promises of God, for
remission of sins to the penitent, or the threats and judgment of God, in
binding the sins of the obstinate and impenitent: So Luke 20.24. Christ
commands his Apostles to preach repentance and remission of sins in his
name.

Thirdly, we confess also a judiciary power of the keys, in binding and
loosing, which is exercised in ecclesiastical discipline, in punishng and
absoluing according to the word of God: as the incestuous person was bound,
when he was delivered up to Satan, 1. Cor. 5.5. he was loosed again, when he
was restored to the Church, 2. Cor. 2.7. But neither this nor the other was
commended to the Church as a Sacrament.

The Protestants.
TRue repentance we do acknowledge, which is a dying to sin, and a walking
in newnes of life, Romans 6.4. But a Sacrament of repentance we find none in
Scripture, and therefore we deny it.

Argum. 1. In every Sacrament there is an external sensible element, as water
in Baptism, bread and wine in the Lords Supper: but there is none in their
penance: Ergo, no Sacrament.

Bellarm. answers, that the words of absolution and confession, are the
outward signs in penance: it is not necessary it should be a visible sign: it
is a sensible sign being audible, cap. 11.

Ans. 1. There must be the word beside the element: as Augustine says, Accedat
verbum ad elementum, Let the word be joined to the element: and it makes a
Sacrament: the word it self cannot be the element: for the same thing cannot
both sanctify and be sanctified. And if the audible word be the element, by
this reason the preaching of the word also shall be a Sacrament.

Argu. 2. There was repentance and absolution of sins both, in the old
testament: for both David confessed and was sorry for his sin, and the Prophet
Nathan pronounced forgiveness from God, 2. Sam. 12.13. so likewise John preached
repentance for remission of sins, and the people came and confessed their
sins: here were all things necessary for true repentance, yet was it no
Sacrament all this while, as they themselves confess, which they hold to be
instituted after Christ's resurrection, Trident. council. sess. 14. cap. 1. Why
then should it be rather a Sacrament now, then before?

Augustine thus writes, Sacramentum ideo dicitur, quia aliud videtur, aliud
intelligitur: It is called a Sacrament, because one thing is seen, Sermon. de
baptis. ad infantes.
another understood. And then he says, Quid tale aut ipsi vident, aut alijs
queunt ostendere in eo, quod sacramentum poenitentiae vocant: But neither do
they see, or can show to others, any such visible sign in that which they call
the Sacrament of repentance Here Augustine denies repentance to be a
Sacrament, because it has no visible sign.

THE THIRD QVESTION, WHETHER THERE be any other Sacrament of repentance, beside
Baptism.
The Papists.
Secunda tabula post naufragiu^.
The second table of refuge after shipwreck, Council. Trident. sess. 14. canon.
2.

Argum. S. John says, If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive
us: 1. Epist. 1.19. he says not, that by the memory of Baptism, but by
confession, which is a part of penance, our sins are forgiven, Bellarm. cap.
13.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we say not, that by the bare memory or remembrance of baptism,
sins after committed are done away: but that the sacramental force of
Baptism does extend it self to our whole life, that is, to be a seal unto us
of remission of all our sins in the blood of Cbrist. Secondly, so that
confession of our sins is not a taking away of the force of baptism, but a
more effectual applying thereof, as the people which were baptized by John
confessed also their sins.

Argu. We acknowledge no other Sacrament of repentance, but baptism: for so
the scripture calls it, The baptism of repentance for remission of sins.
Mark 1.4.

De fide ad Petrum. cap. 29.
So Augustine calls Baptism, Sacramentum fidei, et poenitentiae, the
Sacrament of faith and repentance: what need we then seek for a new Sacrament
of repentance, which cannot any where be found in Scripture?

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, OF THE essential parts of Penance.
THE FIRST PART, OF THE MATTER and form of popish penance.
The Papists.
Council. Tridentin. sess. 14. cap. 3. Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 15.

The Protestants.
NEither is their penance a Sacrament, neither can these be parts of a
Sacrament.

Argum. 1. In every Sacrament there are two things required: res terrena, and
actio externa, the earthly thing or element, as is water in Baptism, and the
external action: neither does the element alone, nor the action alone make a
sacrament: as in baptism there is both water, which is the matter: and the
washing, that is the action. Wherefore seeing in their penance there is nothing
but the action of the Minister, and the action of the receiver, it can be no
sacrament.

Argum. 2. The parts of every sacrament, as the form, the matter, must be
instituted of Christ: But this are they not able to show for the form and
matter of penance, namely, the institution of Christ: Ergo, it is no sacrament.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS QVESTION, OF the three material parts of popish
Penance, contrition, confession, satisfaction.
The Papists.
THese three (they say) are the true and proper parts of penance, contrition,
Council. Trident. sess. 14. can. 4. Rhemist. Math. 3. sect. 2.

Argu. Contrition is proved, Psalm. 51.17. A contrite heart is a sacrifice to
God. Confession, Math. 3. They were baptized in Iordane confessing their
sins. Satisfaction* Math. 11.21. They would have repented long ago in
sackecloth and ashes, Bellarm. cap. 19.

Ans. 1. That godly sorrow and contrition of the heart, is necessary to true
repentance, we never will deny, but that this sorrow is any satisfaction to
Gods justice, we abhor it as a monstrous blasphemy. Secondly, Confession and
acknowledgement of our sins unto God, and in some cases, where the conscience
is not satisfied, to the Minister or some other faithful man, we do willingly
grant: but that it is necessary to make general confession of sins to the
Priest, that place proves it not: for John had had shriuing work enough for
many years, to hear every man's particular confession: Thirdly, that sitting
in sackecloth and ashes, was no satisfaction for sin, but an outward sign of
true sorrow for sin.

The Protestants.
WE do make two parts only of true repentance, according to the scriptures,
that is, the mortifying of the old man with his works, by dying unto sin:
unto the which belongs true sorrow, and contrition of heart for our sins, 2. Corinthians. 7.11. acknowledgement and confession thereof before God, 2. Sam.
12.13. and a perfect hatred and detestation of sin, and indignation with our
selves for the same, 2. Corinthians. 7.11. The other part is the renewing and
quickening of the new man in us, which consists partly in setting our
consciences at peace with God, our sins being forgiven us, Romans 5.1. and
working in us a zeal, study, care and desire of newnes of life, 2. Corin.
7.11. these two parts only we find in Scripture.

Argum. Isai. 1.17. Cease to do evil: Learn to do good: we must die unto
sin and walk in newnes of life, Romans 6.4. Put off the old man, put on the
new, Coloss. 3.9.

Sermon. 66.
Augustine says, Fructus est dignus poenitentia, transacta deflere peccata,
and ea iterum non agere, This is true repentance, to lament for sins past,
and not to commit the same again: though this be no perfect definition of
repentance, yet we see that both confession and satisfaction are excluded.

AN APPENDIX, WHETHER REpentance go before faith.
The Papists.
poenitentia est via ad remissionem peccatorum, et prior iustificatione,
Bellarm, cap. 19.

Argum. Act. 2.38. Repent and be baptized in the name of Christ for the
remission of sins: Remission of sins follows repentance: Ergo
justification also and faith, Bellarm.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, this place proves not, that remission of sins follows
repentance, because baptism was given after repentance, for Baptism does not
give remission of sins, but it is a seal only and confirmation of our
faith, in the remission of sins. 2. Neither is remission of sins obtained
by our repentance: but we are already, being once called, justified before God,
by the remission of our sins, and imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
Romans 4.7.8. By repentance and other works that follow, our calling is made
sure, 2. Peter 1.10. and our salvation finished unto our selves, Philip. 2.10.
and our faith perfited.

Argum. Justification goes before sanctification: for this is the fruit of
the other: but repentance is part of our sanctification, renouation, or
regeneration, being called by S. Paul, A walking in newnes of life, Romans 6.4.
Ergo, it follows and comes after our justification. And seeing without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6: how should our repentance be
acceptable to God, unless it proceeded of faith? faith then is initiate and
begun in us before repentance, which we deny not, by true repentance and other
fruits of sanctification, to be daily strengthened and increased.

Augustine says, No man is justified but by the grace of Jesus Christ: Non
solum remissione peccatorum, sed prius ipsius inspiratione fidei and timoris
dei, donec sanet omnes languores nostros. Not only by remission of sins, but
first, by inspiring into us faith and the fear of God, til he have cured all
our maladies. He says (as we hear) that faith is inspired before we have
remission of sins and the fear of God, without the which there is no true
repentance.

THE FIFTH QVESTION, OF CONTRITION: the first part of their penance.
THere are certain points which we do agree upon.

1. We grant, that true contrition and sorrow of the heart is necessary unto
repentance, and that it stands very well with the liberty of the Gospel,
and is profitable for Christians, 2. Corinthians. 7.10.

2. That true contrition is joined both with a full hatred and detestation of
sin committed, 1. Corinthians. 11.31. We must judge and condemn our selves, as
also with a full purpose to amend our lives, Act. 11.23.

Let us then now see what difference of opinion there is between us concerning
contrition.

The Papists.
1. THey hold that contrition is neither wholly of man's free will, nor yet
wholly of God: but that man by his free will, helped of God, is able to repent:
Deo adiuuante, poenitere, He is brought to repentance, God only helping and
assisting him, Bellarm. de poenitent. lib. 2. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
TRue contrition of heart, as all other good thoughts in us, as they are good,
come only of God: our cogitations indeed are our own, but all the goodness of
them is the mere gift of God, Iam. 1.17.

Argum. 1. Timoth. 2.25. If at any time God will give them repentance:
Repentance the^ is the gift of God. And Augustine writing upon these very
words, says, Quantumlibet praebeat poenitentiam, nisi ipse dederit, quis agit
poenitentiam? Although he never so much give occasion of repentance, yet
unless he bestow upon us the full gift of repentance, no man is able to
repent. Thus he plainly distinguishes between praebere poenitentiam, to offer
occasion to repent: as he proves out of S. Paul, Romans 2.4. The bountifulnes of
God calls thee to repentance: and dare poenitentiam, to give or grant
repentance. But if God should only help our free will, and work together
with us to repentance, and not do all alone himself, he should rather
praebere, then dare poenitentiam: offer occasion by stirring of us up to
repentance, then grant us repentance it self, which were contrary to the
Apostle.

The Papists.
Catechis. Roman. page 439: and that the greatness of the grief ought to be
answerable to the quantity of the sin: So they conclude, that a man shall
never know when he is sufficiently contrite, Thom. Aquinas: for he must be
contrite for every great sin he has committed, Tileman Heshus. loc. 9. de
poenitent. err. 25.27.28.32.

The Protestants.
WHat is this else but a plain doctrine of desperation? for when is a man able
so perfectly to be contrite, as his love toward God ought to be perfect? or how
can his sorrow be equivalent to the weight of his sins? or can a man
remember all his sins, that he should be sorry for?

Argum. 1. The sorrow of Christians is not infinite or uncertain, but it is
determined and limited. Saint Paul says, That he should not be swallowed up of
too much heaviness, 2. Corinthians. 2.7. And again, My Epistle made you sorry,
though for a season, 2. Corinthians. 7.8.

Augustine says, Ista est vera poenitentia, quando quis sic conuertitur, vt
non reuertatur: De tempor. in natali. sermon. 3.
This is true repentance, when a man does so turn unto God, that he return
not unto sin. When a man therefore has in this manner repented, he may be
sure that he has mourned sufficiently: It is therefore untrue, that a man is
uncertain when he has sorrowed enough.

The Papists.
certitudinem remissionis peccatorum, a certainty or undoubted assurance of
remission of sins, Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 9. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 2.

The Protestants.
GOdly sorrow and contrition brings joy and comfort to the soul in the end,
with undoubted assurance of the forgiveness and remission of sins.

Argum. 1. Godly sorrow works in the true penitent person, a clearing of the
mind, 2. Corinthians. 7.11: but the soul and conscience cannot be cleared and set
at rest, unless we be persuaded that our sins are forgiven us, Ergo.

Argum. 2. All hope is certain, and brings undoubted assurance, and
therefore it is called the anchor of the soul, Heb. 6.19. Wherefore either
contrition is void of hope altogether, (which they will not grant) or if it
have any hope, it is sure and stable, and works a full persuasion and
assurance of the mercy of God.

Augustine says, Petrus mox a Domino indulgentiam accepit, De tempor. sermon. 66.
qui amarissime fleuit trinae negationis culpam: Peter straight way received
pardon and indulgence, when he had most bitterly bewailed the sin of his
threefold denial of Christ. How could Peter immediately have felt and received
the remission of that great sin, if the Lord had not assured his conscience
thereof?

The Papists.
4. THey make contrition a part of satisfaction for our sins, and to be a
cause Bellarm. lib. 2. de poenitent. cap. 12.

Arg. Luke 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved: Not only
faith, but love or charity obtains remission of sins, Bellarm. ibid.
Rhemist. in hunc locum.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe argument is not from the cause to the effect, but from the effect to
the cause: for Christ does not reason thus, she loved much, therefore many
sins are forgiven her: but contrariwise, Many sins are forgiven her,
therefore she loves much. As the next words declare: to whom little is
remitted, he loves little. And our Savior says in plain words in the last
verse, That her faith had saved her, whereof her love was an effect.

Argum. That the contrition of the heart is no means of our justification, nor
a meriting cause or procuring of remission of sins: Saint Paul shows, Romans
4.5, 6. To him that believes faith is counted for righteousness: And David
declares the blessedness of that man, to whom God imputes righteousness
without works: It is faith then only that obtains remission of sins: and
a man is justified without any respect had to his works. Therefore neither
contrition, nor any other work inward or outward, procures remission of
sins, but faith only is the mean.

So Augustine says, Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt
iustificandum: Works follow a man already justified, they go not before to
justification, De fide and operib. cap. 14. Therefore the work of contrition
is not available to justification.

The Papists.
5. COntrition (they say) is not necessary for venial or small offenses,
neither So. lib. 4. distinct. 17. articul. 3.

The Protestants.
THis assertion is clean contrary to scripture: for the Prophet David prays
not only to be kept from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. but even to be
cleansed from his secret faults, verse. 12.

Augustine agrees: Non solum propter vitae huius ignorantiam, sed etiam
propter ipsum puluerem mundi huius, qui pedibus adhaerescit, quotidianam habere
debemus poenitentiam: Not only for the ignorances of this life, but even for
that dross and dust of the world, which hangs upon our feet, we ought daily
to repent us. He means the lesser and smaller scapes of our life.

The Papists.
Math. 10. Fear him that can cast body and soul into hell, Rhemist. John. 4.
sect. 6. Bellarm. lib. 2.17.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we acknowledge that the fear of punishment is necessary in the
beginning, to make a way for true love to enter, as the bristle or needle (as
Augustine says) makes room for the thread to enter. We also confess, that
there is a continual fear and reverence of God in the godly, such as children
have of their parents: but as for any mistrust or fear of hell and damnation,
after love be once entered, and we made the children of God, which breeds
terror and anxietie of conscience, it is clean expelled, and thrust out of the
doors by love.

Argum. So says the Apostle, There is no fear in love: but perfect love
casts out fear, and makes us to have confidence in the day of judgment, 1.
Ioh. 4.17, 18. But he that fears damnation and is afraid of the day of
judgment, cannot have confidence in that day. So Augustine: Quid dicimus de
illo, qui caepit timere diem iudicij? si perfecta in illo esset charitas, non
timeret? What say we to him, that fears the day of judgment? if love were
perfect in him, he would not fear it?

THE SIXTH QVESTION, OF AVRICVLAR Confession, the second part of penance.
The Papists.
in mind, heart, will and cogitation only, or in word, and work, with all the
necessary circumstances and differences of the same, Rhemist. Ioh. 20. sect.
5. And this sacramental confession, as they call it, must be made secretly to
the Priest, Council. Trident. sess. 14. can. 6.

Argum. 1. This wonderful power of remitting and retaining of sins, which
was given to the Apostles and their successors, Ioh. 20.22. were given them in
vain, if no man were bound to seek for absolution at their hands: which can
not be had of them without distinct utterance to them of our sins: for they
cannot rule the cases of conscience, unless they have exact knowledge and
cogitation of their sins, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. 1. God has not made his ministers in Christ's stead judges of cases of
conscience, as though there were in them an actual power to remit and absolve
sins: but their office is only to declare and set forth unto all penitent
persons, the promises of God for remission of sins, and the severity of Gods
judgment against impenitent persons: which is especially performed in the
preaching and applying of the word either publicly or privately: as S. Paul
calls the Gospel committed unto him, The word of reconciliation, 2. Cor.
5.16.

2. A man therefore may by their ministry, which are the preachers of
reconciliation, find remission of sins, without a particular declaration
thereof: neither is it necessary for them to have so exact a knowledge of our
sins, seeing they are not absolute judges of the conscience, but the
ministers and ambassadors of reconciliation, 2. Corinthians. 5.20.

3. And Ministers are not to stay while suite is made unto them for their
help, but they ought to exhort and desire men to be reconciled to God by their
ministry.

Argum. 2. As the Priests in the law had only authority to discern the
leprosy of the people, and therefore Christ sends the lepers to the Priest,
Luke 17.14. so men must reveal the spiritual leprosy of sin to the Priest,
Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. First, the leprosy was not healed by the Priest, but only declared to
be healed: so sins are declared to be forgiven by the Priest, not properly
forgiven. Secondly, the Priest received not knowledge of all diseases, but of
this, that was contagious: therefore it would not follow hereupon, that all
sins are to be confessed to the Priest: but such as are notorious, where
public confession is by Church discipline enjoined: and such confession we
deny not. Thirdly, the argument follows not from the Priests of the law, to
the Ministers of the Gospel: for the Priesthood of the law is translated
wholly unto Christ, who has all knowledge to discern, and power to heal our
spiritual diseases.

The Protestants.
COnfession of sins, such as the scripture allows, we do acknowledge: as
namely these four kinds: There are private confessions, either to God alone,
as Daniel confesses, 9.4. or for the easing of our conscience, to man also, as
to him whom we have offended, Math. 5.24. Or to any other faithful man, the
Minister or some other, that we may be helped and comforted by our mutual
prayers, Iam. 5.16. There are also two kinds of public confession, either of
the whole congregation together, Nehem. 9.3. or of some one or more, that make
public confession of their sin, for the satisfying of the congregation,
whom they have offended: which belongs to Ecclesiastical discipline, 2. Corinthians. 2.6. But this particular confession of all sins, yea of them that
are secret, and to none but the Priest, is an Antichristian yoke and too heavy
for Christians to bear.

Arg. 1. It is not necessary to make confession at all unto men: the Prophet
David confessed only unto God, Against thee O Lord only have I sinned, Psalm.
51.4. Augustine also says, Quid mihi cum hominibus vt audiant confessiones
meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi sint languores meos? What have men to do to hear my
confessions, as though they were able to heal my sores? Confess. lib. 10.3.

Argum. 2. If a man otherwise cannot find ease of conscience, but will open
his sins to men: it is not always necessary he should seek to the
Minister, though it be most convenient, if he be a fit man: any other faithful
godly man may serve: for so the Apostle bids us, Acknowledge our faults, not
to the priest, but one to another, Iam. 5.16. Whereupon Augustine writes,
Peccata nostra debemus non solum Deo sed etiam sanctis and Deum timentibus
confiteri: We must confess our sins not only to God, but to men also that
fear God: He says not, Sacerdotibus, only to the Priests, Homil. 12.

Argum. 3. Such a particular enumeration of sins is not necessary, neither
is it possible: It suffices, where our sins are kept from our sight, to say
with the Prophet, Cleanse me from my secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. Augustine
says, Quot habes in cord compunctiones facinorum, tot habe illic punctiones
confessionum: Look how many sins do prick thy conscience, so must thy
confession be. It is an uncomfortable doctrine to teach men to labor to
remember all their sins, and to make a particular catalogue of them: they
have work enough to be eased of those sins that lie heavy on the heart.

AN APPENDIX OF OTHER CIRCVMSTANCES of Auricular confession.
The Papists.
1. THis order and custom of Confession, they hold to be a divine ordinance,
Council. Trid sess. 14. can. 6.8.

The Protestants.
THey are never able to show that it had any divine institution: but it was a
mere devise and invention of men. First, we read that Nectarius a good Bishop
of Constantinople, did abrogate this custom of Confession upon this occasion,
which had before time been used in that Church: for it was found out, that a
certain woman of the city, under this pretense of confession, had unlawful
company with the priest to whom she confessed: whereupon the good man
abolished that custom, seeing more harm then good to come by it. Beza antith.
Pap. cap. 7.
And this act of his was approved by that famous preacher Chrysostom, who
succeeded him in that see: but if it had been the ordinance of God, it ought
not for some abuse to have been abolished.

Augustine also says, Si deest sacerdos, confiteatur proximo: De poenit. cap.
10.
If a priest cannot be had, let a man confess to his neighbor: Ergo, to
confess to a priest, is no certain ordinance of God: for then might it not be
changed.

The Papists.
2. IT is necessary that every man should confess to his own parish priest,
Thom. ex Tileman. Heshus. loc. 7. err. 46.

The Protestants.
YEa, but Augustine says, Sacerdos, vt perfectus medicus, primum sciat curare
peccata sua, and tum detergere aliena: The priest as a cunning physician, must
first know how to cure his own sins, before he can help another, De
salutaribus docum. cap. 50. And in another place, Quaerat sacerdotem scientem
ligare and soluere, ne ambo cadant in foueam: Let him seek a priest that
knows how to bind and loose, lest both fall into the ditch, De poenitent.
cap. 10. But such an one cannot be had in every parish: for many times the
parish priest is worse then he that comes to be confessed: such an one,
Augustine says, is not to be taken, and therefore men should not in that case
bind themselves to their popish priest.

The Papists.
3. IT is enough for men once a year in the time of Lent, to confess
themselves, Council. Trid. sess. 14. can. 8.

The Protestants.
AVgustine says contrary, Non tantum laici, sed etiam sacerdotes vna die esse
non debent sine poenitentia: Not only lay men, but not priests ought to be one
day without repentance, In Apocal. hom. 2. His reason is, because they can not
be one day without sin.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, of satisfaction.
THis question contains these parts: First, whether the sin being forgiven,
there remain any punishment.

2. Whether the temporal punishment of this life may be redeemed by good
works.

3. Whether the wrath of God may be satisfied for sin, and the punishment due
unto the same.

4. Whether one man may satisfy for another: of these now in their order.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE Punishment remain, the sin being once pardoned.
The Papists.
Council. Triden. sess. 14. can. 14. Argum. The Lord forgave unto David the
sin of adultery and murder, which he had committed, yet he punished him in
the death of his child, 2. Sam. 12.13.14. Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 2.

The Protestants.
Ans. THat cross was laid upon David, not as a punishment of his sin, but as
a fatherly correction or chastisement, to exercise him and make him more
careful for the time following: as Augustine says, writing upon the same
example: De peccator. merit. and remiss. lib. 2 34.
Subsecutus est illius comminationis effectus, vt pietas hominis in illa
humilitate exerceretur, atque probaretur: The effect of the threatening
immediately followed, that David's godliness might thereby be tried and proved: He
says not, that David might thereby be punished.

Argum. Christ said to the sick of the palsy, Mark. 2.5. Son, thy sins
are forgiven thee. Whereby our Savior would have them to understand, that the
sin being once forgiven, the sickness of the body, which was the punishment
of sin, could not continue: for the cause being removed, the effect cease.

The afflictions of this life are the loving corrections of God to admonish us,
not plagues to punish us: as Augustine says well, Tota miseria generis humani
dolor medecinalis, non sententia poenalis: The misery of man is but a
medicinal grief, not a sentence of punishment: In Psalm. 138.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER THE Temporal punishment of this life may be redeemed
by good works.
The Papists.


Argum. Daniel said to Nabuchadnezzar the King, Redeem thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, cap. 4.24.
Bellarm. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe text is rather thus to be read: Break off thy sins by
righteousness: that is, leave off to do evil: as it is by Tremellius
translated more agreeably to the Hebrew: for if redemption be here properly
understood, it would follow that men may redeem not only the punishment of
their sins, but the sins themselves: and so take Christ's office out of his
hand.

By true and faithful repentance, and other good works proceeding of faith, we
may avoid Gods heavy judgment due to our sins, yet not for the merit or
satisfaction of any work, but through the merits only of Christ.

Argum. Look how our sins are forgiven, so is the punishment due unto them:
but our sins are forgiven us freely in Christ, Ierem. 31.34. Ergo, so is the
punishment.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER A MAN may truly satisfy the wrath of God, for the
punishment due unto sin.
The Papists.
IT is not a sufficient satisfaction, to believe that Christ has abundantly
satisfied Council. Trid. sess. 14. can. 13. Rhemist. Matthew. 11.21.

Argum. 1. Matthew. 3.8. Bring forth fruits worthy repentance: he preaches
satisfaction by doing worthy fruits of penance, as fasting, prayer, alms,
and the like, Rhemist.

Ans. Fruits worthy of repentance, are no satisfaction for sin, but
arguments of true repentance, effects, not any part thereof.

Argum. 2. Judge your selves, that you be not judged, 1. Corinthians. 11.31. We
must punish our selves according to the weight of the sins past, Rhemist. And
again says the Apostle, What great punishment has it wrought in you! 2. Corinthians. 7.11. This is nothing else but the satisfactorie punishment for our
sins, Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 8.

Ans. The Apostle means nothing else, but an hearty and earnest sorrow for
our sins, whereby we do judge and condemn, and as it were punish our
selves, yet we are far from making any satisfaction hereby for our sins:
as Augustine says, Omnis iniquitas puniatur necesse est, aut a poenitente
homine, aut vindicante Deo: vis non puniat? puni tu: antequam ipse intendat vt
puniat, tu confitendo praeueni and puni. In Psalm. 58.
All sin must needs be punished either of man himself repenting, or God
revenging: if thou will not have him punish, punish thou, before he intend to
punish: prevent him by thy confession, and punish thy self. So then this
punishment of our selves is nothing else, but true repentance and confession of
our sins.

The Protestants.
THat satisfaction ought to be made unto men, either by restitution, as Zacheus
restored that which he had wrongfully gotten: or by reconciling our selves to
those, whom we have offended, as Matthew. 5.24. we do willingly grant: but
that the wrath of God may be appeased and satisfied for our sins, or the
punishment due unto the same by any work of ours, it is a great blasphemy,
and clean contrary to the course of Scripture.

Argum. 1. That it is sufficient to return unto God by true repentance and
amendment of life, without any satisfaction, either for our sin, or the
punishment of sin: the Prophet Ezechiel shows, where speaking of the
conversion of a wicked man, he says, His iniquities shall no more be mentioned,
or laid to his charge, chap. 18.22. But if after the sin remitted, there
should remain some punishment behind, his sins should still be remembered
and mentioned: there is therefore no satisfaction for the punishment of sin,
because none remains.

Argum. 2. Isai. 43.25. I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine
own sake. Likewise, 53.4. He has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are
we healed. God of his free mercy does forgive our sin: Christ also has
fully satisfied for us: Ergo, there is no satisfaction in us: we are made
whole by his stripes, and not our own.

Argum. 3. Our prayers, fastings, alms, and what works soever, are neither
meritorious, nor satisfactorie: for when we have done all, we are but
unprofitable servants, and we did no more then was our duty, Luke 17.10.

In Matthew. sermon. 16. De poenitent. cap. 10
Augustine says, Peccasti in fratrem? fac satis, and sanatus es. Have thou
offended thy brother? satisfy him, and thou art healed. Qui multos offendit
peccando, placare multos debet satisfaciendo: He that has offended many in
sinning, must appease many by satisfying them. These kinds of satisfaction
both publicly and privately we acknowledge: but satisfaction to God, neither
he, nor we acknowledge. Lachrymas lego, satisfactionem non lego: I read of
Peter's tears, says he, De tempor. sermon. 117.
but of no satisfaction.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER ONE man may satisfy for another.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Coloss. 1. sect. 4.

Argum The passions of the Saints are suffered for the common good of the whole
body, as Saint Paul says: Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fulfill
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ for his bodies sake, which
is the Church, Coloss. 1.24. Here Saint Paul's afflictions are meritorious and
satisfactorie for the Colossians, Rhemist.

Ans. The Apostles sufferings were for the glory of God, and the confirmation
of their faith: but therefore it follows not, that they were meritorious,
either for himself, or others. His sufferings are said to be Christ's, who
suffers in his members, not that they receive any force from Christ to be
satisfactorie, but because he was made like and conformable by his sufferings
unto Christ, Romans 8.17. Augustine also thus expounds the place, Non dixit,
pressurarum mearum, sed Christi, quia membrum erat Christi: He says not, of my
sufferings, Tract. in Johan. 10^.
but of Christ's, because he was a member of Christ: they are not then the
sufferings of Christ, as though they received a satisfactorie power from
Christ: but because he was a member of Christ, who suffered together in and
with his members.

The Protestants.
NOne can merit or satisfy for themselves, much less for others: neither can
one man bear the burden, or pay the debt of another man's sin.

Argum. The Scripture says, The soul that sins, the same shall die, Ezech.
18.20. Every man shall bear his own burden, Galath. 6.5. None can redeem his
brother, or give a price to God for him, Psalm. 49.8.

Augustine upon those words, John. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
he will give it you: Exaudiuntur quippe omnes sancti pro seipsis: non autem
exaudiuntur pro omnibus, vel amicis, vel inimicis, etc. The Saints are heard
praying for themselves: Tract in Johan. 102.
but they are not heard praying for all their friends or enemies, because it is
not said simply, He will give, but, He will give to you. Ergo, much less can
they satisfy for others, if their prayers be not heard always for others.

THE EIGHT QVESTION, OF INDVLgences and penal injunctions.
THE FIRST PART: WHETHER Penal and painful works are necessary unto
repentance.
The Papists.
NOt only amendment, and ceasing to sin, or repentance in heart before
Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 2. sect. 2.

Argum. The incestuous person was rebuked of many, 2. Corinthians. 2.6. which word
implies, beside his inward repentance, outward correction and chastisement.

The Protestants.
Ans. We acknowledge, that in notorious sins, and offensive to the Church,
as this of the young man's was, inward repentance is not sufficient, but that
after sharp discipline, by the outward testification of sorrow, and public
confession, satisfaction must be made to the Church: but it follows not that
this course should be taken for all sins, which a man repents him of. And
yet we grant that outward signs of our sorrow are always necessary in
true repentance, not as satisfactorie means to redeem our sins, but only as
infallible tokens and effects of our repentance. As Augustine says, Satis
durus est, cuius mentis dolorem oculi carnis nequeunt declarare: He is hard
hearted, the grief of whose mind, the eyes of his flesh do not show forth, de
poenitent. cap. 9.

Argum. There are but two essential parts of repentance, and true conversion
unto God: To turn from our sins, and lead an holy life. So says the Lord
by the Prophet, If the wicked will return from his sins and keep all my
statutes, Ezech. 18.21. This is all God requires, without any other penal
works: wherefore ceasing from sin and amendment of life, which necessarily
include the true sorrow and conversion of the heart, are sufficient for
repentance.

THE SECOND PART, BY WHOM penal works are to be inflicted.
The Papists.
Conc. Trid sess. 14* can. 15. Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 2. sect. 2.

Argum. To them is given authority to bind, and loose: Ergo, to enjoin
penance, Bellarm. cap. 5. lib. 4.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. SOme kind of mulctes Church discipline is not to deal withal: as
bodily punishment, and pecuniarie fines, which are to be imposed at the
discretion of the magistrate. Secondly, we grant a wholesome use of the keys in
Church discipline, in punishing and clensing of notorious offenders in the open
face of the congregation: but privately to enjoin men penance for their secret
sins is an Antichristian yoke.

Argum. True repentance is a free work, not of compulsion, or coaction: Saint
Paul exhorts men to judge themselves, that they be not judged, 1. Corinthians.
11.31. But now when penance is laid upon a man, and not voluntarily taken of
himself, he is judged rather of another, he does not judge himself.
Augustine says, Quem poenitet, punit seipsum, prorsus aut punis aut punit
Deus, vt ille non puniat, puni tu. He that repents, punishes himself:
either thou punishest, or God: if thou will not have God to do it, punish thy
self. A man therefore must punish himself, he must not be punished of another
in his repentance to Godward: for of outward chastisement to the world, now is
not the question.

THE THIRD PART, OF PARDONS and Indulgences.
The Papists.
1. THe principal Magistrates of the Church are no less authorized to pardon,
then to punish, and to remit the temporal punishment due to sinners, Rhemist.
2. Corinthians. 2.4. Council. Trid sess. 25.

Argum. To whom you forgive any thing, I forgive also, 2. Corinthians. 2.10. Here
the Apostle forgiueth the young man a piece of his punishment, when he might
have kept him longer in penance for his offense, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. 1. We deny not, but that the Church may release such public exercise
of humiliation, which is enjoined offenders for trial of their repentance, and
some satisfaction of the Church, when it sees, that they are sufficiently
humbled. But it follows not, that the Church therefore may dispense with any
necessary part of repentance toward God. Secondly, whereas you say, the
Apostle, notwithstanding his rebuke was sufficient, might have kept the young
man still in temporal punishment: it is clean contrary to the Apostles own
rule, who persuades the Corinthians to forgive him, least he should be
overcome of too much heaviness, verse. 7. The Apostle therefore would neither
forgive nor release him, before they had forgiven him, and he had satisfied
the whole Church, verse 10. Neither would he keep him longer in punishment,
having once sorrowed sufficiently, verse 6. The Apostle therefore did neither
bind nor release him at his own pleasure, but as he saw repentance to be
wrought in the offender.

The Protestants.
THe power which the Pope and popish Bishops do challenge unto themselves, in
giving Pardons and Indulgences, is most blasphemous.

1 They do take upon them to release both the punishment of this life, and the
pains of purgatory also, and say, that their pardons profit both the dead
and the living, Bull. Leon. 10.

2 They pardon not only the punishment, but the sin both past, and to come, for
days, years, hundreds, thousands of years: how so ever the Rhemists would
bear us in hand that an indulgence is a release but of the punishment. Such
was the first Iubile pardon granted by Boniface 8. an. 1300. And another by Leo
the 10. an. 1513. See also the Boston pardons granted by Pope Innocent, Pope
Iu^ye, Pope Clement, which gave them release of all their sins for five
hundred years, Fox. page 1178.

3 And, which filled up the measure of iniquity, they set their pardons to
sale: as in Pope Leo his time, his pardoners for ten shillings would give to
any man power, Fox. p. 844.
to deliver one soul at his pleasure out of purgatory.

Argum. The scripture says, that God only forgiueth sins, Mark. 2.7. And
that Christ no otherwise, then as God, forgave sins, verse. 10. His Apostles
only as his ministers and Ambassadors, and in his name, declare and pronounce
remission of sins, 2. Corinthians. 5.19. Wherefore there is no such power given
unto men, at their pleasure to bind or loose.

De Baptis. lib. 3. cap. 18
Augustine says, Non secundum arbitrium hominum tenentur, aut soluuntur
peccata, sed ad arbitrium Dei, and orationes sanctorum: Sins are not loosed,
or retained at the pleasure of men, but according to the will of God, and
prayers of his Church.

The Papists.
Corinth. 2. sec. 5. Coloss. 1. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
HEre are many blasphemies and untruths couched together:

1 That a man's penalties may exceed and be greater then his sins, and so
his abounding may supply another man's want: for thus the Rhemists say: which
cannot stand with the justice of God, to punish a man more then he has
deserved. And it is contrary to the Scriptures: Enter not into judgment with
thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified, Psalm.
143.2. And Job says, If the Lord should call him to account, he should not
answer one to a thousand, 9.3.

2 How can the Church governors dispense the merits of one to another* Who
made them stewards of another man's good? Ye say also the contrary your
selves, That the abounding passions of the Saints are applicable to others by
the sufferers intention, Rhem. 1. Colo. 2.2. Then not by the Churches
dispensation.

3 It is a great blasphemy, that one may be helped by another man's merits,
and it does derogate from the death of Christ, whose only merits are the
treasure and storehouse of the Church: The most righteous man that ever was,
can but save his own soul, Ezech. 14.14. And that only by Christ.

Augustine says: Vnusquisque pro se rationem reddet, In Matt. sermon. 22.
nec alieno testimonio quisquam adiuuatur apud Deum, and vix sibi quisque
sufficit, etc. Every man shall give account for himself, before God no man is
helped by the testimony of another: the testimony of his own conscience does
hardly suffice for himself.

The Papists.
3. THe dispensing of pardons and indulgences, is only committed, they say,
Council. Trident. sess. 14. cap. 7. The cases reserved to the Pope are 51. in
number, Fox. page 785. The Bishop of Paris, ann. 1515 reserved these cases to
himself, to dispense in murder, witchcraft, sacrilege, heresy, simonie,
adultery, ex Tileman. Heshus. loc. 9. de poeniten. err. 63. Likewise the
years of their pardons are limited: Bishops may not exceed 40. days pardon:
the Pope may be lavish in his hundreds and thousands, yea, and this reservation
of cases, stands not only with the external policy of the Church, but is
of force even before God, Council. Trident. sess. 14. cap. 7.

The Protestants.
WE will not much contend with them about reservation of cases: for we
acknowledge no such power to give pardons, or indulgences, either in superior
or inferior Priests: yet we will show how this devise of theirs stands not
with their own doctrine.

Argum. 1. It is a greater power to remit the sin, then to release the
punishment: but every Priest has the greater power, as they say, to remit
sins, yea as fully as has the Pope himself: Allen in his book of pardons,
cap. 2. Ergo, why have they not the less power, which is by indulgence to
dispense with the punishment? And that of these two, the remission of sins is
the greater, it is confessed by the Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 2. sect 6.

Argum. 2. In the point of death, the reservation of cases has no place: but
at that time every Priest may absolve from all manner sins and punishment,
Council. Trident. sess. 14* cap. 7. But every hour is with some, and ought to
be with all, the point of death: because we are uncertain when it comes, and
therefore ought always to be in a readiness. Therefore even by their own rule
every Priest has at all times authority to absolve in all cases.

Again, if those words of Christ be spoken to all ministers and preachers of
the Gospel, John. 20.22. Whose sins ye retain, etc. (which cannot be
denied) to them all then is committed equally that power of binding and
loosing, which is exercised by the preaching of the word.

THE NINTH QVESTION, OF THE ceremonies and circumstances of penance.
The Papists.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de poenitent. cap. 22.

The Protestants.
Our Savior clean contrary bids his Disciples, not to look sowrely, nor
to disfigure themselves, when they fast and repent, or to show any other
outward token of their sorrow, but to do it secretly between themselves and
God, to wash their face, to annoint themselves with oil, that it appear not
to men that they fast, Matthew. 6.16.17.

Augustine also answering a certain objection, that young men newly married
might make: How can I shave my head or change my habit? says thus, Vera
conuersio sufficit tibi, sine vestimentorum commutatione. The true conversion
of the heart may suffice thee without changing of thy vesture. De temper. sermon.
67.


The Papists.
Bellarm. ibid. to go a pilgrimage, and such like works of penance were
prescribed them.

The Protestants.
TRue repentance consists not in such outward exercise of the body, but is a
conversion rather of the heart. It was the manner of hypocrites, idolat^rs and
superstitious men, to seek to appease their Gods with afflicting of their
flesh, as the Gentiles did cut their hair, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Baals Priests did
launch their flesh, 1. King. 18.28.

Argum. What is to be thought of such punishing of the carcass, Saint Paul
shows, Coloss. 2.23. He calls it voluntary religion or superstition in not
sparing the body: when men do not use such outward exercises of fasting and
abstinence for the chastisement of the flesh, to subdue it to the spirit, but
with an opinion of meriting thereby, preferring them before the faith and
conversion of the heart, as the papists do.

Augustine says, Non sit satis, quod doleat, sed ex fide doleat, and non
semper doluisse, doleat: Let it not suffice to be sorrowful, but let his
sorrow proceed of faith, De poenitent. ca. 13.
and let it grieve him, that he is not always grieved for his sin. So then
true repentance is especially an inward work of faith, rather then an exercise
of the body, and it ought always to continue. Wherefore it consists not in
such laborious works, which if a man should long endure, he should end his
life sooner then repentance.

The Papists.
3 THey measure their penance by number of years and days: They have
quadragenas, forty days penance: septenas, seven years penance, Ex Tileman.
Heshus. loc. 9. de poenitent. Err. 83. And they lengthen or cut short the time
of penance at their pleasure, to continue three, seven, or ten years, yea
sometime more, Bellarmin. lib. 1. de poenitent. 22.

The Protestants.
THat true repentance is not to be measured by the time, but by the right
sorrow and contrition of the offender, Saint Paul teaches us, who writes for
the young man to be released, because of his great and sufficient heaviness for
his fault, 2. Corinthians. 2.7.

Augustine also says, Poenitentia vera, non annorum numero, De tempor. sermon.
66.
sed amaritudine animicensetur: poenitentia quamuis sit exigui temporis, etc.
True repentance is not measured by number of years, but by the bitterness of
the soul: though it be but for a short time, yet it is not despised before
that judge which regards the heart.

THE FIFTEENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, OF MATRIMONY.
THe several questions belonging to this Controversy are these.

First, whether Matrimony be a sacrament properly so called.

2 Of the causes of divorce, and whether it be lawful to marry after divorce.

3 Of the degrees in marriage: First, the manner of supputation or accounting of
degrees. Secondly, whether the degrees forbidden, Leuit. 18. may be dispensed
with. Thirdly, whether any other degrees may be by humane law prohibited.

4 Of the impediments of marriage, of two sorts. First, of those that may
hinder the contract of marriage only. Secondly, of such impediments, as may
both dissolve the contract and the marriage also consummate.

5 The comparison of marriage and virginity, whether either be preferred
before the other before God.

Of these now in their order.

6 Of the times of marriage prohibited.

7 Of the ceremonies and rites of marriage.

THE FIRST QVESTION, WHETHER Matrimony be a sacrament.
The Papists.
Council. Trid. sess. 24. can. 1.

Argum. 1. Ephesians. 5.32. This is a great sacrament: Matrimony is here a sign
of an holy thing, representing the conjunction of Christ, and his Church. Ergo,
a sacrament.

Answ. 1. The words are thus to be read rather, This is a great mystery. Or if
we read sacrament, they have no great advantage, seeing they are not ignorant,
that the original word, Mystery, which they translate sacrament, is
attributed to other things then sacraments: as 1. Timoth. 3.16. Mystery of
godliness: Apocal. 17.5. A mystery great Babylon. Neither do they themselves
much urge this argument. 2. The Apostle says not, that Matrimony is a
mystery, but I speak of Christ and his Church, verse. 32.3. Matrimony we
confess to be instituted of God, and to be a sign of a holy thing: yet no
sacrament: for so was the Sabbath ordained of GOD, and signified the rest in
Christ, Hebr. 4.8. yet was it no sacrament. Wherefore al significatiue and
mystical signs are not sacraments.

Argum. 2. Matrimony gives grace of sanctification to the parties married.
They shall be saved in bearing of children, if they continue in faith and love,
1. Timoth. 2.15. These are the graces given by matrimony. Ergo, a sacrament.

Answ. 1. We deny that any sacraments give or confer grace, they are
instruments only of grace. 2. We also grant that by matrimony God gives to
the faithful this special grace to live in holiness and pureness, from the
filthy pollution of the flesh: but the sacraments are seals of spiritual
graces, and serve for the increase of faith: it is not sufficient to be a
means of any common gift, but of the spiritual and iustifiyng grace to make a
sacrament. 3. Wherefore if by faith and love here, they understand only the
fidelity and duty of wedlock, they are not those spiritual graces, whereof
sacraments are seals: if we take them for the true faith and love, which are
the common graces of the faithful, as the very meaning is, they are as well to
be had out of wedlock, as in it.

The Protestants.
THat matrimony is no sacrament of the Gospel, speaking now properly, and
understanding a sacrament, for the seal of the grace of God in the remission
of our sins by Christ, it is thus proved:

Argum. 1. Matrimony was instituted by GOD, before sin, in Paradise,
therefore it can be no sacrament of the Gospel.

Argum. 2. Our adversaries are contrary to themselves: for they call matrimony
a profanation of Orders, Martin* sect. 15. cap. 11. And they say it is more
tolerable for a Priest to keep many concubines then to marry, Pighius ex
Tileman. Hesbus. loc. 21. Err. 2. Do these fellows mean in good sooth, that
matrimony is a sacrament, which they make so vile, polluted and unclean a
thing?

3 In every sacrament there ought to be an external sensible element, as the
matter, and a sanctifiyng word, as the form: But in matrimony there is
neither. Ergo, it is no sacrament.

Bellarm. The form, are the words pronounced by the parties themselves, when
they contract matrimony: I do take thee, etc. They also themselves are the
matter: yea and the Ministers of the sacrament too: For the Jesuit holds,
that it is a sacrament in the very contract and giving of mutual consent,
before it be solemnized in the Church, De matrim. cap. 6.

Ans. 1. The sacrament is one thing, and the receivers another: therefore the
married parties cannot be the sacramental matter, being the receivers. 2. It is
not every word that sanctifies, but the word of God, 1. Tim. 4.5. but these
words, I take thee, are no part of the word: Ergo, they want also the form of
a sacrament. 3. The ministers of Christ and preachers of the word are only the
dispe^sers of the mysteries and sacraments of the Church, 1. Cor. 4.1.
Wherefore the parties themselves could not be ministers of matrimony, if it
were a sacrament.

Augustine thus writes, Ne quis istam magnitudinem sacramenti in singulis
quibusque hominib. vxores habe^tib. intelligeret, ego aute^ dico, inquit, etc.
Tract. in Johan. 8.
Lest any man should think, when the Apostle had said, This is a great
sacrament, that this great Sacrament is to be understood of all married persons,
the Apostle adds, but I speak of Christ and his Church. But if so be
matrimony were a sacrament, why is it not to be found in all married folk?

THE SECOND QVESTION, OF THE CAUSES of divorce in marriage, and whether it be
lawful to marry after divorce.
THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THERE MAY BE more causes of divorce, then fornication
only.
The Papists.
Divorce, as Bellarm. defines it, is either from the duties of marriage, as
from diuortium, or it is a dissoluing of the knot and bond of marriage, which is
called repudium.

First then, they affirm, that the very bond and knot may be dissolved in the
marriage of Infidels, if one of them after marriage become a Christian: his
reason is, because marriage contracted in infidelity is no sacrament, and
therefore may be dissolved, Bellarmin. cap. 12.

Argum. Saint Paul says, If the Infidel party will depart, let him depart,
a brother or sister is not in subjection in such a case, 1. Corinthians. 7.15.

Answ. Saint Paul gives not liberty to the one party at their pleasure
utterly to renounce the other, as though they were no longer man and wife: for
Saint Paul had said before, that if the Infidel party be content to dwell
with the other, he or she is not to be put away. But his meaning is, that if
one party wilfully depart, the other is no longer bound, nor in subjection for
the performance of the mutual duties of marriage.

The Papists.
Council. Trident. sess. 24. can. 8. Bellarmine names three: Fornication,
according to Christ's rule, Math. 5. Heresy, Tit. 3. An heretic must be
avoided. Thirdly, when one is a continual offense to another and a provocation
to sin: If thine eye offend thee, pull it out, Math. 5.29. Bellarmin. cap. 14.

Answ. Fornication we admit is a just cause of separation and divorce, but not
heresy: for Saint Paul would not have a woman to forsake an Infidel, 1. Corinthians. 7.13. therefore not an heretic. We must avoid such, that is, take
heed of their poisoned opinions, and shun their company also, where we are not
otherwise bound: Neither is the eye to be cut off, where there is any hope: but
who knows whether the offensive party may return to grace? And this place
proves as well a final ^utting off of marriage, as a separation or disjunction.

The Protestants.
FIrst, that there is no cause of utter dissolution of marriage by way of
divorce, but only adultery and fornication: it is plain by our Savior
Christ's words, Math. 5.32. and 19.9. where neither infidelity nor any cause
beside is excepted, but only fornication.

Secondly, Saint Augustine sometime was of opinion, that the wife might be
dismissed for infidelity: but he reuoketh and retracteth that opinion, Lib.
retract. 1. cap. 19. For elsewhere he flatly concludes thus: A viro non
fornicante non licere omnino discedere: that it is not lawful for a woman at
all to leave her husband, if he commit not fornication, De adulter. coniug.
1.7.

And yet further, to make this matter more plain, we acknowledge no other
cause of lawful divorce in marriage but that only, which is prescribed in the
Gospel, namely, for adultery or fornication, Math. 5.32. and 19.9. There is
notwithstanding another cause whereby the marriage knot may be dissolved,
though not for fornication: as when one of the parties does wilfully renounce,
leave and forsake the other upon no just cause, but either of lightness or for
diverse religion, as when an Infidel forsakes a Christian, a Papist a
Protestant, an heretic a true professor, or upon any other unlawful or unjust
cause: for the Apostle says plainly, A brother or sister is not in subjection
in such things, 1. Corinthians. 7.15. that is, is freed from the yoke or bond of
marriage.

First, it is plain that the Apostle is so to be understood in this place:
for the word, which he uses is, (...), is no longer a servant, or in
subjection: which is to be taken in the same sense, as if he should say, (...),
he or she is no longer bound or tied: which word the Apostle uses, verse. 39.
And again the Apostle has relation here to the fourth verse, where he says
the wife, (...), has no power of her own body, and the husband likewise: But
now, says he, the infidel party having wilfully separated himself, (...), the
innocent party is no longer in subjection, that is, (...), has now power over
his own body: and is now become (...), free, exempt from the marriage knot or
bond, in which sense the Apostle uses the word, verse 39.

Secondly we must know what kind of desertion it is, that causes a
dissolution of marriage, and in what manner. First, it must be malitiosa
desertio, a malicious departure without any just cause: But when as the husband
is absent by consent about necessary affairs, as the Merchant beyond the seas:
or is employed in some weighty business, as in warfare, in embassage, or such
like: or is violently detained in prison or captivity, amongst the Turks or
elsewhere: In these and the like cases the wife is bound to wait and expect the
return of her husband, unless she be otherwise advertised of his death.
Secondly, the innocent party must use all means to reconcile, reclaim, and
bring home again the wilful and obstinate party so departing, if it be
possible. Thirdly, if he continue in his obstinacy, and depart, having no
purpose to return, the matter must be brought before the judge or Magistrate
in such cases: who after public citation of the obstinate party, and certain
knowledge that he refuses wilfully to appear being cited, and is not
otherwise let to come, may with mature deliberation pronounce the innocent
party free and at liberty to marry, according to Saint Paul's rule, A
brother, or sister is not bound in such things.

Thirdly, neither is Saint Paul contrary to our Savior Christ, who allows no
divorce but only for fornication: for that is a diverse case from this, whereof
Saint Paul treats: And there is great difference between lawful divorce,
and unlawful and wilful desertion: for there the innocent party first
claymeth the privilege of separation: here the guilty party first separateth
himself: there divorce is sued, and required: here the innocent party seeks
no divorce, but seeks all means of reconciliation: So that properly the
setting free the innocent party in this case, cannot be called a divorce.
Christ therefore speaks of lawful divorce, not of every dissolution of
marriage: for then mention should have been made in that place of natural
death and departure, which is confessed by all to be a dissolution and breaking
off of marriage.

Thus have I showed mine opinion with Beza and others concerning thi^ point:
Herein further as in all the rest referring my self to the determination of
our Church, and the judgment of our learned brethren, Beza. 1. Corinthians. 7.
verse. 15. Amand. Polan. Hemingius. T^leman. Heshus.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER IT BE Lawful to marry after diuorsement for
adultery.
The Papists.
FOr adultery one may dismiss another, but neither party can marry again
Rhemist. Math. 19. sect. 4. no not the innocent party may marry again: for
the marriage knotte is not dissolved because of adultery, Council. Trident.
sess. 24. can. 7.

Argum. 1. Romans 7.2. The woman is bound by the law to her husband, so long as
he lives: nothing but death dissolueth the bond between man and wife:
therefore not lawful to marry again after divorce, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. Saint Paul must be expounded by our Savior Christ, who makes exception
of fornication, Math. 5. Neither does Saint Paul deny, that marriage may be
dissolved, while they live, without breaking of wedlock: but that, although the
knot hold during their life, yet by death it is dissolved. Again, Saint Paul
having no occasion to entreat of divorce, speaks of marriage as it stands
whole and sound by the ordinance of God, that if a woman join her self to
another man, her former wedlock being not lawfully dissolved, she is a wedlock
breaker.

Arg. 2. 1. Corinthians. 7.11. If she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be
reconciled: Ergo, the parties separated for fornication may not marry again,
Rhemist.

Ans. Saint Paul speaks of other separations, which are caused by dissentions
in marriage, and not of divorce for adultery: for he says, If she depart: not
If she be put away: neither was it so usual a thing for reconciliation to be
sought after solemn divorce. Again, he says, Let not the woman depart, as
being in her choice, whether she would depart or not: but in the case of
fornication, she was to depart, or rather be put away, whether she would or not.

The Protestants.
FOr no other cause in the world, but only for fornication may there be either
a final separation, or clean dissolution of marriage, by way of divorce: But
for that cause our Savior has granted liberty, both to dissolve matrimony,
and to marry again.

Argum. Math. 5.32. Whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornication) commits adultery: Ergo, for fornication it is lawful for a
man to dismiss his wife. Likewise Math. 19.9. Whosoever shall put away his
wife, except it be for whoredom, and marry another, commits adultery:
Ergo, for adultery it is lawful for the man both to put away and renounce his
wife, and the wife likewise her husband (for there is the like reason for both)
and for them to marry again. This liberty granted by our Savior Christ, by
no humane law can be restrained, or cut off.

Argum. 2. Saint Paul says, Let every man have his wife, and every woman her
husband, for avoiding of fornication, and it is better to marry, then to
burn. Wherefore it is lawful, the first marriage according to the word of God
being broken, both for men and women to use the remedy against incontinencie,
and to be married again: for he speaks generally of all.

Augustine says, that he which puts away his wife for adultery and marieth
another, Non est aequandus ei, is not in the same case with with him, which for
any other cause puts away and marieth again. But if it be as lawful for
other causes to be divorced, as for heresy and infidelity, De fide and ^per.
cap. 19
as the Jesuit tells us, there should be no difference made between the
second marriage of the one and the other. Augustine in the same place, though he
be elsewhere resolute against marriage after divorce, yet grants that it is
not plain out of scripture, whether he be an adulterer, that marieth again
after divorce for adultery: Sed quantum existimo, venialiter ibi quisque
fallitur, but as I think, we are every one of us herein deceived.

I end this point, better allowing Pollentius judgment for this matter, then
Augustines, between whom there is much discoursed of both sides: Si mulier a
viro non fornicante discesserit, non ei licere alteri nubere propter
praeceptum* si autem a fornicante, non ei expedire propter opprobrium: If a
woman depart from her husband being no adulterer, it is not lawful to marry
another because of the commandment: but if he be an adulterer, it is lawful
to marry, but not expedient always, because of the shame and reproach, Ad
Pollent. lib. 1. cap. 6.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF THE degrees in marriage prohibited.
FIrst of the supputation of degrees. Secondly, whether the degrees forbidden,
Leuit. 18. may be dispensed with. Thirdly, whether any other degrees may by
humane law be prohibited beside those.

THE FIRST PART, OF THE SVPPVtation and account of degrees.
THe degrees are either of consanguinitie, which is of diverse persons coming
of the same stock and blood: or of affinity, which arises of marriage, as when
the kinsmen of either party that is married, are by marriage allied to the
other, though not of his blood, as Laban the brother of Rebecca was allied by
marriage, as also by blood unto Isaac, though not so nearly.

In both these kinds of kindred there is a right line both upward and
ascending: as in consanguinitie, the Father or Mother, Grandfather,
Grandmother, and so forth: in affinity, the Father in law, and mother in law,
the stepfather, or stepmother: as also descending, as the son, the sons
son, the son in law, or daughter in law, and their sons and daughters.
There is also a collateral line in consanguinitie, as brother and sister,
brother and sisters children, uncle or aunt: in affinity, the brothers wife,
sisters husband, the uncles wife, or aunts husband. Now our adversaries set
down these rules to know the degrees by.

The Papists.
Abraham.
Isaac. 1. Jacob. 2.
except the first, from the which we begin the account: as in this example
Jacob is in the second degree from Abraham.

Answer. We see no reason, why the first should be left out: for look how many
generations, so many degrees: But every person is a generation: And this is the
manner of account in scripture: as Math. 1. there are 14. generations reckoned
from Abraham, whereof Abraham makes one, Judge. 14. Enoch the seventh from
Adam, Adam being the first himself in that number: Thus the scripture numbreth
inclusiue, not exclusive, inclusiuely comprehending also the number, from whom
the account begins: And thus Abraham must be counted the first degree, and
Jacob, not in the second but the third from him.

The Papists.
Bathuel.
Rebecca. Jacob. Laban. Rachel.
Jacob and Rachel are in the second degree, because each of them is removed
from Bathuel, in the second degree, Bellarm. cap. 26.

The Protestants.
Answ. NEither do we allow this rule: but rather follow the account of the
civil law, which in the collateral line makes so many degrees as persons,
excepting the stock, which is not to be counted in collateral degrees,
because we begin not to number there. Wherefore according to the rule before
said, how many generations, so many degrees. According then to the account of
the civil law, which we here follow, Jacob and Rachel are not in the second,
but the fourth degree each from other: Rachel, 1. Laban, 2. Rebecca, 3. Jacob,
4. For in collateral degrees, we count not the distance from the root or
stock, but the mutual distance from themselves.

And by this reason, if Cousin germans be but in the second degree, there
should be no degree beyond the second forbidden, Leuit. 18. for there is no
degree forbidden beyond this: neither is this by name and directly forbidden.

The Papists.
3. THeir third rule is this: In collateral degrees unequal, Their.
Abraham. Aram. Sara.
Sara is distant two degrees from the stock, and as many from Abraham,
Bellarm. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. NEither is this rule perfect: for by this reason, he that is indeed a
degree further off, shall be in the same degree: for if the uncle and the
nephew be removed but the second degree, and Cousin germans are but distant in
the second degree, as they say, the uncles son shall be in the same degree
with his cousin, as his father is, which is not to be admitted.

Wherefore in collaterals we prefer the Civil account of degrees: that is,
so many persons, the stock of the kindred excepted, so many degrees. These then
are the rules of marriage.

1. In the right line ascending and descending, all degrees are forbidden.

2. In collateral consanguinitie the prohibition reaches to the third degree:
as it is not lawful to marry the uncle, or the Aunt, who are in the third
degree from their nephew.

3. In collateral affinity the prohibition is extended to the fourth degree:
for affinity is always a degree beyond that consanguinitie, by the which it
comes in: as it is unlawful to marry the uncles wife, Leuit. 18.14. which
is in the fourth degree from her nephew, being one degree beyond her husband,
who is the uncle in the third degree. And this is to be observed, that there is
no affinity in the first or second degree, but the nearest is in the third: as
the wives or husbands father, brother, or daughter, which are all in the third
degree: the husband is in the first, the wife the second, and they in the third.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER ANY OF THE degrees prohibited in the law may be
dispensed withal.
The Papists.
THey say not that the Pope may dispense with all, but with some of them,
Council. Trid. sess. 24. can. 3. As they took upon them to dispense with King
Henry the 8. marriage with his brothers wife: their reason is, because some of
those prohibitions were only judicial and positive constitutions, not grounded
upon the law of nature.

Argum. 1. If it be the law of nature not to marry within those degrees, it
should have been in force before the law was made: but so was it not: for
Abraham married his brothers daughter, and Jacob two sisters, Bellarm. cap. 27.

Ans. 1. As Augustine says of the marriage and copulation of Adams children,
brothers and sisters together: Factum est compellente necessitate, It was for
necessity sake, because there were then no more women: so also may it be in
some sort true of those Patriarchs, that having a necessity to marry amongst
their own kindred, and not with the Gentiles, there was no choice to be had of
women of their own kindred further off in degree.

2. Although this example of theirs both in marrying many wives and so near of
kin, cannot be altogether excused or justified in them: yet because the law
of nature was not yet so clearly known, as afterward by the giving of the
law, which is nothing else but an exposition of the law of nature; the offense
was not so great in them, but might better be tolerated: because as Augustine
says, it was neither Contra morem illorum temporum, nec contra praeceptum*
Neither against the custom of those times, nor against any flat precept. And
to conclude, although those holy men had their imperfections, yet we must not
judge them in these things according to the evil and corrupt disposition of men
in these days, which might use this great liberty in marriage, better then
many use lawful marriage now: as Augustine says, Castius habebant plures,
quam nu^c multi vnam: They used many wives more chastely, then many now live
with one, De bon. coniug. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
WE affirm that it is utterly unlawful for any Christian to marry within the
degrees prohibited: neither can any humane power dispense with such marriages:
but the equity of that law being grounded upon nature, is in force for ever.
Wherefore the Pope of Rome shows himself plainly to be Antichrist in
dispensing against the law of God.

Argum. 1. Leuit. 18.24. The reason of that law is given concerning the
forbidden degrees: They should not defile themselves in any one of those
things, because the Gentiles defiled themselves thereby, and were cast out
before them for it. Wherefore it is a natural and perpetual law, otherwise
the Gentiles had not been bound unto it.

Argum. 2. Mark. 6.18. John says to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have
thy brothers wife: Ergo, the law was not abrogate, being in force in our
Savior Christ's time. Neither are they to allege, that Herodes brother was
yet living, or that he had a child by Herodias, and therefore it was not
lawful for him to marry her: for all this being granted, which cannot be
proved, yet it is plain out of the text, that John reproves him in no other
name, but because he married his brothers wife.

Augustine is against them, who speaking of the marriage of Consobrines or
Cousin germans, which had been sometime in use, Quia id nec diuina prohibuit,
De ciuitat. dei lib. 15. cap. 16.
and nondum prohibuerat lex humana: It was as yet thought lawful, because
neither the divine law forbad it, neither was it yet prohibited by man's law. If
that then be thought lawful, which Gods law manifestly forbids not, that
sure is unlawful which it plainly forbids. Wherefore to marry within any of
the degrees directly forbidden, Leuit. 18. is utterly unlawful.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER ANY OTHER DEgrees may be by humane law prohibited,
beside those directly forbidden in the law.
The Papists.
1. THey affirm, that by the law of Moses, those degrees only are unlawful
to marry in, which are directly and by name set down: and therefore it is
Moses law, for the uncle or Aunts husband to marry his niece, because it is
not by name prohibited: as Abraham married his brother Arams daughter: for Sara
was his niece. The marriage also of Cousin germans was lawful by Moses law,
and practiced, Numb. 36. The daughters of Zelophehad married their uncles
sons. Therefore by Moses law no degrees are forbidden, which are not directly
named, Bellarm. cap. 27.

The Protestants.
1. COncerning Abraham's marriage what is to be thought, we have showed before:
but it is a plain case, that the uncle is no more to marry his niece, then
the nephew his Aunt: and this being by name prohibited, Leuit. 18, 14.20.2. the
other also is necessarily included: for the same rules for degrees of kindred
do proportionably hold both in men and women: wherefore such marriage is
unlawful, neither to be contracted, and if it be, to be dissolved.

2. Concerning the marriage of brothers and sisters children, there is a
greater question. First, it cannot be proved that Zelophehads five daughters
married their uncles sons, that is, their Cousin germans: for the Hebrews
call the nephews, sons: as Iethros daughters are called the daughters of
Raguel their grandfather, Exodus 2.17. So it is very like that their husbands
were their uncles sons sons, as in the 12. verse it may be gathered, where
the text says, They were married into the families of the sons of Manasses:
therefore not into one family. But as touching the question in hand, the
marriage of Cousin germans seems also by some analogy to be forbidden by
Moses law: for if the degrees of affinity be limited to the fourth degree: as
it is not lawful for a man to marry his wives daughters daughter, Leuiticus
18.17. why should not the line of consanguinitie hold to the fourth degree
likewise? And so neither the son to marry his fathers brothers daughter, or
the daughter the son: for here are also four degrees: the son, one: the
father two, the fathers brother three, the brothers son four. Yet this we
grant, that this analogy or proportion is not so strong, nor does conclude so
necessarily as the other. Wherefore we thus determine of this matter, that it
is well that the marriages of Cousin germans are restrained by humane law, and
so they ought to be: which kind of marriages may lawfully be hindered, and the
contract loosed: but the marriage being consummate and finished, it is not for
this cause to be dissolved.

De ciuitat. dei lib. 15. cap. 16.
Augustine also writes very well of this matter, Quis dubitet, honestius hoc
tempore consobrinarum prohibita esse coniugia, etiamsi id diuina lex non
prohibeat: cuius enim debet causa propinquitatis verecundum honorem, ab ea
contineat quamuis generatricem libidinem? Who doubts, but that the marriage
of Cousin germans is honestly forbidden, though the divine law do not
prohibit it? for to whom a man owes a shamefast reverence for kindred sake, he
ought to refrain his lust.

The Papists.
Moses, and that the decrees of the Church in such cases do bind in
conscience, Council. Trident. sess. 24. can. 3. As to prohibit marriage unto
the seventh degree in natural kindred. Also their Canons do make a spiritual
kindred, that comes in by Baptism and Confirmation: and suffer not the
godfather to marry the godchild, or the godfather the godmother. Likewise they
have found out an affinity that comes in by espousals only of Matrimony,
which binds (say they) in the first degree by the Canon law, which is the
first and second by the Civil law: as that it is not lawful for the brother
to marry her which was espoused to his brother. Also another kindred and
affinity, by fornication and unlawful fleshly knowledge, which binds in the
2. degree Canonical, which is the 3. and 4. Civil: as it is not lawful for
the son to marry his fathers bastard, Bellarm. cap. 24. cap. 30.

The Protestants.
1. TO forbid more degrees in marriage, then are either directly or by
necessary consequence prohibited in the law, is a mere Antichristian yoke
laid upon the people of God: for the Lord (the author of that law) best did
know, both what persons were fit for marriage, and how far the line of
marriage was to extend.

2. The invention of spiritual kindred is but a popish trick, to get the more
money for their dispensations: for by this reason no Christians ought to marry
together, because they are all of one spiritual kindred in Christ.

3. The new affinity that comes by espousals, is also but an humane
invention: for the law speaks only of the kindred of the flesh, which arises
of carnal knowledge and copulation, not an intent or purpose only of
marriage, Leuit. 18.6.

4. The last we admit, for the son of the father begotten out of marriage, is
of his fleshly kindred, though not lawfully: and therefore in marriage matters
there is respect also to be had even of this kindred of the flesh: as Ruben is
cursed of his father because he lay with his concubine, Genes. 49.4. which
notwithstanding was not his fathers wife.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, OF OTHER impediments of marriage.
THere are some impediments which may hinder and dissolve the contract of
marriage, before it be consummate, but not after: some, which both may

The Papists.
1. BEllarmine reckons up diverse impediments of both kinds, which may
disanull the contract of marriage, and dissolve the matrimony it self: but he
makes no mention of the consent of the parents. And indeed it is their
opinion, that it is not a necessary thing to be respected in marriage: neither
that children are bound to require the consent of their parents, Cap. 19.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we do not say, that the want of the parents consent may dissolve
marriage consummate after mutual conjunction: but that it may break off the
contract and espousals. Secondly, neither have the parents power to bestow
their children in marriage without their consent, Genes. 24.57. Thirdly,
neither must the parents exercise a tyrannical power over their children in
forbidding them marriage, but must always have respect unto their need. And
thus doing their consent is necessary, and without it the contract has no
validity, 1. Corin. 7.37.38. The parent has power to give in marriage or not
to give.

There are also other causes which may dissolve contracts and espousals made:
as if the honest and lawful condition propounded in the contract be not kept:
or if there be an error in the person, he hears afterward of her dishonestie,
whom he took for an honest woman: both these may make void the contract,

The Papists.
2. THey set down many impediments, which may make a nullitie of marriage it
self, after it be consummate: some of them we acknowledge, as afterward it
shall appear: but these following we do renounce.

First, the vow of chastity and entering into Orders do loose the bond of
marriage. Secondly, if one marry with an Infidel, the marriage is not only
unlawful, but actually void, Bellarm. cap. 23. Thirdly, he that marries her
with whom he committed adultery before, is loose, even after marriage, and the
matrimony void, Bellarm. cap. 22.

The Protestants.
1. COncerning the inualiditie of vows to disanull marriage, we have declared
the truth before, Controu. 6. de Monachis. For marriage lawfully contracted and
consummate, is only made void in the case of adultery, as we have before
proved.

2. Neither does the infidelity of the one party make a nullitie of marriage:
for S. Paul says, that the woman in that case is not to forsake her husband,
1. Corinthians. 7.13. Of this matter see more, quaest. 2. part. 2. of this
controversy.

3. Neither is the fault committed before the marriage, sufficient to disable
the marriage once done: for the^ question might have been made of the strength
of David's marriage with Bathsheba. And Augustine doubts not thus to conclude,
De bono coniug. cap. 15.
Posse sane fieri nuptias ex male coniunctis, honesto postea placito
consequente: That marriage may very well stand between those, that once had
unlawful carnal copulation, but afterward an honest purpose of marriage
followed.

But there are certain cases, wherein matrimony unlawfully contracted, yea
consummate, may be dissolved: as first, if the consent of either party be
wanting, as when by tyrannical coaction and compulsion they come together, and
the consent is still withholden. Secondly, if the consent of both be wanting,
as in the marriage of children, that are not able to give consent. Thirdly, if
there be an error of the person, as if one be thrust upon a man in stead of
another, as Lea was upon Jacob: or an error in the condition of the party, as
if he or she be an Hermaphrodite, an Eunuch, or such like. Fourthly, if they
marry within the degrees forbidden by Moses law. In all these cases,
Matrimony thus unlawfully begun and ratified, may be dissolved. But lawful
matrimony cannot be abrogate but either by natural death, or lawful divorce
for fornication. In the case of desertion also and long absence of either
party, after the expecting of his return some term of years, with probable
intelligence of the parties death, or if he be wilfully absent, of his lewd and
dishonest life, the innocent party, by the wise and deliberate sentence of the
Magistrate, may be pronounced free.

THE FIFTH QVESTION, OF THE COMPARISON between Virginity and Marriage.
The Papists.
Rhemist.

Argum. 1. Corinthians. 7.32. The unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how
she may please God: Ergo, virginity is a fitter state of life to serve and
please God in, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
FIrst we grant, according to the Apostles saying in this place, that
virginity is also a fitter state of life for the service of God, yet not
simply, but for those only that have the gift of continency: for they which
cannot abstain, may and do serve God with a more quiet mind being married,
then many popish virgins which burn in the lust of concupiscence. Secondly,
yet it follows not, that virginity is a more holy and clean thing in it
self, and more meritorious before God, then marriage is: for this were to make
marriage unholy and unclean: whereas it is not the act of marriage, but the
abusing thereof, that brings uncleanness with it: before God in themselves,
neither is more holy then other.

Argum. It is faith which makes us accepted of God, not the merit of any
work: and therefore of all faithful believers it is said, Apocal. 14.4. These
are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. And he
understands all that are redeemed by Christ, from amongst men, and are the
first fruits of the Lamb, verse. 4. And not only those, which properly in
common use of speech we call virgins. True godliness therefore and a sincere
faith, whereby we are divorced from the world, and joined to God, is the true
virginity.

Augustine, Sicut non est impar meritum patientiae in Petro, qui passus est, De
bono coniugal. cap. 21.
and in Iohanne, qui passus non est: sic non est impar meritum co^tinentiae in
Iohanne, qui nullas est expertus nuptias, and in Abraham, qui filios generauit:
As there was no greater merit of patience in Peter that suffered, then in John,
who suffered not: so there was no greater merit of continency in John that was
never married, then in Abraham that begat children. See then, by his judgment,
there is the same merit of married and unmarried persons.

THE SIXTH QVESTION, OF THE TIMES OF marriage prohibited.
The Papists.
THere are certain seasons in the year, wherein for the holiness of the
festival times, they hold it unlawful to have marriage solemnized: as from
the Aduent Ex Tilem. Heshus. loc. 20. err. 14.
Ruard Tapper. artic. 20. page 526. But the Council of Trent has somewhat
moderated this time, and cut it shorter, thinking it unreasonable that marriage
should be prohibited the third part of the year (for so much the time
interdicted arises to, if account be taken of the weeks.) The time of
Pentecost therefore they have dispensed with: and the time prohibited at Easter
they would have begun not from Septuagesima, but from Ashwednesday, Sess. 24.
cap. 10. Upon these times they hold it unlawful publicly to have marriage
solemnized, both for the holiness of so great feasts, and because of receiving
the Sacraments, Bellarm. de matrim. cap. 31.

Argum. God commanded the people to abstain from their wives, when he was to
appear unto them in Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.15. And Sam. 21.4. Before the high
priest would deliver the shewbread to David and his company, he asked if the
young men had kept themselves from women: Ergo, marriage is not lawful at all
times, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. First, these places alleged do rather prove, that men in those
interdicted times ought not at all to come at their wives, the^ that the
solemnization of marriage should be restrained: but I think they would be
ashamed to forbid men their wives company so long together, as five or six
weeks at the Nativity, and eight or nine weeks at Easter: why then should
not the one be as lawful as the other? Secondly, the abstinence from their
wives was commanded then, as a legal and ceremonial kind of sanctification, as
was also the washing of their clothes, Exodus 19.10. And the company of women
was at some times counted as a legal pollution, not as a sinful or unclean
act of it self: as the women after childbirth were commanded to purify
themselves, Leuit. 12. from a legal pollution only, not from any sinful or
unclean act: for then it had been a manifest injury to that holy birth, that
Mary purified her self according to the law, Luke 2.22. Wherefore seeing it
was a legal kind of sanctification, it is not to be intruded and imposed upon
Christians now. Thirdly, neither can they prove that this kind of abstinence is
necessary always before the receiving of the Sacrament, though sometimes we
deny not but it is convenient: for it was not always required, no not of the
priests in the law, when they were to offer incense or sacrifice. For whereas
the high priest, which was always but one, was bound morning and evening to
offer incense unto the Lord, Exodus 30.8. He could not observe this rule,
unless he had been enjoined perpetual abstinence, which we see by the law was
not imposed upon the^. This doubt somewhat troubled Augustine: Quaest. sup.
Leuitic. 15.
for first he says, That it must needs follow, seeing the high priest was
married, and did sometime go in unto his wife, that the offering of incense
should some days be intermitted: but in his retractations he misliketh his
former solution, and thus determines, That the high priest first offered the
morning incense, and afterward went in to his wife, and so was unclean,
Retract. lib. 2. cap. 85.
vsque ad vesperam, but until the evening, not after the euentide, and then he
offered the evening incense. To take this answer for this time, though it be
insufficient: for the Hebrew word, which is translated the even, or euentide
(...), signifies the twilight, when the Sun is set, when light and darkness
are mixed together: but the incense was renewed before the Sun set: yet I
say, admitting Augustines solution, the high priest did not abstain one whole
day before he offered: much less many days, much less many weeks, much
less some months: as the popish Church prescribes by interdicting so many
days.

The Protestants.
THat not only the public solemnity of marriage at some times may have
intermission, but all matrimonial acts ought to cease, as when men either
privately do give themselves to fasting and prayer, 1. Corin. 7.5. or when
public or general fastes are by the spiritual governors thought meet, and
by the Christian Magistrate proclaimed: we do not deny, but in our judgment
allow it, and by our practice approve it: but that matrimony at such set times
as an unholy and unclean thing is to be forbidden and restrained, we take it
to be popish superstition, and an Antichristian yoke.

Argum. 1. It disgraceth the holy institution of marriage, which the Apostle
calls honorable, Heb. 13.4. and S. Paul counts the fruits of marriage,
which are the children of the faithful, holy, 1. Corin. 7.14. How is it then,
that there can be any time so holy, the which holy matrimony is not beseeming?
Again, in thus doing they make difference of days, esteeming some in
themselves more holy then others, contrary to the Apostles rule, Galath. 4.10.
Colossians 2.16.

Argu. 2. The Tridentine Chapter makes but two holy times in the year, the
Nativity and Ester: during which times, they would not have matrimony
solemnized: and I pray you, why is Pentecost left out, is it not as festiual a
time as the other?

Could there be a more holy place, then Paradise? or a more holy time, then
while man was in his innocence? yet even then and there Matrimony was
instituted.

Lastly, Is not the Sabbath or Lords day an holy festival time? and as holy as
any is? what if I said more holy, for this only immediately was instituted of
God: but marriage may notwithstanding be fitly solemnized upon that day, the
abuses and disorders, which commonly fall out in such assemblies, being cut
off: for Augustine is of opinion, that the marriage in Cana of Galile, was die
Dominico, upon the Lords day: Sermon. de temp. 159.
And it is most fit that matrimony should be solemnized in the face of the
congregation, which is usually assembled upon that day: Ergo, it may as fitly
and conveniently at any time be kept and solemnized, excepting the respects
aforesaid.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION, OF THE ceremonies and rites of Matrimony.
The Papists.
THe Jesuit reckons up seven. First, they which are to be joined in
matrimony, sacrifice of the Mass. Thirdly, they are covered with a veil.
Fourthly, they are coupled together vitta purpurea and ca^dida, with a scarf
or riband, partly white, partly purple. Fifthly, the bride gives to the
bridegroom a ring, first hallowed and blessed of the Priest. Sixthly, he
commends them to God in his prayers. Seventhly, he exhorts and admonishes
them of their mutual duty, Bellarm. cap. 33. de Matrimon.

The Protestants.
SOme of those rites we altogether allow and use them our selves, as the 6. and
7. for both prayers are made unto God for them, and they are by the Minister
put in mind of their duty: and all is done with us in the vulgar tongue,
much more to the edifying of the people, and comfort of the parties themselves:
whereas their idolatrous Priest chattereth all in an unknown tongue: A goodly
exhortation sure, when the parties exhorted understand not one word thereof.

Some other of these rites we utterly reject, as the 2.3.4. for oblation or
sacrifice, in their meaning, we acknowledge none: for the married parties to
receive the Communion, if there be a sufficient number, we neither hold it
necessary as being of the essence of marriage, nor yet think it unmeet.

But as for that colored and painted attire of blew and white, we take it
fitter for a May Game, then to be showed in a solemn assembly of Christians.

The rest we in part allow, as the ring, so it be used only as a civil
ornament, and token of mutual love: but that popish blessing either of the
ring, or of the married couple with the fingers acrosse, and muttering of some
few enchanting words, as though by the very act of popish blessing there were
a secret virtue and quality of holiness infused into the things so blessed or
enchanted; we condemn it as a superstitious toy. So we conclude, all such
rites in matrimony, as have a comely and profitable use, tending to edifying,
we refuse not: the rest we reject, and send them back to Rome, from whence
they came.

THE SIXTEENTH CONTROVERSY, OF CONFIRMATION, ORDERS, EXTREME UNCTION.
THE FIRST QVESTION, OF Confirmation.
THe parts of this question are these. First, whether it be a Sacrament.
Secondly, of the parts thereof. Thirdly, of the effect of this ceremony.
Fourthly, of the rites, and whole order thereof.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER it be a Sacrament.
The Papists.
THat Confirmation is properly and truly a Sacrament, it was decreed in the
Tridentine Council, sess. 7. can. 1. and it is their general opinion.

Argum. Act. 8.17. They did lay their hands upon them, and they received the
holy Ghost: This imposition of hands, together with the prayers here specified,
was no doubt, the Sacrament of confirmation: for here is an outward sign, and
a spiritual grace: Ergo, a Sacrament, Rhemist. ibid. Bellarm. de Confirmat.
lib. 2. cap. 2.

Ans. 1. These were miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, as the gifts of
tongues, of prophesying, healing, which were bestowed upon the Disciples,
whereof the imposition of hands was a sign at that time: but it is impossible
to ground an ordinary and perpetual sacrament, upon an extraordinary example:
and that they were such visible graces of the spirit, it appears, because
Simon Magu^ saw that the holy Ghost was given them by laying on of hands.
Secondly, the holy Ghost was obtained by their prayers, ver. 15. and not by the
very laying on of hands. Thirdly, to make a Sacrament, it is not enough to have
a visible sign, and to show some spiritual grace therewith to be bestowed:
for then the spittle and clay that Christ used, the napkins also and partlets,
which were carried to the sick from the Apostles, and they were healed
presently: all these should be sacraments; for here are outward signs, and
some effect followed: yet because there was no institution of a sacrament by
Christ, nor any commandment to use them, neither these, nor the imposition of
hands can be a Sacrament.

The Protestants.
WE grant a ceremony of imposition of hands used in the Apostles time, and
after, so long as the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost continued in the
Church: there is also another kind of imposition of hands, such as the Apostle
speaks of, Heb. 6.2. which may have perpetual use in the Church, which is
nothing else but a kind of prayer to be strengthened by the holy Ghost, and
for the increase of grace. But neither this nor the other do we hold to be a
sacrament.

Argum. 1. Every sacrament must have his appointment from Christ, consisting
both of an outward element, and the word of institution: but the popish
sacrament of confirmation has none of these: the element they use, is oil,
the word of consecration, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and
anoint thee with the Chrisme of health, in the name of the Father, the Son,
and holy Ghost: but none of these have their institution by Christ or his
Apostles any where in the new testament: Ergo, it is no sacrament.

De Baptis. lib. 3.16.
Augustine says, Manus impositio, quid aliud est, quam oration super hominem?
The imposition of the hands, what else is it but prayer over a man? He says not
it is a Sacrament.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE MATter and form of Confirmation.
The Papists.
THe matter of this popish Sacrament, they say, is oil mixed and tempered
Rhemist. Act. 8. sect. 6. First, hallowed and consecrated by the Minister
thereof, and striked in manner of a cross upon the forehead of him that is to
be confirmed, Bellarm. cap. 8.

Argum. 2. Corinthians. 1.21. It is God which establishes us, or confirms us
with you in Christ, and has anointed us. Here the Apostle speaks of
confirmation, and of the material part thereof, which is holy unction, or
anointing, Bellarm. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst the Apostle says not, Which has confirmed, but, Which does
confirm: which if it were meant of that external ceremony of confirmation, see
what injury you offer to the Apostle, that being a confirmer of others, he had
need now to be catechized and confirmed himself. Again, he speaks not of
confirmation wrought by the ministry of men: but God (says he) confirms
us, that is, establishes us by his spirit.

2. It is to too gross to understand by this anointing, your greazie
besmearing men's faces with your Chrisme, seeing the Apostle expounds himself
in the next verse, He has sealed us, and given the earnest of his spirit in
our hearts, ver. 22. Of this holy anointing of our hearts by the spirit, S. John
also makes mention, saying, This Anointing teaches you all things, 1. epist.
2.27. But does the anointing of the face I pray you, give men instruction?

Let us hear Augustines exposition, Christus sit in cord, vnctio ipsius sit
in cord: Tractat. in epist. Ioh. 4.
inspiratio eius docet, vnctio eius docet: Let Christ be in your hearts, let his
anointing be in your hearts: his inspiration is his anointing: you may be
ashamed therefore, so grossly to abuse Scripture.

3. As for your oil therefore mixed with balm: First, the true balm you know
is not to be had, and therefore you abuse the people. Secondly, make the best
of it you can, it is but a Jewish ceremony. Thirdly, your benediction of it,
is but a kind of magical enchantment, seeing you have no word of God to
consecrate creatures in that sort: for all things are sanctified by the word of
God and prayer: Ergo, without the warrant of God, there is no such sanctifying
of creatures.

The Papists.
2. THe form of Confirmation is in the words which are pronounced, I sign
thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee with the Chrisme of
Bellarm. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
1. THey must show the institution of Christ, out of the word, for the form of
every sacrament: which they can not do for this, unless they run to their
beggarly traditions, which they blasphemously call the word of God unwritten.

2. Where have they learned, that men are confirmed and established with the
external anointing of oil? so said some amongst the Colossians, Touch not,
taste not, handle not: to whom the Apostle answers, Which things perish with
the using, and are after the commandments of men, Coloss. 2.21.22. So is this
anointing with oil, a mere invention of men, and has no longer virtue or
force, then in the natural use thereof.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE Efficacy and virtue of confirmation.
The Papists.
THe holy Ghost is given in confirmation, for force, strength, and
corroboration, against all our spiritual enemies, and to stand constantly in
the confession Rhemist. Act. 8. sect. 7. And in this respect it gives more
abundant grace, in strengthening of us against the devil, then Baptism does,
Bellarm. cap. 11.

The Protestants.
FIrst, they do offer great injury to the spirit of God, tying him as it
were, to their beggarly elements, which have power, as they say, to confer
grace: The Scripture says, The spirit blows where it lists, Ioh. 3. The
spirit of God is free, and is given without Sacraments, as well as with them:
but this tradition of yours is no Sacrament: if it were, yet could it not
confer grace, as we have proved before.

Secondly, they do greatly deface the Sacrament of Baptism, making it
imperfect without confirmation, saying, that he which is baptized, shall never
be a perfect Christian, Tilem. Heshus. loc. 22 error. 22.
unless he be confirmed with Chrisme, Gerson. And that it is to be reverenced
with greater reverence then Baptism: See Fulk Act. 8. sect. 7. Yea they
deprive Baptism of the proper effect and use thereof, which is a sign unto us
of the assistance of Gods spirit, to fight manfully against the Devil: for by
baptism we are buried into the death of Christ, Romans 6.3. But Christ by his
death triumphed over the Devil, Coloss. 2.15. Ergo, Baptism is a sign of our
victory against the Devil: yet they rob Baptism of this honor, and give it to
Confirmation. And thus they prefer their own inventions before the ordinance
of God; no Sacrament before a Sacrament.

Augustine shows, what the Sacrament of Unction is, Vnctionis sacramentum est
virtus ipsa inuisibilis; Tract. in epist Johan. 4.
vnctio inuisibilis, spiritus sanctus: The sacrament of unction, is the
invisible virtue: the invisible anointing, the holy spirit: What is become now
of your sacrament of unction?

THE FOVRTH PART, OF THE RITES and ceremonies of Confirmation.
The Papists.
THe ceremonies which they commonly use in Confirmation, are these. First, Aue
sanctum Chrisma: Hail holy Chrisme. Thirdly, he gives a kiss. Fourthly, he
strikes him that is confirmed with his hand, to teach him patience. Fifthly,
his forehead is bound about, least the Chrisme should run down, which teaches
him not to lose the grace of God. Sixthly, seven days together he must neither
wash his head nor face. And these with such like ridiculous toys, are
practiced amongst them, Bellarm. cap. 13. lib. de confirmat.

The Protestants.
1. SOme of these ceremonies we condemn as ridiculous: as the breathing upon
the oil, the striking of the party confirmed, which light gestures become not
the gravity of the Ministers of the Gospel: all things should be done in the
Church in decent and comely order, 1. Cor. 14.40. Secondly, one of them is
merely Idolatrous, to salute the oil, as the Angel saluted Mary, to say Aue,
All hail unto it, making an Idol of it, being a thing without sense or life.
Thirdly, all of them are superstitious, having mystical and typical
significations and shadows, which agrees not with the nature of the Gospel:
for all shadows are now past, the body being come, Col. 2.17. Lastly, they are
superfluous, cumbersome, and burdenous, as Augustine says: Ipsam religionem,
quam Deus paucissimis sacramentis liberam esse voluit, onerib. premunt. They
oppress religion with the burden of ceremonies, which God has left free in
few sacraments. Again, who sees not how thus by their own traditions they do
euacuate the ordinance of God? for in stead of catechizing and instructing of
the youth in the principles and foundation of religion, as of repentance from
dead works, faith toward God, of the resurrection and eternal judgment,
Hebre. 6.2.3. they have brought in nothing else, but oyling, greazing,
anointing of them, breathing upon them, crossing, and such like: and whereas
S. Paul gives Parents a charge to bring up their Children in the instruction
of God, Ephesians. 6.4. They bid them bring their Children to be anointed, crossed
and chrismated, as they call it, and they have done enough.

THE SECOND QVESTION, of Orders.
THe several parts of this question, are these: First, whether it be a
Sacrament* Secondly, of the efficacy and virtue thereof. Thirdly, of the
ceremonies.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER THE receiving of orders be a Sacrament.
The Papists.
THat holy Orders are a sacrament rightly and properly so called, it was
decreed in the Tridentine Council sess. 23. canon. 3. And that not only the
Exorcistae, Acoluthi, Lectores, Ostiarij, do belong unto the same sacrament of
Orders, and are sacraments as well as the other, Bellarm. cap. 8. lib. de
sacram. ordinis.

Argum. 1. Timoth. 4.14. Despise not that gift which was given thee through
prophecy, with the laying on of hands. Holy orders give grace by an external
ceremony and work: Ergo, it is a Sacrament, Rhemist. in hunc locum.

Ans. 1. It cannot be proved out of this place, that imposition of hands gives
grace: for this was an extraordinary gift which S. Paul speaks of, and does
not always follow imposition of hands. Secondly, this gift was not given by
the very ceremony of imposition of hands, but through prophecy and revelation
of the holy Ghost: for it was revealed unto the Church by the spirit of
prophecy, that Timothy was a chosen vessel of God: therefore S. Paul says,
That worthy thing which is committed unto thee, keep through the holy Ghost,
2. Tim. 1.14. The holy ghost was both the conferrer of that grace, and the
preserver of it. Imposition the^ of hands was but an outward sign of the
presence of Gods spirit upon those that were lawfully ordained: for all upon
whom hands were laid, received not the holy ghost, but such only as were
appointed of God: And therefore the Apostle charge Timothy to lay hands
suddenly on no man, 1. Timoth. 5.22. which caveat was not needful, if upon
whomsoever he had laid his hands, they should immediately receive the holy
Ghost.

The Protestants.
YOur seven popish orders we do not at all receive into the church, much less
can we abide, that they should be sacraments: The lawful ordeining of Pastors,
teachers, and Deacons, we do acknowledge, but no sacrificing Priesthood, nor
no ministering Deaconship at the Altar: such orders as we have notwithstanding
we do not take to be Sacraments, much less yours, that are utterly to be
abolished.

Argum. 1. Sacraments must have their institution from Christ: so have not your
orders: for Christ instituted only Apostles and Disciples: Presbyters, and
Deacons were founded by the Apostles: who notwithstanding had no commission to
constitute new Sacraments. As for the other five orders, of Subdeacons,
Readers, Acoluthi, Exorcistes, door keepers, they are neither read in
Scripture, nor ordained of the Apostles, nor heard of for many years after.

Secondly, your Sacrament has neither outward element, nor word of
institution: if you say, laying on of hands is the external sign: we answer,
that the visible sign in a Sacrament must not only be an external action,
but a material element, as water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords
Supper. The form (you say) is in these words pronounced by the Bishop,
Accipite potestatem offerendi sacrificium, Receive ye power to offer sacrifice,
Bellarm. ca. 9. We answer again, that this sacrificing office, has no
foundation in Scripture: the Ministers of the Gospel are called dispensers of
Gods Mysteries: namely, of the word and Sacraments, 1. Corinthians. 4.1. Ministers
for Christ, not sacrificers of Christ: wherefore neither have ye any word of
institution; and consequently no Sacrament.

And I pray you tell me, if you will make every one of your orders a Sacrament;
then must you needs have as many Sacraments as there are orders: and so shall
you have six Sacraments more then you thought: for you do distinguish all the
orders in office and form of consecration one from another: and therefore,
they cannot all make one Sacrament.

Epist. 118. cap. 1.
Augustine says, Christus Sacramentis numer^ paucissimis societatem populi
colligauit: Christ has joined together his people with most few Sacraments:
and then he names Baptism and the Communion: Et si quid aliud in Scripturis
canonicis commendatur: and if any other be commended in Scripture: Ergo, there
is no Sacrament of orders, because it is not found in Scripture, as we have
said.

OF THE EFFICACY, WHICH THEY ascribe to this sacrament.
The Papists.
THis sacrament of Orders, as they call it* gives a double grace. First, it
gives Council. Trident. sess. 23. can. 1. By holy orders then the holy Ghost is
actually bestowed, when those words are pronounced, Accip^ spiritum sanctum,
receive ye the holy Ghost. Canon. 4.

The Protestants.
FIrst, the Gospel allows no external sacrificing priesthood, but a
spiritual only, whereby every Christian is made a king and priest to offer
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving unto God, Apocal. 1.6. And
the only essential part of the office of Ministers under the Gospel, is, to
be able dispensers of the mysteries of the word and sacraments, 1. Corint. 4.1.
2. Corinthians. 3.6.

So Augustine also says: In Apoc. hom. 2.
Quicunque aut Episcopus aut presbyter frequenter de Deo loquitur, and quomodo
ad vitam aeternam perueniatur annuntiat, merito Angelus Dei dicitur. Whosoever
Bishop or presbyter does speak freely of God, and preaches the way to
eternal life, is an Angel of God. This then is the only principal office of
true Pastors, to tea^h the way to the kingdom of God.

Secondly, it is also a great untruth, that the holy Ghost is straightway
given to all those, upon whomsoever hands are laid, and they admitted to
Orders: For what need then that trial and examination, which ought to be had
of those, which are to be ordained, whereof Saint Paul speaks, 1. Timoth.
5.22. if the only laying on of hands can make able Ministers?

Nostri sacerdotes, says one, Ex veter. testam. qu. 1^9. inter opera Aug.
super multos quotidie nomen Domini and verba benedictionis imponunt, sed in
paucis effectus est: Our priests do lay the word of blessing upon many,
calling upon the name of God, but in few follows any effect of that blessing:
And he gives the reason in another place, Dei est, effectum tribuere
benedictionis: It belongs unto God, to give effect to Priestly blessing.
Ergo, it is not by only act and using of the ceremony bestowed.

The Papists.
AN other effect of their sacrament of orders, they say, is to imprint a
certain Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 1. sect. 7. And therefore a priest once ordained
can never lose his orders, or become a lay man again, Council. Trident. sess.
24. can. 4. Bellarmin. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
FIrst, the practice of the popish Church is contrary to their own rules: for
I would have them tell me, whether they took not the priesthood and anointing
from John Husse, when with a pair of sheares they clipped off the skin of his
head most cruelly, as they were busy in disgrading of him, in the Council of
Constance: Fox. p. 623.
Or when they had grossly abused that reverend father, Bishop Cranmer, and
unmannerly behaved themselves in his degradation, and clapped him in a poor
beggarly, threadbare, Lay man's gown: did they not think, that they had
dispoyled him of his priesthood? What is now become, masters, of your indeleble
character? Or is it your meaning, that it may be clipped or scraped off only,
but not washed off, or lightly rubbed away? Your own cruel deeds do
overthrow your popish principles.

Augustine is against you: Constitutum est in ecclesia, ne quisquam post
criminis alicuius poenitentiam clericatum accipiat, ad clericatum redeat, aut
in clericatu maneat: It is a constitution of the Church, that no man after
public penance done for some notorious crime, should be either made a clerk,
or return to his clerkship or priesthood, or be suffered to continue therein.
If his priesthood were neither restored to him, nor he suffered to remain
therein, then surely he had lost his priesthood.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE ceremonies.
The Papists.
Tileman. Heshus. loc. 14. Err. 5. Bellarm. cap. 12.

The Protestants.
WE have the same opinion of these ceremonies, as we have of the popish orders
themselves, counting them worthy of no place in the Church of God. As for the
superstitious custom of anointing, it is a Jewish rite, better beseeming
Aarons order, then the Ministers of Jesus Christ: Look how he was anointed,
so are we: of him it is said, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me, Luke 4.18. So the inward working of the spirit is our
anointing, 1. John 2.27. Again, in diverse places of the scripture we read of
ordayning by imposition of hands, Act. 13.3. 1. Timoth. 4.14. and 5.22. 2.
Timoth. 1.6. But there is no mention at all made of anointing with oil.

And as for the shauing of the crown, it it is worse then a Jewish ceremony:
for it seems to have taken beginning from the heathen: and the Jews were
forbidden to cut or make balde their heads, Deuteronom. 14.1. Leuit. 19.28.
In so much, as it was a sign of more holiness amongst them not to suffer the
rasor to come upon their heads, as it is to be seen in the law of the
Nazarites, Numbers 6. The rest of the questions that concern the calling of
ministers, we have entreated of more at large, Controuers. 5. of
Ecclesiastical persons.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF EXTREME Unction. First, whether it be a sacrament.
Secondly, of the efficacy. Thirdly, of the ceremonies.
THE FIRST PART, WHETHER EXtreme Unction be a sacrament.
The Papists.
THat extreme Unction is rightly and properly a sacrament, which is Trent.
sess. 14. can. 1. and is generally maintained by the Church of Rome, Bellarmin.
cap. 2.

Argum. Iam. 5.14. The sacrament of extreme Unction in this place is plainly
promulgated by the Apostle, being instituted before by our Savior Christ, Mark
6.13. For here is remission of sins promised to the outward element, that is,
the anointing of the sick with oil: Ergo, a sacrament, Rhemist.

Ans. 1. This anointing of oil, was a sign only of the miraculous gift of
healing, that was then in the Church, and therefore was no longer to continue,
then the gift it self. But it is not like, will they say, that every one of the
Elders had this miraculous gift of healing. Answer: Though every particular
Elder perhaps had it not, yet the whole company of the Eldership might have it,
as Saint Paul speaks of the gift of prophecy given to the Eldership, 1.
Timoth. 4.14. And it is not like that the Apostle would have promised health by
calling for the Elders, if the gift had not been general in every
congregation.

Ans. 2. Neither is remission of sins annexed to the element, but to the
general doctrine of prayer made in faith. The prayer of faith, says the
Apostle, shall heal the sick.

The Protestants.
EXtreme Unction is no convenient ceremony at all to be used in the Church, as
tending to superstition, and breeding a vain confidence in terrene elements:
much less is it to be holden for a sacrament.

Argum. 1. It has no institution from Christ: For they themselves confess,
that Mark 6.13. there is but a preparatiue to the sacrament of extreme Unction,
Rhemist. the promulgation and publishing thereof is set forth by the Apostle,
Iam. 5. But this is not to be admitted, that Christ was a preparer of
sacraments only, and that they were perfited and finished by his Apostles:
Nay, they were not to add any thing to the institution of sacraments, but to
take them as Christ delivered them, 1. Cor. 11.23.

Again, the place in James makes nothing for their popish aneeling: for the
Apostle would have all the Elders called: but one priest is sufficient to bring
your ointment box. Secondly, if any man be sick, says Saint James, though it
be not deadly or mortal sickness, but whenever he is sick: But your Unction
is never ministered before the point of death. Thirdly, here health is
certainly promised: But not one amongst ten recouereth after your popish
aneeling.

Argum. 2. Christ used sometime clay, and spittle, sometime other elements in
healing the diseased, as the Apostles used oil: why, I pray you then, may not
they be sacraments as well as this? For they were signs of healing but for a
time: no more was the anointing with oil.

Augustine says, De latere Christi in cruce sacramenta ecclesiae profluxerunt:
The sacraments of the Church issued out of Christ's side upon the Cross: In
Psa. 40.
There gushed out* ^^is side, water and blood: but we read not that any oil
was shed from (...): therefore by Augustines argument, Unction is no
sacrament.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE effect and virtue of extreme Unction.
The Papists.
Per istam sanctam Vnctionem, and suam pijssimam misericordiam, indulgeat tibi
Deus quicquid deliquisti per visum, etc. By the virtue of this holy ointment,
and the most merciful favor of God, the Lord forgive thee, what thou have
offended by thy sight, hearing, etc. Bellarm. cap. 7.8.

The Protestants.
1 YOur popish aneeling is not able to heal the body, as we see by daily
experience: for more die then live after your anointing: And they that do
recover should do as well without your aneeling. Wherefore this anointing of
oil is not like to that used by the Apostles: for then health certainly
followed, Iam. 5.14.

2 It is also a great blasphemy, to ascribe remission of sins to a terrene
and beggarly element: The Apostle says not the oil, but the Prayer of faith
shall save the sick. The scripture also testifies, that the Just shall live
by faith, Romans 1.17. And we walk by faith, not by sight, 2. Corinthians. 5.7. But
he that ascribes remission of sins to oil or any other external element,
walks by sight, not by faith.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE MINISTER of extreme Unction, and the ceremonies.
The Papists.
FIrst, they give power only unto their anointed Mass priests, to aneele the
sick with oil. Lay men have no authority to do it, nor whosoever are
Council. Trident. sess. 14. can. 4. Secondly, for the rite and ceremony, the
Priest coming to the sick must anoint his five senses; his eyes, ears,
nostrels, mouth, and hands: also the reins, which is the seat of
concupiscence, and his feet, which are the instruments of execution,
Bellarmin. cap. 10.

The Protestants.
1 THis anointing which Saint James speaks of, was done by the whole company
of Elders in every congregation, which were not all the Pastors of the Church:
Yea, and it appears by their own Canons, Innocent. 1. Epist. 1. cap. 8. that
it was lawful for lay men and all Christians to use this anointing, see Fulk.
annot. Iam. 5. sect. 5.

2 What need the body be anointed in so many places? It is mere superstition:
of the like mind was Peter sometime, when he said to Christ, who would wash
his feet; Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head. To whom Christ
answered: He that is washed, need not save to wash his feet, but is clean
all, John. 13.9. Where, although the words of Christ have a spiritual meaning:
yet we see the evident and plain practice of them in Baptism: In the which
sacrament, we doubt not, but that infants are thorougly baptized though every
part be not touched with water. And even so, if your aneeling were a sacrament:
why might it not suffice, in some one part of the body to be anointed, and not
in so many? This we are sure of, that now you speak without book. For the
Apostle makes no mention, of anointing eyes, hands, or mouth, but only
generally of anointing the sick. And thus it appears that your extreme
Unction is no sacrament, nor any of the other four, which you have invented.

THE CONCLUSION OF THIS treatise concerning the sacrament.
THus, I trust, we have made it pliane by scripture, and evidence of argument,
that there are but two sacraments only, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord,
left and enjoined to the people of God by our Savior Christ: for four things
are required to make a sacrament: First, the authority of Christ in commanding
it. Secondly, the element or external sign, as the matter. Thirdly, the word
of institution, as the form. Fourthly, the end and use, to be a seal of our
faith for remission of sins.

1 Concerning the efficient cause, we find that two sacraments only in the
new testament, are commanded by Christ to be used for ever in the Church,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: which both by his own example and presence, as
also his precept and commandment were established.

2 There must be an outward visible elementall sign, as is water in Baptism,
bread and wine in the Lords Supper. But so is there not in the five popish
sacraments: For in some there is no sign at all, as in Matrimony, where they
are driven to say, that the parties that are married are the signs: In some
there is a sign, but not visible, as in absolution, the audible voice of the
priest ponouncing the words of absolution is, they say, the outward sign: But
in all the sacraments of Christ's institution, we find a visible sign. In some
there is an outward sign, but it is an action or gesture only, no material
element, which is not sufficient, so is the imposition of hands in giving of
Orders. In some there is a material sign, as Chrisme in Confirmation, oil in
extreme Unction, but they are not of Christ's institution.

3 They also want a word of institution: In Penance the priest says, I do
absolve thee, after particular confession made of his sins. In Confirmation
the words are, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee
with the Chrisme of salvation, in the name of the Father, Son, etc. In
Matrimony, I take thee to my wife. In giving of Orders, Receive thou power to
offer up the body of Christ. In extreme Unction, God by the virtue of this oil
forgive thee thy sin. These, they say, are the words of the institution: But
they can show no word of God for them: for it is not every word that
sanctifies, but only the word of God, 1. Tim. 4. Wherefore, seeing they have
no word of institution, they are no sacraments.

Lastly, they want the true use and end of a sacrament, which is, to strengthen
our faith for the remission of sins: for in some of these there is no
relation at all had to the forgiveness of sins: As Matrimony does but
perform, say they, the graces of marriage, as fidelity, mutual love, and such
like. Orders do confer the power of priesthood. Here is no sign or
assurance of the grace of justification. In the rest, remission of sins is
ascribed to other isntrumental means, then to faith only, as to
satisfactorie works in Absolution, to Chrisme in Confirmation, to oil in
extreme Unction. Wherefore we conclude, because they are no seals of the
righteousness of faith, as Saint Paul defines a sacrament, Romans 4.11. that they
are no sacraments of Christ's institution, but superstitious ceremonies devised
by men.

HERE ENSVE SVCH QVESTIONS AND CONTROVERSIES AS ARE MOVED CONCERNING THE
Benefits of our redemption, purchased unto us by the death of Christ.
THE SEVENTEENTH CONTROVERSY.
ALl the benefits of our redemption may be brought to these three heads. Our
predestination, vocation, and justification: as they are set down by the
Apostle, Romans 8.30. These three then are the parts of this Controversy.

THE FIRST PART, OF Predestination.
THe particular questions are these: First, whether predestination be of the
wicked to condemnation, as of the elect to salvation. Secondly, whether our
election be of mere grace. Thirdly, whether it be certain and unchangeable.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF Reprobation.
The Papists.
GOd, they say, is not the cause of any man's reprobation or damnation, Rhemist.
9.1. He intends no man's damnation directly or absolutely, but in respect of
their demerites, ibid. sect. 5.

Argum. 1. Timoth. 2.4. God would have all men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth: Ergo, the perishing or damnation of none must be
imputed to God, Rhemist.

The Protestants.
An. 1 NO man must impute his damnation to God, because the wicked are justly
punished for their sins, without any respect had unto the secret counsel of
God: yet it is certain, that God, to set forth his glory, as he has made some
the vessels of honor, so others are ordained to be vessels of wrath, without
any respect had to their works, either good or evil. And this notwithstanding
stands with the justice of God, to save some, and reject others: for he might
justly condemn all to eternal death: Now if notwithstanding he have mercy of
some, his justice in the condemnation of the rest is not to be complained of,
but his mercy to be extolled in saving of some.

God indeed would have all men to be saved, that is, says Augustine, Omnes
homines, Enchirid. cap. 1^3.
omne genus humanum intelligamus: by all men we must understand all sorts, or
all kinds of men, not every particular man. And this is agreeable to the
Apostles meaning, which before exhorted men to pray for kings and princes: and
then he gives this reason, because God would have all men to be saved, that
is, high, and low, kings and people, of all sorts. And this place also is to
be understood not of the secret, but of the revealed will of God, who offers
unto all the outward means of their salvation. Thus also Augustine expounds
these words, Remota hac discretione, quam diuina scientia intra secretum
iustitiae suae continet, syncerissime credendum est, etc. Setting apart the
consideration of the secret counsel and justice of God, it is sincerely to be
believed, that God would have all men to be saved, that is, offering unto all
the outward means of salvation, as his word and sacraments, Contr. articul.
falls. imposit. Art. 2.

Argum. Romans 9.22. The Apostle speaks plainly, that as God has prepared some
vessels unto glory, so also, some are ordained to wrath. And that the counsel
of God is most just herein: for as the Potter may dispose of the clay, as it
seems best to himself, to make of it a vessel of honor or of dishonor at
his pleasure: so the Lord has as great right to deal with his creature. And
seeing all things ought to be subdued to the glory of God, which is set forth
in the destruction of the rebellious, as in the election of the faithful: it
was necessary and requisite, that the Lord should get unto himself both ways
a glorious name: therefore he says, Romans 9.17. That God had set up Pharao, to
show his power in him.

Augustine says, Tenenda est inconcusse haec regula, impios in peccatis
antequam essent in mundo praescitos esse tantum, Hypognost. articul. 6.
non praedestinatos, poenam autem ijs praedestinatam. This rule we must
undoubtedly hold, that the wicked were only foreseen, or foreknowne of God in
their sins, not predestinate: but their punishment was predestinate. So then
God ordayneth not men to sin, but he ordayneth men to punishment, not having
relation to their sins* but in his own secret counsel. Yet are not the
wicked to complain, for they are justly forsaken because of their rebellion
and disobedience. Neither are the godly and faithful by this doctrine to be
discouraged: for as much as God has not denied them the grace of his spirit,
but has given them faith and repentance, and strength to walk before him in
his fear: all which are pledges unto them of their free election and salvation
in Christ.

THE SECOND QVESTION, WHETHER PREdestination proceed from the free will and
purpose of God, without relation to our works.
The Papists.
GOd does not hate or reprobate any man but for sin, or the foresight
thereof, Rhemist. Romans 9. sect. 2. Neither does Christ appoint any by his
absolute and eternal election, to be partakers of the fruit of his redemption,
without any condition or respect of their own works, obedience or free will.
Rhem. Heb. 5.9.

Argum. Heb. 5.9. He is made the author of eternal salvation to all that obey
him: they are not (we see) elected without condition of obedience, Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. GOd indeed electeth all that shall be saved, not with any condition
on their behalf, but on his own behalf: for unto them, whom he chooses,
he will give grace to obey, will to believe in him, and to do that he
appoints. Secondly, this place is expounded by that other of Saint Paul,
Ephesians. 1.4. God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy: upon the which words Augustine writes thus: Elegit
nos, vt essemus sancti, non quia futuri eramus, sed vt essemus, and secundum
bonam voluntatem suam, non nostram, quae bona esse non posset, nisi ipse
secundum bonam voluntatem suam, vt bona fieret, subueniret: He has chosen us,
that we should be holy, not because he saw we should be holy, but to the end we
might be holy: and according to his good pleasure, not after our own will,
which could not be good, unless he according to his good will should assist
us to make it good. See then, our holiness and obedience is a fruit and effect
of our election, no cause thereof: neither is there any free will or good
disposition in man, till God make it free and good.

Argum. Romans 9.16. Our election is not of the willer, nor of the runner, but of
God, that shows mercy. Ergo, the mercy of God is the only ground of our
election: for if our faith or works should be foreseen, then it were of the
willer and of the runner, which the Apostle here denies. And to this purpose
the Apostle brings in the example of Jacob and Esau, over whom the Lord had
cast his lots: Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, before they were yet
borne, or had done either good or evil: as Augustine says, In epistol. ad
Romans 9.
Vt totum, quicquid essent, secundum misericordiam se esse cognoscerent. And
all to this end, that they should ascribe all, whatsoever was in them, to the
mercy of God. Yea the Rhemists confess against themselves, that Gods mere
mercy is seen in the elect, Romans 9. sect. 2. Ergo, our election is a work of
Gods mere mercy: there is then no respect at all to be had to our works, for
then were it not of Gods mere and sole mercy.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF THE certainty of Predestination.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Act. 27. sec. 3. (Men cannot be saved, though they be predestinate,
unless they keep Gods commandments.) As though it were possible for men
predestinate, not to keep the commandments of God, or in the end not to be
saved. Likewise it was concluded in the Council of Trent, sess. 6. can. 23.
that the grace of justification may be lost: which is as much to say, that a
man may lose his predestination: for none are justified, but whom God before
has predestinate, Romans 8.30. They cannot therefore fall away from the grace of
justification, unless they fall away from predestination.

The Protestants.
THat the decree of God, concerning such as shall be saved, remains sure and
certain, and that it is impossible for any of the Elect to fall away, the
Scripture every where proves.

Argum. Whom God loves, he loves to the end, John. 13.1. The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29. My father is greater then
all, and no man is able to take them out of his hand, John. 10.29. Ergo, our
election is certain, for With God there is not so much as any shadow of
change, Iam. 1.17.

Augustine says, Horum, qui electi sunt, si quispiam perit, fallitur Deus, sed
^emo eorum perit, quia non fallitur Deus: Of the Elect, if any perish, God is
deceived: but none of them can perish, because God cannot be deceived, De
corrept. and great. cap. 7.

The Papists.
Romans 8. sect. 9. They call it a faithless persuasion of salvation, to be
confident of Gods grace and salvation, and fides daemoniorum, not Apostolorum,
the faith of devils, not of Apostles: Rhemist. 1. Corint. 9. sect. 9. So the
Tridentine Council call certitudinem remissionis peccatorum, vanam, and ab omni
pietate remotam fi^uciam, the certainty of remission of sins, a vain and
faithless persuasion. And therefore every man, De gratia formidare, and timere
potest, may stand in doubt, and be afraid, whether he be in the state of
grace, sess. 6. cap. 9.

Argum. 1. Saint Paul says: I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified: Paul durst not assure himself, whether he were justified, Rhemist.

Ans. Paul was most sure of Gods grace, and his justification through faith,
Romans 8.30. But he does acknowledge, that he is not justified by his faithful
labors in the Gospel, or any other works of his own, although he were
clear in conscience.

Argum. 2. Philip. 2.12. Work your salvation with fear and trembling: Ergo,
men must not be secure of their salvation.

Ans. We do not teach men to walk securely, or presume of their election. But
we protest unto them, that seeing men are predestinate unto good works, that
unless they be careful to lead an holy life, they have no part in
predestination: yet we teach men notwithstanding, assuredly to believe the
promises of God made to all those that believe, to be saved. And this
confidence does very well agree with the fear of God.

The Protestants.
Our security of salvation is no vain presumption, but an assurance upon the
word of God, that through faith in God, and walking in that way which God has
appointed us, we shall undoubtedly come in the end to eternal life.

Argum. 1. As our election is certain, sure, and undoubted before God: so it
is the Lords pleasure, that every Christian while he lives, may and ought in
himself to be assured thereof by a lively faith: as Saint Peter teaches us to
labor and give our diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2. Pet.
1.10.

Argum. 2. Romans 8.38. S. Paul says, I am sure, that neither death nor life,
etc. shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus: Ergo, the Apostle
was certain of his salvation.

Rhemist. First, the Apostle speaks only in general: as if he should have
said, So many as are elected, cannot certainly perish.

Ans. It is false, for the Apostle pronounces particularly of himself: As
more plainly, 2. Timoth. 4 8. From henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness.

Rhemist. Secondly, Saint Paul might have this persuasion by some especial
revelation.

Ans. The ground of the Apostles persuasion is none other, but that which is
common to all the faithful, the love of God in Christ. And so Augustine
interprets this place, writing thus: Isti, significati sunt ad Timotheum,
etc. These, of whom the Apostle speaks, are signified in another place to
Timoth. 2.2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, the Lord knows who are
his: De corrept and gra^. 7.
Ergo, this assurance and confidence is common, though not in the like measure
to all faithful Christians.

Augustine also says: Quia non secundum merita nostra sed illius misericordiam
firma est promissio, nemo debet cum trepidatione praedicare, vnde non potest
dubitare. Because the promise remains steadfast, not by our works, but his
mercy: we must not with trembling and fearefulnes pronounce that, whereof we
cannot doubt. No marvel then if Papists doubt of their salvation, because
their confidence is built upon their works: but if they would with the
faithful of God, renounce their own works, and be content to submit
themselves to the faith of Christ, they would not think it so strange a thing,
for Christians to have a full and steadfast persuasion of their salvation.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE BENEFIT of our vocation, to the which belongs the
knowledge of sin and the law.
THE FIRST QVESTION, of sin.
THe parts of this question are these: first, of original sin: secondly, of
the difference of sins: thirdly, of venial sins: fourthly, whether all
sins be remissible: fifthly, whether God be the author of sin: sixthly,
whether the works of the not regenerate are sin.

THE FIRST PART, OF original sin.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Romans 6. sect. 6. Council. Trident. sess. 5.

Argum. Iam. 1.15. Concupiscence, when it has conceived, brings forth sin:
Ergo, it is not sin of it self: but when the consent of will comes, sin
is engendered, Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe argument follows not, concupiscence brings forth sin, Ergo, it
is no sin: nay it shall the rather be sin: as one serpent brings forth
another, so both the mother and daughter are sin: for evil fruits do show
an evil tree.

Argum. Saint Paul says, that concupiscence is flatly forbidden by the law,
which says, Thou shall not lust, Romans 7.7. And verse. 17. He calls it sin
dwelling in us, though it do not reign in us: Ergo, it is properly sin.

Augustine says, Omnium malorum reatu caret, qui baptizatur, non omnibus
malis: He that is baptized is cleared from the guilt of all evils or sins,
but not from the evils themselves. Dimittuntur in Baptismo omnia peccata, and
originaliter tracta, and ignoranter, vel scienter adiecta: All sins are
forgiven in Baptism, both original, and committed ignorantly or wittingly.
Therefore original sin is no otherways taken away in Baptism, then other
sins are: but the guilt only of other sins is remitted in Baptism, the
blot or stain remains still: Ergo, original sin cease in respect of the
guilt: for neither it, nor any other sins shall be imputed unto those, which
are justified in Christ: But it is a sin still, as the rest are. Augustine
also dare call it a sin: Concupiscentia peior est ignorantia. Concupiscence
is worse then ignorance. Cont. Julian. lib. 6. cap. 5. Epistol. 105
And in another place: Ignorantia in ijs, qui intelligere noluerunt, peccatum
est: in ijs qui non potuerunt, poena peccati: But ignorance is in them which
are able to learn, sin: in those that cannot; a punishment of sin. If
ignorance be sin, concupiscence worse then ignorance, is much more.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE difference of sins.
The Papists.
SOme sins are deadly or mortal, because all that do them are worthy of
Rhemist. Romans 1.11.

Argum. Sin when it is finished, brings forth death, Iam. 1.15. Ergo, not
all sin, but that which is consummate and perfited is mortal, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. OVt of this place it is gathered, that there are degrees of sin, and
that the more heinous sin is worthy of more grievous death and condemnation:
but that concupiscence, or other less sins deserve not death, it is not
hence proved: seeing the Scripture says, That the wages of all sin is death,
Romans 6.23.

Argum. That no sin is venial or pardonable of it own nature, but that the
least deserves death, if God should deal with us, according to the exact rule
of his justice, it thus appears. First, if all sins are not mortal, Christ
died not for all sins: for he by his death did satisfy only for sins,
that deserved death: but Christ died for all sins, John. 1.19. Secondly, all
transgression of Gods law is sin, and deserves the curse of God, Galath.
3.10. But all sin is the transgression of the law, 1. John 3.4.

Augustine and other of the fathers do use this term of venial sins, but
not in their sense, as though any sin in it own nature deserved pardon: but
by venial sins, they understand the lesser and smaller faults, which are
more easily forgiven at Gods hand, then the greater. Sunt venialiae peccata,
there are certain venial sins, without the which a man cannot live, says
Augustine: Propter omnia peccata baptismus inuentus est, propter leuia oration
dominica: For all sins Baptism is a remedy, and the Lords prayer for the
less: De symbolo lib. 1.6. By venial sins he understands the smaller
sins, which are not pardonable in their own nature, for then it were not
necessary to ask forgiveness for them in the Lords prayer: they would vanish
away of themselves. Wherefore we cannot receive this popish distinction of
venial and mortal sins, as they understand it: as the Scripture uses to
speak, we do not greatly mislike them; that is, by grace and mercy in
Christ, all sins even the greatest, are not only pardonable, but pardoned
unto us, Isay 1.18. But unto the wicked and impenitent every sin is mortal;
they shall even by their idle words be condemned, Matthew. 12.36.37.

THE THIRD PART, OF THOSE, which they call venial sins.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Romans 7. sec. 8.9.

The Protestants.
Sins done without consent of the inward man, are never imputed: but this
must be understood only of the regenerate: in whom there is a new man, borne
of the spirit.

Argum. That inuoluntarie lusts which arise in the heart, not having the
consent of will, are in their nature sin, it is evident by Saint Paul's words,
Romans 7.20. If I do that I would not, then is it not I any longer, that do it,
but sin that dwells in me: he calls it sin, though he consent not unto
it.

In Psalm. 105
Augustine says, Peccata negligentiae vel ignorantiae melius accusantur, vt
pereant, quam excusantur, vt maneant, meliusque purgantur inuocato Deo, quam
firmantur irritato Deo: The sins of negligence and ignorance are better
accused and confessed, then excused, better by praying to God to purge them,
then by provoking God to confirm them. Ergo, forgiveness must be asked at Gods
hand for inuoluntarie sins, sins of ignorance.

The Papists.
2. THe motions of the flesh in a just man, whereunto the mind of man
consents not, cannot any whit defile the operations of the spirit, but
Rhemist. Romans 7. sect. 10.

The Protestants.
Ans. THough the operations of the flesh concur not with the spirit in any
one act: yet do they hinder the works of the spirit from perfection, and
therefore defile them.

Argum. Romans 7.19. Saint Paul says, The good that I would, do I not. Did not
concupiscence even in this blessed Apostle hinder the proceedings of the
spirit, when it kept him from doing that good, which he desired? and whereas he
cries out, and desires to be delivered from that law of his members, verse.
24. it is not like that any merit, or good thing can be obtained by it: for
then he should rather have been desirous to have given it entertainment
still.

Augustine thus writes of these smaller and less sins: Quibus peccatis
licet occidi animam non credamus, De sanct. sermon. 41.
ita tamen eam veluti quibusdam pustulis deformem faciunt, vt eam ad amplexum
sponsi, sine grandi confusione venire non permittant. By the which sins,
though the soul be not slain; yet the face is deformed as with pimples, that
she dare not without great blushing draw near unto her spouse. Let them tell
me now, what great glory is obtained, by this corruption in our members.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER all sins be remissible.
The Papists.
ALL sins are pardonable, so long as the committers of them be in case
Caluinists utter, that Apostasy and certain other sins of the reprobate,
cannot be forgiven at all in this life, Rhemist. 1. John. 1.5. sec. 4. And
therefore they say, that blasphemy against the spirit is said to be
irremissible, because it is hardly forgiven: And they define sin against the
holy Ghost, to be nothing else, but final impenitencie, Rhemist. Matthew. 12.4.

The Protestants.
FIrst, sin against the holy Ghost, is not final impenitencie: every one
indeed that so sins, is finally impenitent, because he shall never have
the grace to repent: But our Savior Christ means some special sin, in
calling it blasphemy against the holy Ghost: for many a wicked man may die
impenitently, and yet not blaspheme. Augustine better defines this sin: Cum
quis aduersus gratiam ipsam, qua reconciliatus est Deo, inuidentiae facibus
agitatur: When a man maliciously does oppugn that grace, whereby he was
reconciled to God: lib. 1. de sermon. in mont. 41. But most perfitly is this
sin described, Heb. 10.29. where there are set down three circumstances that
make this sin: first, the person; he must be such an one as has been lightened
with grace, and been in outward appearance sanctified: therefore Jews, Turks,
or Infidels, cannot commit this sin; because their minds were never
illuminate by the truth. Secondly, his affection must be considered, which is
most deadly and hateful in the highest degree: blaspheming the spirit, and
despiting the same, crucifying and persecuting Christ again as it were, Heb.
6.6. Wherefore they which offend of ignorance, or infirmity and weakness, or
which fall not into horrible blasphemies, are not guilty of this sin.
Thirdly, it is the truth which they hate and detest, which sometime they
loved, and were thereby sanctified: They count the blood of the testament as an
unholy thing. Blasphemy then against the holy Ghost, is an horrible hatred and
detestation of the truth, and grace of Gods spirit, whereby he that now
blasphemeth, was before illuminate.

Secondly, this sin not only easily shall not be forgiven, but not at all,
as our Savior says, Neither in this world, nor the world to come, Math.
12.32. And it is impossible for them to be renewed by repentance, Heb. 6.6.
Wherefore it is a great blasphemy in the Papists, so contrary to the
Scripture to affirm, that blasphemy against the spirit may be forgiven.

THE FIFTH PART, WHETHER God be the author of sin.
The Papists.
Romans 3. sect. 4. And therefore Christ's death was Gods act no otherwise, then
by permission, Act. 3. sect. 2. Neither is God the author of sin, otherwise
then by permission, and withholding of his grace, Iam. 1.13. Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. ALL sin is against the will of God revealed in his word, although
nothing can come to pass, contrary to the determinate and secret will of God.
Secondly, God did not only permit the Jews to work their malice upon Christ,
but most holily and most justly he used their malice, to bring his purpose to
pass: for the text is, That Christ was delivered up according to the
determinate counsel of God, Act. 2.23. which must needs be more then a bare
permission. Thirdly, although God be not any moouer unto sin, yet as a just
judge he not only permits, but leads into temptation those whom in
justice he delivers up to Satan.

Argum. It is a petition which we daily rehearse in the Lords prayer, Lead us
not into temptation: Likewise, Romans 11.8. God gave them the spirit of
compunction. These speeches of leading and giving, implie an active power in
God, not a passive and permissiue only: for how is it possible, that God being
omnipotent, should permit or suffer any thing to be done in the world, con^^^ry
to his will?

Augustine upon those words of David, concerning Shemei, Let him alone, what
know I, if God have sent him to curse? Not, says he, De libero arbitrio. cap.
20.
that God bad him curse, for then his obedience should be commended: Sed quod
eius voluntatem proprio suo vitiomalam, in hoc peccatum iudicio suo iusto and
occul^o inclinauit: But because, God by his just and secret judgment did
incline his will being corrupt of it self, unto this mischief. Lo he says,
inclinauit, he did incline his will, which is more then permisit, he did suffer
him.

THE SIXTH PART, OF THE WORKS of those which are not regenerate.
The Papists.
THe works done before justification, although they do not proceed of faith,
are not properly to be called sins, neither do they deserve the wrath of
Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 7. Andrad. Tilem. loc. 4. er. 6.

The Protestants.
THe works which were done of the heathen without faith, and of carnal men
before they are called, how goodly soever they seem in the sight of men, are
nothing else but peccata speciosa, glorious and goodly sins.

Argum. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. And without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 6.6. Seeing then they could not please God with
their faithless works, they must needs be in danger of his wrath: Augustine
writes thus: Si ad consequendam beatam vitam, quam nobis fides, quae in
Christo est, promittit, nihil prosunt homini virtutes, nullo modo possunt verae
esse virtutes. If men's virtues help them not toward the attaining of eternal
life, Cont. Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3.
which is promised only by faith in Christ, they cannot be said truly to be
virtues: but such are the works of men before they have faith: Ergo, if they
be not virtuous actions, what are they else but vicious and sinful?

THE SECOND QVESTION, CONCERNING the law, with the several parts thereof.
THe parts of this question are these. First, whether it be possible in this
life to keep the law. Secondly, whether just men do sin. Thirdly, of the
works of supererogation. Fourthly, whether God be to be served for hope of
reward, or fear of punishment. Fifthly, of the use and office of the Law.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER IT BE possible in this life to keep the Law.
The Papists.
1. IF any man say, that the precepts and commandments of God unto a man
Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 18.

Argum. Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us:
Ergo, the law of God by the grace of Christ may be kept, and the keeping thereof
is our justice. S. John also says, The commandments of God are not heavy, 1.
Ioh. 5.3. And our Savior says, His yoke is sweet, and his burden light:
Ergo, the commandments of God are possible to be fulfilled in this life.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, the Apostle says not, that the law is fulfilled by us, but in us
by Christ, who is made our righteousness and sanctification by faith, 1. Cor.
1.30. The law remains still impossible to be kept by us through the weakness
of our flesh neither does God give us ability to keep it: but, Christ has
fulfilled it for us, we notwithstanding being bound to walk in obedience to
the commandments of God, which is far off from perfection, or keeping the
law as Gods justice requires.

2. To him that is borne of God, and his sins pardoned by the grace of
Christ, the commandments of God are not grievous, not because they can
perfitly be fulfilled, but because strength is given to keep them in part, and
the curse of the law is taken away, and our transgressions answered in Christ.

Argum. 1. If it were possible for any man to keep the law, it is possible in
this life to be without sin: But if any man say he has no sin, he is a
liar, 1. Ioh. 1.8.

Argum. 2. S. James says* 2.10. If a man should keep the whole law, and yet
fail in one point, is guilty of all. He then that will keep the law, must
keep it perfectly, and not fail in the least point: but so is no mortal man
able to do: wherefore it is an horrible blasphemy, to say, that it is
possible for any mortal man to keep the whole law.

Augustine thus expounds that place, Philip. 3.15. Let us, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: by the which place the Rhemists would prove a
perfection of justice in this life, Potest quis esse perfectus iustitiae
cognitor, licet non sit perfectus effector. A man may know the rule of justice
perfectly, though he be not a perfect doer: he understands a perfection of
knowledge, not a perfection of justice.

The Papists.
2. THey say, that those sins which they call venial, that is, the lesser
and smaller Rhemist. 1. John 1. sect. 5. Galath. 3. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
THat men are just before God, for all their daily transgressions of frailetie,
and manifold infirmities by the righteousness of Christ, made theirs by a
lively faith; we deny not: but that there is no perfect inherent justice in
themselves, neither that they can perfectly keep the law, because of those
sins, thus we prove it out of the word of God.

Argu. They which do but in the least point break the law, are subject to the
curse thereof: for it is written, Cursed is he that continues not in all
things written in the law to do them, Galath. 3.10. And what is to be
understood by all things our Savior declares, Math. 5. where he shows how
murder may be committed in the affection, and in the tongue, and adultery
likewise in the eye: Ergo, the smaller offenses are also transgressions of the
law: from the which seeing the most righteous men upon earth are not free, they
cannot perfectly keep the law, nor by their own justice escape the curse
thereof.

Augustine: Custodit vias Dei, qui non sic exorbitat, vt eas relinquat, De
perfect. iustit. cont. Celest.
sed in eis currendo proficit, et si aliqua^do vt infirmus titubat, proficit
tamen minue^do peccata. He is said to keep the ways of God, which does not
so turn aside out of them, that he altogether leave them: but does daily
profit and go forward in keeping of them: and although he sometime stumble,
yet he profits by diminishing of his sins. As he therefore that stumbleth,
and is turned sometime out of the way, does not perfectly keep the way: no
more does the righteous man perfectly keep the law of God, which he
transgresses by his daily sins. In isto ergo conflictu induimur ea iustitia,
qua ex fide viuitur: In this conflict therefore let us put on the righteousness
of faith: he gives counsel that men should leave their own righteousness, and
rather labor to live by faith, and be counted righteous in Christ.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER just men do sin.
The Papists.
Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 25. Whereupon it follows, that the good works
of righteous men are so perfect, that the least imperfection or blot cannot be
found in them.

The Protestants.
THe most righteous men upon earth have not only their infirmities, and are in
danger to sin daily: but even their best and most holy works are blemished
with some infirmity, and have a smacke of sin.

Argum. Job says, If I wash my self with snow water, and purge my self most
clean, yet mine own clothes shall make me filthy, Job 9.30. that is, though he
should allege for himself, the best works that ever he did, yet even in
those the Lord could find out matter against him.

Yea, S. Paul says, That he knew nothing by himself, his own conscience did
not accuse him, yet was he not thereby justified, 1. Corinthians. 4.4. The reason
is given by S. John, that Although a man's heart condemn him not, yet God is
greater then our heart, 1.3.20. Wherefore there is no work of any man so
perfect, but before the Lord it may be found faulty: for All our righteousness
is as a stained clout.

Augustine upon those words of Job. 29.14. I put on justice as a robe: Vestis
ista belli magis solet esse, De perfect. iustit. cont. Celest.
qua^ pacis, vbi adhuc expugnatur concupiscentia, non vbi erit plena sine
aliquo prorsus host iustitiae. This garment, that is, a cloak or mantle, is
rather for war, then peace: for here we do daily fight against
concupiscence, and there is no perfect righteousness without some enemy. But if
so be any work of ours could be perfect without sin, righteousness sometimes
might be without an enemy, which Augustine denies.

The Papists.
2. Mortal sin, they say, cannot consist together with the grace of God, and
Rhemist. 1. John 3. sect. 5.

The Protestants.
FIrst, understanding mortal sin as they do, for every sin that deserves
death, as are adultery, theft, murder, their exposition is heretical: for
then David should not have been the Son of God, when he committed adultery,
and consequently should have been none of the predestinate: he that is once the
Son of God, is always even to the end: For whom God loves, he loves to the
end, John 13.1.

Secondly, the Apostles meaning, when he says, He that is borne of God,
sins not, is no other then that which S. Paul has, Romans 6.12. That sin
should not reign in our body, that is, the children of God, though they fall
into sin, continue not in it, nor delight therein, neither are wholly
overcome of it; for it is true of them, that it is not they that do it, but
sin that dwells in them, Romans 7.20.

Augustine, Quicunque in Dei prouidentiss. dispositione praedestinati sunt, De
corrept. and great. cap. 9.
non dico nondum renati, sed etiam nondum nati, filij Dei sunt, and perire non
possunt: Whosoever in the most wise counsel of God are predestinate to
salvation, not only before they are regenerate and borne again, but even
before they are borne at all, are the Children of God, and cannot perish. If
then the elect not yet called, or regenerate, are the Children of God, much
more are they that are called and regenerate, though after their calling they
do fall into some sin for the time.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE WORKS of Supererogation.
The Papists.
THey teach, that it is not only possible for men to keep the Law of God in
Rhemist. 1. Cor. 9. sect. 6. ex Tileman. loc. 3. er. 16.

Argu. 2. Cor. 8. sect. 3. As your abundance now supplyeth their want, their
abundance also may supply your want, that there may be equality. Saints or
other virtuous persons may in measure and proportion of other men's deseruings,
allot unto them as well the supererogation of their spiritual works as these,
that abound in worldly goods, may give alms of their superfluities, to them
which are in necessity, Rhemist. totid. verbi^.

Ans. 1. This place proves no communication of merits of one to another: but
that as every one abounds in the gifts and graces of God, so they ought to
communicate the use thereof one to another benefit: for no man meriteth
himself by any work of his: therefore he cannot communicate that to another,
which he has not himself. Here also mention is made of mutual communication,
for one to supply another want: but he that does supererogate to another of
the abundance of his good works, has no need to have his wants supplied by
another man's deseruings: therefore there is no mutual communicating between
them, which is the thing whereof the Apostle speaks in this place.

Argum. That no man is helped by another man's deseruings, but all that a man
can do, is little enough and not sufficient for him self; it is plain in the
Gospel: where our Savior says, That when we have done all that is commanded,
we are unprofitable servants, and did no more the^ was our duty, Luke 17.10.
Ergo, a man can not do more then his duty.

We may also remember the parable of the Virgins, Math. 25. where the five wise
refuse to give of their oil to the five foolish: least (say they) there will
not be enough for us and you. No man therefore has attained to such a
perfection of goodness, that he is able to spare ought for his brother, but shall
have need thereof himself.

Augustine writing upon this parable says, Vnusquisque pro se rationem reddet,
nec alieno testimonio quicquam adiuuatur apud Deum: In Math. sermon. 22.
et vix sibi quisque sufficit, vt sibi testimonium per hibeat conscientia sua.
Every man shall give account for himself, neither is a man relieved by
another testimony before God: the testimony of a man's conscience is hardly
sufficient for himself. See more of this matter: Controu. 14. quest. 7. part.
4. and quest. 8. part. 3. articul. 2.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER GOD be to be served for hope of reward, or fear of
punishment.
The Papists.
Moses, Heb. 11. He had respect to the recompense of reward, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, we deny, that we ought to make account of heaven to be given as a
just recompense deserved by our works: for Life eternal, as the Apostle
says, is the free gift of God, Romans 6.23. 2. We grant that men in their well
doing ought to have respect to the reward, but not chiefly or principally: but
the respect of Gods glory and their own duty ought to move them more.

Argum. Psalm. 34.8. Taste and see, how gracious the Lord is! We ought as
dutiful children to yield obedience to the Lord, and delight in him, even
because of that pleasant taste, comfort and joy, which we feel in his goodness
toward us. Augustine says well, Deus non propterea se amari vult, In Psalm. 52.
quia dat aliquid praeter se, sed quia dat se: God would not be beloved of us,
because he gives or promises any thing beside him self, but because he
gives himself.

The Papists.
2. EVen in right Christian godly men there remains doubt, mistrust, fear S.
Paul says, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Philipp. 2.
Rhemist. 1. John 4. sect. ^.

The Protestants.
Ans. WE acknowledge a dutiful reverence and fear of God always remaining in
the godly: but it is far from that servile and slavish fear, which is caused
only by the remembrance of hell fire and eternal judgment: Augustine does
thus resemble the matter: The chaste wife (says he) and the adulterous do
both fear their husbands, sed casta timet ne discedat vir, adultera, ne
veniat: But the chaste wife is afraid least her husband should depart, In Psalm.
127
the adulterous is afraid least he should come. Such a fear as is in the
chaste wife, we grant to be in the children of God, but not the other.

2. We also confess, that the horror of hell is profitable to make a way and
entrance for the calling of worldly and hard hearted men, as the needle or
bristle (as Augustine says) makes a way for the thread. But in a man already
called, this fear is expelled by love, as the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. ^.^8. For
we must be of those that love the appearing of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8. Not of that
number which fear it, and wish it were prolonged.

August. Si possumus efficere, fratres, vt dies iudicij non veniret, puto, quia
nec sic erat, male viuendum. If we could bring it about, that the day of
judgment should not come at all, we ought not for all that to live ill. His
meaning is, that we ought not to live well only for fear of Gods judgments.

THE FIFTH PART, OF THE USE of the Law.
The Papists.
Ministratio vitae effecta, made the ministration of life, Andr. lib. 5. in qua
omnis nostra salus consistit: wherein consists our salvation, Catech. Colom.
ex Tileman. de leg. loc. 3. err. 14. they call it Verbum fidei, and verbum
Christi, the word of Christ, and the word of Faith, to be obeyed and followed
of all Christians, that which Christ uttered to the young man: Math. 19.17. If
thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: Council. Trident. sess. 6.
cap. 7. So their opinion is, that the law is made unto us a mean and
instrument of our salvation.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, our Savior uttered those words to the young man, only to humble
him thereby, and to teach him to know him self: for otherwise the Apostles
should have taught contrary doctrine to their master, who exhort men only to
believe, and they shall be saved, Act. 16.31.

Argum. The Law was not ordained to save men, but it serves only as a
Schoolmaster, as S. Paul says, to bring us to Christ, Galath. 3.24. It also
reuealeth and discovers sin, Romans 7.7. The Apostle also calls it the
killing letter, and ministry of condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.6.9. How then can it
procure our salvation? therefore what can be more opposite and contrary to
Scripture, then this assertion of theirs?

Let Augustine speak: Testimonium legis eis, qui ea non legitime vtuntur,
testimonium est quo conuincantur, eis, qui legitime vtuntur, testimonium est,
quo demonstratur, quo liberandi confugere debeant peccatores. The testimony of
the law, to them which use it not aright, is a testimony to convince them; to
them which do, a testimony to teach them, to whom sinners ought to fly for
their deliverance: Ergo, the law does not it self work our deliverance, but
sends us to our deliverer.

THE THIRD PART, OF THIS controversy of Justification.
THe particular questions are these. First, of Free will, and the power
thereof. Secondly, of Faith. Thirdly, of good works. Fourthly, of the manner
of our justification.

THE FIRST QVESTION of Free will.
THe parts of this question. First, whether free will in spiritual things were
utterly extinguished by the sin of Adam. Secondly, of the power and strength
of free will in us.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER FREE WILL be utterly lost by the transgression of Adam.
The Papists.
FRee will is not utterly extinguished, but only abated in strength, and
attenuated, Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 1.

The Rhemists also gather by the parable of the man in the Gospel that lay for
half dead, Luke 10. verse. 30. that neither understanding, nor free will, and
other powers of the soul, are utterly extinguished and taken away, but wounded
only by the sin of Adam, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. IT is but a feeble collection and of small force which they draw from
this allegory: for allegories and similitudes, as they know themselves right
well, do not hold in all things, but wherein only they are compared: neither
do they necessarily conclude.

Argum. But that we are altogether dead in sin by the transgression of Adam,
the scripture speaks plainly in many places without allegory, Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
When we were dead in our sins, he has quickened us in Christ. Likewise,
Coloss. 2.13. he says not, as in the parable (...), they left him for half
dead, but (...), plain dead men indeed.

Augustine says, Cum peccauit primus homo, non in part aliqua, sed tota, qua
conditus est, natura deliquit: When the first man sinned, Cont. Pela. articul.
3.
he did not offend in any one part, but wholly in that nature wherein he was
created. And in another place, Natura tota fuit per liberum arbitrium in ipsa
radice vitiata: In Iohann. tract. 87.
Our nature wholly was corrupted by free will, in the very root or original,
that is, in Adam: Ergo, all the powers both of body and soul wholly corrupt
and decayed in spiritual things.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE POWER AND strength of free will in man.
The Papists.
THey say not, that a man by his free will only is able to live well, or to
obtain by the grace of God, he is able to do it. The first stirring then and
motion of the heart, they say, is of God. Then it is the part of free will to
apprehend the grace offered, and to give consent unto it, and to work together
with it, Trid. Council. sess. 6. cap. 5. can. 4.

Loc. 31.
Eckius sets down four steps or degrees to justification. The beginning of
our calling is only of God, by inspiring of grace into us: this is the first
degree. The second is in our own power, to give assent unto grace once
inspired. Thirdly, to obtain that, which by so assenting we do desire, is
only of Gods gift, and this is the third degree, gratiae gratum facientis, of
grace which makes us gracious, or acceptable. The fourth degree of
perseverance in the grace of salvation received, is partly in our power and
free will, partly of the grace of God.

Our Rhemists thus define the matter: Man, they say, was never without free
will: but having the grace of Christ he is truly made free, John. 8. sect. 2.
Again, though our election, calling, or first coming to God, lie not wholly
or principally upon our own will or works: yet our willing or working of any
good to our salvation, is the secondary cause; Gods special motion, grace and
assistance is the principal, Romans 9. sect. 4.

So then this is their sentence, that neither our free will is so corrupt, that
it had need wholly to be assisted by the grace of God, but that it works
somewhat of it self: nor yet so perfect, that it is able of it own strength
to obtain salvation: But their plain meaning is this, that Gods grace and
man's free will do work actiuely together, as the Rhemists note. The Gentiles,
though they believed specially by Gods grace and preordination, yet they
believe also by their own free will, Act. 13. sect. 2.

Argum. 2. Timoth. 2.21. If any man purge himself from these, he shall be a
vessel of honor, 1. John. 3.3. Every man that has this hope, sanctifies
himself: Ergo, man has free will to make himself a vessel of salvation, or
damnation. And this teaches us, that man may sanctify himself by his free
will, working together with the grace of GOD, Rhemist. in vtrumque locum.

Ans. First, these places of scripture do not prove, that there is any
freedom or liberty in man's will to do good by nature: but that our will
being enlarged by Gods spirit, consents unto grace, not of it self, or by it
own power. This then is the difference between us: We hold that our free will
is wholly corrupt by nature, and can do nothing, unless it be helped by
grace: They say, that there is some strength left by nature in free will, and
it works together with the grace of God.

Argum. 2. If there be no free will unto good, what need exhortations,
admonitions, precepts, laws, reward, punishment, seeing nothing is left in a
man's own power? Eckius.

Ans. Though all good things do come of God, and we have no power in our
selves to do that which good is, yet this hinders not exhortations,
teaching, industry and labor, no more then the doctrine of predestination
does: For as God gives all grace, so he bestows them by means: faith is the
gift of God, yet it comes by hearing. The staff of bread is the blessing of
God, yet for all that the husbandman must not leave tilling of his ground. So
our will is directed by the grace of God unto goodness: but we must use the
means notwithstanding, whereby the grace of God works in us.

The Protestants.
THat it may fully appear wherein the chief point of this controversy
lies, we will first show what manner of free will we deny not to be in man.

1. We confess that our first parents had free will before their fall, both to
choose the good, and refuse the evil: as Augustine says, Magnas liberi
arbitrij vires homo cum conderetur, accepit, sed eas peccando amisit: Man by
creation had great strength in his free will: but he utterly lost it by his
sin.

2. We acknowledge a free will in man, that is, a government of reason, Non per
quod sit idoneum, quae ad Deum pertinent, sine Deo, inchoare and perficere, sed
tantum in operibus vitae praesentis, as Augustine says: Not a free will,
whereby men are able to begin or finish any work to Godward, without his
grace: but only in the affairs of this life: as to labor, to eat, to
drink, to build, to plant, and to do other affairs of this life. These
things has God left unto man's discretion, whom he has endued with a
reasonable soul: yet so, that al these things are governed and directed by the
general providence of God. And therefore in all these actions, we must say as
the Apostle teaches us, Iam. 4.15.
If the Lord will, I will do this or that.

But in the preparing of our will unto good, the general providence of GOD is
not sufficient, but there must be also a special influence of his grace.

3. A free will to do evil also we grant, free from compulsion or coaction,
of it self inclined to evil without any enforcing: as Augustine says,
Liberum hominis arbitrium ad malum sufficit, ad bonum parum est, De corrept.
and great. c. 11
nisi adiuuetur ab omnipotente bono: The free will of man suffices unto evil,
but it is of small force unto goodness, unless it be helped by the almighty Good.

4. Neither do we so deny free will in good things, as though men were
violently forced, and compelled against their will to the kingdom of GOD, as
the Papists do charge us, John. 6. sect. 3. But God so changes our wills,
that of unwilling he makes us willing: as Augustine, Ex nolentibus volentes
facit: and gives us grace most gladly to embrace Christ: as our Savior
says, If the Son make you free, then are you free indeed. So man has free
will from coaction, both in evil things, to the which he is voluntarily
inclined; as also in good things, wherein his will being regenerate, he walks
willingly without compulsion.

5. Neither do we so take away free will from man, as though there were no
more in him, then in a piece of clay, as our adversaries falsely charge us,
Romans 9. sect. 7. As Augustine says, Non sicut in lapidibus insensatis, aut in
ijs, quae rationem non habent, Cont. Pela. 1.5.
Deus salutem nostram operatur: God works not our salvation in us, as in
senseles stones, or in unreasonable creatures: So we do not take away man's
proper motions or thoughts, as the Rhemists accuse us. 2. Corinthians. 3. sect. 2.
God gives not a new mind, soul, will, or understanding to the regenerate, but
only alters and changes it: so that it remains the same in matter and
substance, but God by his grace, casts it as it were into a new mould, and
gives a new form and shape unto it.

De bon. perseueran. lib. 2. ca. 13.
So August. Cogitantes credimus, cogitantes agimus, quicquid agimus, sed tamen
quod attinet ad pietatis viam, and verum Dei cultum, non sumus idonei cogitare
aliquid ex nobis, sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo est: We by our own thoughts
believe by our own cogitation we enterprise whatsoever is done, yet in the way
of godliness, and in the worship of God, we are not able to think any thing of
our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Wherefore two things are to be
considered in our will and thoughts, the natural power of willing and
thinking, and the goodness and holiness of our thoughts: the first is in us, and
is properly ours by the gift of God: but the other comes only of God by his
grace. The will, the understanding, the thoughts are ours, but the goodness is
merely and entirely wrought by the spirit of God: So that in respect of the
goodness inspired into our minds, our wills are altogether passive; in respect
of the general power and natural motion of willing, thinking, and
understanding, they are also active.

The several points then, wherein we and our adversaries dissent about free
will, are these.

1. They say, that man was never without free will, but it is made more free by
grace, Rhemist. John. 8. sect. 2. that is, our free will is not altogether
corrupt, but there remains some freedom therein, even before grace.

Ans. Clean contrary to S. Paul, who denies that in his flesh dwells any
good thing, Romans 7.18. but says, he by nature was wholly sold unto sin,
verse. 14. How then can there remain any goodness in our will without grace?
Augustine consents, Laborant homines inuenire in voluntate, quid boni sit
nostrum, quod non sit ex Deo, quod quomodo inueniri possit ignoro: Men do
labor to find some goodness in the will, that is of our selves, and not of
God: but I am altogether ignorant how any such thing should be found.

2. The beginning of our calling, and the first motions and stirrings of the
heart are of grace, but to consent is wholly in our power: so belike God
begins the good work and we continue it. This is right the old Pelagian
heresy: Gratiam Dei non ad singulos actus dari: That the grace of God need not
be given at every assay: but it is enough if God give a hint, and show us the
beginning, and we will perform the rest. This heresy is confuted by
Augustine, Epistol. 106. And in another place, Nos eam gratiam volumus, says
he, qua non solum reuelatur sapientia, sed amatur, non suadetur bonum, sed
persuadetur: De great. Christ. 1.10
We understand that grace, by the which wisdom is not only revealed, but
loved, we are not moved and stirred only to good things, but thoroughly
persuaded. Wherefore it is not God that begins the good work in us only,
but also continues and finisheth it: for all things are by Jesus Christ, 1. Corinthians. 8.7. no good thing in us but by him.

3. They also renew another heresy of the Pelagians, who taught: That, what
men are commanded to do by free will, facilius impleri per gratiam, is but
more easily performed by grace. What else do the Rhemists say, Haeres. 83.
August.
giving this note, that although the Gentiles do especially believe by Gods
grace, yet they do believe by their free will? Act. 13.2. So grace helps
them only more especially, fully, or easily to believe. Whereupon it follows,
that they may believe without grace, though not so especially.

Now then, we are to prove against our adversaries, that our free will has no
power at all of it self to will or do that which is good, no further then it
is guided, and not only in part assisted, but wholly directed by the spirit of
God.

Argum. 1. Philipp. 2.13. God works in us both the will and the deed: yea
and the thought to, 2. Cor. 3.5. He says not, God and we work, but he
himself works: he is all in all.

Argum. 2. John. 6.44. No man comes to me, unless my father draw him. But he
is not drawn that gives assent of his own accord: for so they say, that God
first touches the heart with his spirit, and then it is in the power of man to
give consent. But the scripture speaks otherwise: how that God draws us, he
draws our will, and makes us to give assent unto his grace. He it is that
takes away the stony heart, and gives an heart of flesh, Ezech. 11.19. Ergo,
he prepares and addresseth the will wholly. For like as a stone has no fleshy
nature in it, no more has the natural will of men any goodness dwelling
therein.

Augustine, Quicquid vult bonum, quicquid potest, a Domino est, Hypogno. cont.
Pelag. articul. 2.
quia sine me ait Dominus, nihil potestis facere, John. 15. Whatsoever a man
either wills, or is able to do, it is of God: as the Lord says in the
Gospel, Without me you can do nothing: Ergo, without grace the will is able
to do nothing: it is then wholly corrupt in it self. It follows therefore,
that our will and Gods grace work not together: but God by his spirit works
alone in us.

THE SECOND QVESTION, of Faith.
THe parts of the question. First, what faith is. Secondly, of the diverse
kinds of faith. Thirdly, of the form of faith. Fourthly, how we are justified
by faith. Fifthly, whether faith be meritorious. Sixthly, whether it be in our
own power. Seventhly, whether faith may be lost. Eighthly, whether wicked men
have faith.

THE FIRST PART, WHAT FAITH IS, whereby we are justified.
The Papists.
Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 13. It is a general or universal believing
the articles of Christ's death and resurrection, not any fond special faith,
fiducia, or confidence, of each man's own salvation, Rhemist. Romans 4. sect. 9.

Argum. Abraham's faith was nothing else but his belief of a certain article
revealed unto him from God, and credit given to Gods speeches, Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. Abraham's faith was not only a general or historical belief, that Gods
speeches were true; but a sure confidence and trust in God, that his promises
pertained unto him: and that he himself should be blessed in that promised
seed: as our Savior testifies, John. 8.56. Abraham desired to see my day,
and he saw it, and was glad. For whereof sprang that exceeding joy in Abraham,
but upon that certain hope and persuasion which he had of his own salvation
in Christ?

The Protestants.
A Justifying faith is not only a general belief of the articles of faith,
that Christ was borne, dyed, rose again for them that believe: but it is an
assured and steadfast confidence, whereby every faithful man particularly does
apply to himself the general promises of God, for the hope of remission of
his sins in Christ, that Christ dyed, rose again, and did all the rest, even
for him.

Argum. 1. Saint James says, The devils also do believe that God is, and do
tremble: Iam. 2.19.
yea no doubt, but they believe the word of God is true, and confess all the
articles of the faith: for they acknowledge Christ to be the Son of the
living God, Mark. 5.7. But the faith of devils is no justifying faith: Ergo,
neither this historical and general faith.

Argum. 2. Saint Paul was saved by no other faith, then the common justifying
faith of all Christians: but this faith wrought a particular persuasion in him,
From henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 2. Timoth. 8. Ergo,
such ought the faith of all Christians to be.

Augustine says, Nos non simul omnes, In Psalm. 106
sed paulatim and singulatim credentes congregamur in vnam quandam ciuitatem:
We (says he) not believing all at once, but every man asunder and by himself,
are gathered into one people. What this singulatim credere, means, he shows
a few lines after: Quicquid, cum loquor, agnoueris in te, quisquis expertus ^s,
creed contingere omnibus qui de manu inimicoru^ precioso sanguine redimuntur:
That which I say, thou that have the experience thereof in thy self, know
that it is common to all that are redeemed by that precious blood: Ergo, every
man must have a particular feeling and experience of his redemption in himself.

The Papists.
2. FAith a man may feel and know to be in himself, because it is an act
only of understanding, but a man cannot be assured thereby, that Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 13. sect. 1.

The Protestants.
Ans. WE see what a poor miserable faith, the faith of popish Catholics is:
They say, it is but a bare act of the understanding, which brings with it no
certainty or assurance of salvation. But the Apostle, Hebr. 11.1. defines
faith after another sort: It is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. Faith then has two parts, as it works the
evidence and knowledge of heavenly things in the understanding: so also it
begets a strong hope and persuasion in the heart of the promises of God: it
is not therefore only an act of the understanding.

Argum. But that by a lively and true faith, men may know that they are in
grace, and may be assured of salvation, Saint Paul teaches, Prove your selves
whether you be in the faith: know ye not, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
unless ye be reprobates? 2. Corinthians. 13.5. By faith therefore we may know
whether Christ be in us: Ergo, whether we are in the state of grace: for
Christ dwells only by faith in the elect, and such as shall be saved, Ephesians.
3.17.

Augustine, Vnusquisque inspiciat se intus, appendat se, probet se in omnibus
factis suis: fides, quae operatur per dilectionem, si in vobis est, iam
pertinetis ad praedestinatos: Let every man look into himself, examine, prove
himself: if faith working by love be in you, even now ye do belong to the
number and company of the predestinate: Ergo, by a lively faith men may be
assured of their election.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE DIVERSE kinds of faith.
The Papists.
fides implicita, the faith of simple men and idiots: who although they are not
able to give a reason of their belief, yet it is enough for them to say they
are Catholic men, and that they will live and dye in that faith which the
Catholic Church does teach, Rhemist. Luke 12. sect. 3. This implicit faith,
which, they say, is sufficient for common Catholics, is nothing else but to
believe as the Church believes, though they know nothing themselves
particularly.

The Protestants.
AS before they spoiled faith of the better part thereof, which is a stable and
certain persuasion of the heart: so now also they rob it of the other part,
which is an evidence and light of spiritual knowledge: for faith cannot stand
with ignorance, but necessarily brings with it an illumination of the mind,
as it works stablenes in the heart.

Argum. Wherefore it is not enough for a Christian to say, he believes as the
Catholic Church believes: for we must be ready to give account to every one
that asks of that hope that is in us, 1. Pet. 3.15. Ergo, every true
Christian must be able to give account of his belief.

Augustine writes, Ita apud omnes vulgatam and confirmatam esse catholicam
fidem, Cont. Iuli. lib. 6. cap. 4.
vt nec notitiam possit fugere popularem: That the Catholic faith was so
common, and so plain, that it could not be hid even unto the popular sort.
For now in these days the prophecy of Jeremy ought to be fulfilled, They
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest, Hebr. 8.11.

The Papists.
Corinth. 12.9. is of the same substance with the common justifying faith: it
differs only in an accidental quality of more feruor, devotion and
confident trust, Rhemist. ibid.

Yea, that faith which Saint James calls a dead faith, is notwithstanding a
true faith, and the same which is called the Catholic faith, and which the
Apostle defines, Hebr. 11. and in substance all one with that which
justifies, Rhemist. Iam. 2. sect. 11.

The Protestants.
FIrst, the faith of miracles, and the justifying faith, are not all of one
nature: because the faith of miracles may be in wicked men, Matthew. 7.23. The
justifying faith can be in none but those that shall be saved, Mark. 16.16.
They that believe shall be saved. But what intolerable boldness is this, to
ascribe greater confidence and trust to that faith, which may be in wicked men,
then to the true justifying faith in the elect?

Secondly, the dead faith, that Saint James treats of, is not of the same
nature with the justifying faith, nor that faith which is handled, Heb. 11. For
by that faith the Patriarchs pleased GOD, and believed that he was a rewarder
of those which sought him, verse 6. But this dead faith has no such operation.

Again, it is great blasphemy, to make this dead faith, and a lively
justifying faith, of one and the same kind and nature: for as a dead man
cannot be said properly to be a man, no more can a dead faith be properly
called a faith. Nay further, the faith of devils and the faith of Saints cannot
be of one nature and substance: but this dead speculatiue faith may be in
devils, Iam. 2.19. Ergo, it is a blasphemous assertion, that these two faiths
are all of one.

Augustine says, Discern fidem tuam a fide daemonum: daemones credunt, De
verb. Apost. ser. 16.
quod oderunt; distinguit Apostolus fides, quae operatur per dilectionem:
Discern thy faith from the faith of devils; the devils believe that which they
hate. The Apostle does distinguish them: faith which works by love. Ergo, a
dead faith which is fruitelesse, and works not by love, is the faith of
devils, and so not of one nature with a true justifying faith.

THE THIRD PART, WHEther charity be the form of justifying faith.
The Papists.
IT is so affirmed by our Rhemistes, Iam. 2. sect. 11. Faith being formed,
Tapper. ex Tileman. Heshus. de fide err. 7.

Argum. Saint James says, As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith
without works is dead, 2.26. But the soul or spirit gives the form and
life to the body. Ergo, so do the works of charity to faith, Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. WE must consider of what kind of faith Saint James speaks: not of a
lively or justifying faith, but of a dead faith, which in deed is no faith,
neither can possibly receive any life or quickening, to be made a true and
right faith. The words then are thus to be read, and distinguished: So faith
without works is dead: that is, this kind of faith, which neither works, nor
ever shall: Not thus, Faith is dead without works: as though a true faith were
quickened by works. But even as the body is dead, having neither soul, nor
the operations thereof, life, motion, sense: so this vain speculatiue kind of
faith is dead, both wanting the spirit and soul, that is, having not one
spark of true faith, neither the operations and fruits thereof, which a
lively faith shows by love, as the soul works life and motion in the
body: for a lively faith can never be without works: And a dead faith will
never have works, but remains dead for ever.

We must not therefore think, that it is one and the same faith, which
sometime is dead without works, and again is made alive and quickened, when
works come: But we must understand two kinds of faith: one altogether void
of good works, which is only a faith in name, and a very dead faith. Another
is a lively faith, always working: and this can never become a dead faith, so
neither can the other be ever made a lively faith.

Argum. That charity is not the form or any cause of faith, but the effect
rather and fruit thereof, we do learn out of the word of God: Christ says,
John 3.18. He that believes, shall not be condemned, but is already passed
from death to life, John. 5.24. Faith then is able to save us, and alone
justifies us before God without love (which always follows a true faith* but
is not joined, or made a partner with it in the matter of justification) But
faith could do nothing without the form thereof: Ergo, charity is not the
form of faith. Saint Paul also faith: Faith which works by love, Galath.
5.6. The being and substance of faith is one thing, the working another: Love
only concurreth with faith in the working, it is no part of the essence or
being of faith.

In Psalm. 67.
August. Ea sola bona opera dicenda sunt, quae fiunt per dilectionem, haec
necesse est, antecedat fides, vt inde ista, non ab istis incipiat illa: Those
only are to be counted good works, which are wrought by love: faith of
necessity must go before: for they must take their beginning from faith, and
not faith from them. Faith then goes before love that works, therefore love
is not the form of faith: for forma prior est re formata, the form should go
before the thing formed.

THE FOVRTH PART, HOW MEN are justified by faith.
The Papists.
We are said to be justified by faith, because faith is the beginning,
Council. Triden. sess. 6. cap. 8. Faith then by their sentence does not fully
justify the believer, but is the beginning, way and preparation only to
justification, Andrad. ex Tilem. de fide err. 11. Rhemist. Romans 3. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
FAith is not the beginning only of our justification, but the principal and
only worker thereof: neither are we justified in part or in whole by any
other means then by faith.

Argum. He that is at peace with God, is fully and perfectly justified, his
conscience cleared, and his sins remitted. But by faith we have peace of
conscience: Ergo, by faith we are fully and perfectly justified, Romans 5.1.
The Scripture also faith, The just man shall live by faith, Romans 1.17. But we
live not by justification begun only, but perfited and finished: Ergo, our
full justification is by faith.

Augustine upon these words, John 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye
believe etc. Si iustitia est opus Dei, quomodo erit opus Dei vt credatur in
eum, nisi ipsa sit iustitia, vt credamus in eum? If justice or righteousness be
the work of God, how is it the work of God to believe in him, unless it be
righteousness it self to believe in him? See then, it is not initium iustitiae
credere, sed ipsa iustitia: it is not the beginning of justice to believe, but
justice and righteousness it self.

THE FIFTH PART, WHETHER faith be meritorious.
The Papists.
BY faith we do merit eternal life, Catechis. Roman. p. 121. ex Tilemann. de
20. Rhemists also ascribe meriting to faith, Romans 3. sect. 3.

Argum. Faith is a work: Ergo, if we be justified by faith, we are justified
by works, and so consequently by merit.

The Protestants.
Ans. FAith in deed is a work, but not any of our own works: it is called the
work of God, John. 6.29. God does wholly work it in us: Ergo, we cannot
merit by it.

Argum. Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are you saved through faith, not
of yourselues: for it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should
boast himself. Faith then is no meritorious cause of our justification, but
only an isntrumental means, whereby we do apprehend the grace of God
offered in Christ: God gives both faith and the end of faith. Vtrumque Dei
est, (as Augustine says) and quod iubet, Lib. 1. de praedestinat. 11.
and quod offertur: Believe and thou shall be saved: both come of God* the
thing commanded, that is faith, and the thing offered, namely salvation, Ergo,
all is of grace.

THE SIXTH PART, WHETHER to believe be in man's power.
The Papists.
RHemist. Act. 13. sect. 2. give this note, that the Gentiles believed by their

The Protestants.
FAith is the mere gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and wholly comes from God: it is
not either in part or whole of our selves.

Argum. Romans 11.36. Of him, through him, and for him are all things. Ergo
fidei initium ex ipso, neque hoc excepto ex ipso sunt caetera: Therefore says
Augustine, the beginning of our faith is of him; unless we will say, that all
things else are of God, this only excepted. And afterward he shows, that
our faith is wholly of God, not part of him, part of our selves. Sic enim homo,
quasi componet cum Deo, vt partem fidei sibi vendicet, partem Deo relinquat. So
man shall as it were compound with God, to challenge part of faith to himself,
and leave part for God.

THE SEVENTH PART, WHEther faith may be lost.
The Papists.
Paul says of some, They had made shipwreck of faith, 1. Timoth. 1.19.
Rhemist. ibid. Ergo, true faith may be lost.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe Apostle says, Some having put away a good conscience, made shipwreck
of faith. Such a faith in deed, yt has not a good conscience, may be lost: for
it is not a true lively faith, but a dead fruitelesse faith.

Argum. But he that once has received a true lively faith, and is thereby
justified before God, can never fall away, neither can that faith utterly
perish or fail in him: for He that believes, is already passed from death to
life, John. 5.24. If then it be possible for a man to be brought from life to
death, from heaven back again to hell, then may a faithful believer become
also a faithless infidel.

Augustine does plainly set down his sentence of this matter: De corrept. and
great. ca. 7.
Horum fides, quae per dilectionem operatur, profecto aut omnino non deficit,
aut siqui sunt, quorum deficit, reparatur antequam vita ista finiatur. Their
faith, which works by love, either never fails at all, or if it do fail
in any, it is repaired again, before their life be ended.

THE EIGHT PART, WHETHER wicked men may have a true faith.
The Papists.
THe certainty of remission of sins, with a sure confidence and trust in
Christ, Conc. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 9.

The Protestants.
IT is impossible, that a true lively faith, whereby we are justified before
God, which works in us a sure confidence and trust in God, should enter into
the heart of a wicked man.

Argum. Christ says, He that believes in me, shall never thirst, John 6.35.
And verse 40. This is the will of God, that he that believes in me, should
have eternal life: Ergo, if wicked men and reprobates may have this faith;
they also shall have everlasting life: which is a thing impossible.

Augustine, Nostra fides.i. catholica fides, iustos ab iniustis, non operum,
Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. li. 3.5.
sed ipsa fidei lege discernit, quia iustus ex fide viuet. The Catholic faith
discerns just men from unjust, not by works, but by the law of faith: for
the just shall live by faith. If then the difference between the godly and
wicked be only faith, if the one may have faith as well as the other, there
should be no difference between them.

THE THIRD QVESTION, OF good works.
THe parts of this question: first, what works are to be counted good works:
secondly, whether there are any good works without faith: thirdly, of the use
and office of good works, whether they be applicatorie, expiatorie,
meritorious: fourthly, of the distinction of merits: fifthly, the manner of
meriting.

THE FIRST PART, WHICH BE the good works of Christians.
The Papists.
THey do not only call them good works, which are commanded of God, Council.
Trident. sess. 6. cap. 10. Tapper. ex Tileman. loc. 11. Err. 1.

The Protestants.
SAint Paul defines good works otherwise, namely those which God has
ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. They are not the precepts
of men, but the commandments of God in his word, the doing whereof has the
name of good works. As for the traditions and injunctions of men not warranted
by Gods word, they are so far from being commended or commanded, that our
Savior calls the doing thereof, but a Worshipping of God in vain, Mark. 7.7.

Augustine upon those words, in the 103. Psalm verse. 18. The loving kindenes
of the Lord is upon those that keep his covenant, and think upon his
commandments to do them, says thus: Vide vt praecepta teneas: sed quomodo
teneas? non memoria, sed vita: Memoria retinentibus mandata eius, non vt
reddant ea, sed vt faciant ea: See that thou keep Gods commandments: but how?
not in thy memory, but in thy life, not to say them by rote, but to do them.
Ergo, they are Gods commandments, which we must think of to do them; for
unto such the blessing is promised, not to the obseruers of men's precepts or
traditions.

THE SECOND PART, WHEther there be any good works without faith.
The Papists.
THough they dare not altogether justify the works of the heathen and
infidels, Rhemist. Romans 14. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
THese works are not sin in themselves, but in infidels they are, because
they proceed of infidelity.

Argum. It is the rule of the Gospel, that a corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit, Matthew. 7.18. But all infidels are corrupt trees, being without
faith. Ergo, they can bring forth no good fruit.

The Pelagians thought to have posed Augustine with the same question, which
the papists propound to us. Was it sin in the heathen (say they) to clothe
the naked? Augustine answers, Non per seipsum factum peccatum est, Cont.
Julian. lib. 4. c. 3.
sed de tali opere non in domino gloriari, solus impius negat esse peccatum.
The fact of it self is not sin, but in doing any such thing not to rejoice in
the Lord, none but wicked men will deny it to be sin.

THE THIRD PART, OF THE use and office of good works.
THey make a threefold use of good works, as they call them: first, by them
the merits of Christ, they say, are applied unto us: secondly, they do purge
our sins: thirdly, they are meritorious.

THE FIRST ARTICLE, WHEther bona opera be applicatoria.
The Papists.
BY any work proceeding of faith and charity, the merit of Christ's passion
Soto. ex Tilemann. loc. 11. err. 21. Men by their sufferings and other works,
may apply to themselves the general medicine of Christ's merits and
satisfaction, Rhemist. annot. 1. Coloss. sect. 4.

The Protestants.
IT is the property of faith only, to apprehend, and apply unto us the
benefits of Christ's passion, and all other his merits.

Argum. Romans 10.7.8. We need not, says the Apostle, to ascend to heaven, or
descend into the deep, to bring Christ from thence: it is the word of faith,
which we preach. By faith then we do scale the heavens, and behold Christ:
it is not the doctrine of works, but the word of faith that performs this.
And therefore the Apostle defines faith, to be the ground of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. This definition cannot agree
unto works, or unto any other thing but faith: for then it were no good
definition, nor yet description. Ergo, faith only is the evidence of things
invisible: and therefore only applies Christ's precious merits, which are
things believed and not seen.

Augustine thus also describes faith: Rerum absentium praesens est fides,
rerum, De Trin. li. 13. ca. 1.
quae foris sunt, intus est fides, rerum, quae non videntur, videtur fides:
Faith makes things absent, present, things without us, to be within us,
things not seen to be seen: Ergo, faith only has this applicatorie power,
to apply Christ's merits not present, nor seen, and to make them as our own.

THE SECOND ARTICLE, WHEther bona opera be expiatoria.
The Papists.
THe works of charity and mercy, as alms deeds, and such like, have Peter
says, Charity does cover a multitude of sins, Epist. 1.4.8. Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. THe Apostle speaks of mutual charity amongst our selves, whose
property is to cover a multitude of our neighbors offenses, as Solomon says,
Prou. 10.11. Hatred stirs up contentions, but love covers trespasses: what
is this to the extinguishing of our sins before God?

Argum. It is an abominable and blasphemous opinion, that any man by his works
should be able to redeem his sins: for the Scripture says, that by himself
Christ has purged our sins, Heb. 1.3. If he have wholly done it by
himself, he has not given this power and force of redemption to any other
means.

If they understand by the force of extinguishing sins, the means only of
applying Christ's merits: in that sense, faith only is said to save us,
Ephesians. 2.8.

Augustine: Si merita nostra aliquid facerent, ad damnationem nostram veniret,
sed non venit ad inspectionem meritorum, sed remissionem peccatorum. If our
merits were auailable to any purpose, God should come to our condemnation: but
he comes not to behold our merits, but to forgive us our sins. Ergo, by our
merits, our sins are not forgiven.

THE THIRD ARTICLE, WHEther our works be meritorious.
The Papists.
to their works, as he gives damnation for the contrary works, Rhemist. Romans
2. sect. 2. And men by their works proceeding of grace do deserve or merit
heaven, and the more or less joy in the same, 1. Corinthians. 3. sect. 2.

Argum. 1. He will render to every man according to his works, Romans 2.6. Every
man shall receive his reward according to his labor. Here we see the kingdom
of heaven is a retribution, hyre, wages for works: Ergo, our works are the
value, price, worth and merit of the same. Rhemist.

Answ. Our labors and works are a measure of the reward, according to the
which God does mete out and render unto his Saints of the heavenly reward* but
they are no meritorious or deserving cause thereof. The reward is of mercy,
not of desert; of grace, not of merit: for life eternal is the mere gift of
God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. But the wages of sin is death. Where the
Apostle does set a manifest difference between the reward of the righteous,
and the just recompense of the wicked: for life eternal is the free and
gracious gift of God, not deserved: but eternal damnation is the due debt of
sin. Wherefore the Papists do bid open battle to the Apostle, in saying,
that the one is as due by debt as the other.

Argum. 2. Saint Paul says, 2. Timoth* 4.8. that there is a crown of
righteousness laid up for him, which God the just judge shall give him. Ergo, the
crown is given not of mercy, but of justice, as a wages and just recompense to
the Apostle.

Answ. God renders heaven as a just Judge, not to the merit and worthiness of
our works, but to the merit and worthiness of Christ, and as due to us by his
promise made to us in Christ. The reward therefore of heaven is of the mercy
of God, who has freely promised it us in Christ: It is of his justice, in that
he is faithful and just in keeping of his promise made to us. So that it is a
debt, not in respect of any desert in us, but in regard of his own promise. As
Augustine says: Debitorem ipse se dominus fecit, non accipiendo, sed
promittendo: Non ei dicitur read, quod accepisti, sed read, quod promisisti.
God has made himself a debtor, by promising, not by receiving any thing at
our hands: We say not to him, render that thou have received, but give that
which thou have promised, in Psalm. 83.

The Protestants.
WE confess a necessary use of good works: As first, they do serve as
notable means and instruments to set forth Gods glory by, Math. 5.16.
Secondly, by them also our faith is showed, published and made known, for the
good example of others, Iam. 2.18. Thirdly, our own conscience also is thereby
quieted, and our election daily made more sure unto us: we do grow and
increase in the certainty and assurance thereof, 1. Pet. 1.10. But we
acknowledge no power, force, or efficacy at all in them to deserve and merit
any thing at the hands of God, neither does the scripture in any place so
speak.

Argum. 1. If man consider his deserts, he shall find, that he is worthy of
nothing but death: To us (s^yth the Prophet) belongs shame, Dan. 9.9. There
is nothing else by debt due unto us: as Augustine also says, Nihil praecesserat
in meritis nostris* nisi vnde damnari deberemus: In Psa. 18. exposit. 2.
Nothing goes before in our merits, but that whereby we ought justly to be
condemned. And again, Omne peccatum nostrae est negligentiae, omnis virtus and
sanctitas est Dei indulgentiae: All evil and sin in us, is of our own
negligence, all goodness and holiness, of the free mercy of God. In Math. sermon. 8.
Si misericordiae domini multae, multus ego in meritis: If the mercies of God
be many, my merits are many. Gods mercies are our merits: our due debts are
nothing else but punishment for sin.

Argum. 2. Between the desert or merit, and the wages or recompense, there
ought always to be some proportion: a like stipend for a like labor: But
heaven without comparison exceeds the worthiness of our works, Ergo, it is
not given as a debt, but as a free gift: therefore the Apostle says, that the
afflictions that are present, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed, Romans 8.18. Homil. 8.
Augustine says, Quam paruo constat regnum coelorum? duob. minutis emit vidua
regnum coelorum: How little does the kingdom of God stand us in? a certain
widow for two mites bought the kingdom of heaven. Shall we think that the
widows casting in of two mites deserved the kingdom of heaven? Far be it
from us so to think: it is then a gift of ^auour and mercy, not wages of debt.

Argum. 3. Saint Paul says, Faith is counted to him for righteousness, that
works not, Romans 4.5. If it be of grace, it is no more of works, for then
grace were no more grace: If of work, then not of grace; for then work were
no more work, Romans 11.9 We see that the righteousness of faith or of grace, and
the righteousness of works, cannot stand together, nor be matched one with
the other.

Our adversaries have here two euasions: First they grant, that the beginning
of our justification, which they call the first justification, is merely of
Gods grace, neither can we have any acceptable works before we are justified:
but in the second justification, which is the increase of the former justice, a
man may merit by good works, Rhemist. Romans 2.3.

Ans. This is but a late and new device of the first and second justification:
as afterward we will show in the proper place. The scripture teaches us, that
not only the beginning of our righteousness, but the finishing and perfiting of
it is only by grace in Christ, Ephesians. 2.5.6. When we were dead in our sins,
he has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved, and has
raised us up, and made us sit together in heavenly places: We see that this
salvation by grace brings us up to heaven. Ergo, both the first and second
justification are of grace, for they can bring us no further then to heaven.

Rhemist. 2. Works done of nature without, or before faith, cannot merit, but
works done by Gods grace may, and are joined with it as causes of salvation.

Ans. Not only the works of nature, but even of grace also are excluded. We
are saved (says the Apostle) by grace through faith; not of works: And then
he shows what works, namely good works, such as the Lord has ordained for
us to walk in, Ephesians. 2.9.10. Ergo, works also of grace, wrought in us by the
spirit of God, are shut out from being any causes of our salvation. I conclude
with Augustine, upon those words of the Psalm, Let the Lord always be
magnified: Peccatores? magnificetur, vt vocet: consiteris? magnificetur, vt
ignoscat: iam just viuis? magnificetur, vt regat: perseueras vsque ad finem?
magnificetur, vt te glorificet: Art thou a sinner? let God be magnified in
calling thee: do thou confess thy sins? let him be magnified in forgiving
them: do thou live well? let him be magnified in directing thee: do thou
continue to the end? let him be magnified in glorifiing thee. God is as much to
be praised for all things wrought after our cal^ing and conversion, as for
mercy showed before: All then is wholly to be ascribed to Gods grace and
mercy: nothing is left for our merit or desert.

THE FOVRTH PART, OF THE distinction of merits.
The Papists.
THey make two kinds of merit: Meritum de co^gruo, merit of congruitie:
Cornelius, Act. 10. which though they be not simply meritorious, ex debito
iustitiae, by the due debt of justice, yet they deserve at Gods hands of
congruitie, because he does graciously accept them, Act. 10. sect. 5. The
other kind, they call meritum de condigno, merit of condignitie, when the
reward is justly due by debt: such are the works done in the second
justification, which are truly meritorious, Ex Tilem. loc. 11. error 22.
and worthy of heaven, Gabriel. Biel. Rhemist. Romans 2. sect. 3.

The Protestants.
FIrst, we utterly deny any such merit of condignitie: For Saint Paul says,
that the afflictions of this life are not condign of the glory to come, Romans
8.18. Condignitie then is wholly removed and taken away.

Secondly, a reward of congruitie in some sort we grant, but neither for any
thing done before faith or justification, for it is impossible without faith to
please God, or do any thing acceptable unto him, Hebr. 6.6. Neither is it of
congruitie for the merit of our works: but it is ( congruum) it is agreeable
to the mercy and justice of God in respect of his promise graciously made in
Christ, to reward the faithful obedience of his servants: so then the
congruitie is on Gods behalf, not in respect of our works.

We are justified, says the Apostle, Gratis per gratiam, freely by grace, Romans
3.24. Ergo, there is no merit either of congruitie or condignitie, seeing all
is done freely.

Augustine says, Quid ille latro attulerat de fauce ad iudicium, de iudicio ad
crucem, In Psa. 55.
de cruce in Paradisum? I pray you what merit did the thief bring with him,
from the prison to judgment, from the judgment place to the cross, from the
cross to Paradise? Here was neither merit of congruitie nor condignitie.

THE FIFTH PART, OF THE MANner of meriting.
The Papists.
Our works (they say) are pleasing and acceptable unto God* even after Tapper.
ex Tileman. loc. 11. Err. 14. Christ's pains of their own nature, compared to
his glory, were not any whit comparable, yet they were meritorious and worthy
of heaven, not for the greatness of them, but for the worthiness of his person.
So our works, not of their own nature, but as they are of grace, are
meritorious of the joys of heaven, Rhemist. Romans 8.18.

The Protestants.
FIrst, it is a great blasphemy, to say, that Christ's passions in themselves
deserved not that glory, which he has purchased for us: neither that there was
any comparison between them: for then, how could he have fully satisfied the
wrath of God? Christ has paid the ransom for our sins: We are redeemed
with his precious blood, as of a lamb unspotted, 1. Pet. 1.19. His blood was
the price of our redemption: therefore, of it self meritorious: It was not in
respect of Christ, of grace; but of merit in him: Unto us his redemption is of
grace, Romans 3.24. Wherefore his passion being the passion of the Son of God,
was a full satisfaction, and worthy desert of that glory, which he has
purchased for us.

Secondly; it is another great blasphemy to match and compare in the way and
manner of meriting, Christ's works and ours together. For first, there is no
merit at all in us unto salvation: we have no merits but Christ's, and are
saved only by faith in him, not by works, Ephesians. 2.8. Secondly, by your own
confession, our works are not of their nature meritorious, but of grace. But
Christ's works were of themselves full of merit, without any external help,
or accession of grace: for in himself did all fulness dwell, Coloss. 1.19.

Augustine very well shows the great difference in the way of meriting
between Christ and us, Tract. 2. in Epist. Johan.
thus writing: Quantum interest, cum duo sint in carcere, interreum, and
visitatorem eius: illum causa premit, illum humanitas adduxit: sic in istu
mortalitate nos reatu tenebamur, Christus misericordia descendit: Look what
difference there is, when two are in prison together, between the prisoner,
and his friend that comes to visit him; the one is there of necessity, the
other comes of good will. Such difference is there between Christ and us:
for when we were detained in the prison of this mortality, for the guilt of
our sins, Christ came in mercy to visit us. How can there now be any
proportionable or like way of meriting, in the guilty prisoner, and the
innocent and friendly visiter?

THE FOVRTH QVESTION, of Justification.
THe parts of this question. First, of the preparatiue works to justification.

Secondly, of the 2. kinds of justification, the first and second. Thirdly, of
inherent justice. Fourthly, of Justification only by faith. They follow now in
order.

THE FIRST PART, OF THE PREparatiue works.
The Papists.
Works done before justification, though they suffice not to salvation,
Cornelius, Act. 10. sect. 5. Rhemist.

The Protestants.
Ans. Cornelius prayers and alms were not without faith, as Augustine
confesses: Non sine aliqua fide donabat, and orabat: De praedestinat. lib. 1.
ca. 7
He did not give alms and pray without some faith. And he proves it by that
saying of the Apostle, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed? Seeing then Cornelius had faith, his justification also was
begun: for so soon as faith comes, it justifies. These were not then works
preparatiue to faith and justification, but the fruits of his faith and
justification begun.

Argum. Before faith come, there can be no works of preparation acceptable to
God: because Without faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11.6.

Augustine also says: Ea ipsa opera ante fidem, In Psalm. 31.
quae videntur hominibus laudabilia, inania sunt: those very works which seem
to be commendable before faith, are altogether vain and unprofitable. If they
be vain, they are no preparations to faith.

THE SECOND PART, OF THE two kinds of justification.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Romans 2.3. This justification and sanctification are all one, Council.
Trident. sess. 6. cap. 7. And it is augmented and increased by the merit of
work, sess. 6. can. 24.

Argum. Of the first justification S. Paul speaks, where he says, We are
justified by faith without works, Rom 3.28. Of the second Saint James
entreats: A man is justified by works, and not of faith only, 2.24. Rhemist.

Ans. This your device of first and second justification, is but a new device,
not yet 60. year old: your second justification is nothing else, but the
effect and fruits of justification before God, and a declaration, that we are
just before men. Saint Paul and Saint James do speak of one and the same
justification by faith: But they take the word diversely, for Saint James by
iustifiyng means nothing else, but a testifiyng or declaration of our
justification before men: And in this sense is the word taken, Math. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified of her children, that is, declared to be just.

The Protestants.
FIrst, justification and sanctification are two diverse things: We are
justified by faith only by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
Roman. 4.7. We are sanctified, when by faith working by love we walk in newnes
of life. These two are perpetually distinguished in the scriptures, I mean
justification, and sanctification, 1. Corinthians. 1.30. and 6.11. and Galath.
5.25. If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Our
justification is the living in the spirit, our sanctification the walking in
the spirit.

Secondly, our works can be no cause of the increase of our justification, and
the grace of God in us: But both our justification and sanctification are the
free gifts of God: For what have thou, that thou have not received? 1. Corint.
4.7. This was the old Pelagian heresy, that the grace of God is given
according to our works: Lib. 1. de praedest. cap. 1.
confuted by Augustine, Epistol. 106. Gratia iam non erit gratia, quia secundum
merita datur, nam merces fidei auctae erit merces coeptae: Thus grace shall be no
grace: for it is given according to merit: for the increase of faith or
justice, is made the hyre or wages of faith, that is begun.

Thirdly, the scripture speaks but of one justification, which glorification
follows, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them also he glorified: unless you
will have another justification to come after our glorificatio^. Likewise, Romans
4. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, ver. 7. The justification in
remission of sins does make a man blessed: Ergo, it is the only sufficient
justification. And Augustine accordingly says, In Psalm. 100.
Donando delicta fecit se debitorem coronae: by forgiving our sins he has
made himself a debtor for the crown or reward. We see heaven is promised at
the first remission of our sins: what need then any other justification?
Wherefore it is a false and blasphemous decree in the Council of Trent, that
we are not justified only by remission of our sins, sess. 6. can. 11.

THE THIRD PART, OF inherent justice.
The Papists.
THey teach, that men are not justified by the only imputation of the
righteousness Trid. Council. sess. 6. can. 11. Neither that we are formally made
just by the righteousness of Christ, can. 10. but by justice inherent in us,
whereby we are not only reputed and accounted just, but are truly called
just, and are so indeed, sess. 6. cap. 7. Rhemist. Romans cap. 2. sect. 4.

Argum. Romans 2.13. Not the hearers of the law, but the doers are justified:
Ergo, we are justified by an inherent justice, Rhemist.

Ans. 1. Saint Paul speaks of the justification of the law, and proves by
this argument, that none could be justified by the law, because none were able
to do it: And without performing of the law there was no justification by the
law: what is this to the justification of faith? 2. But if we will understand
it of the true justification of Christians: it must so be taken, as August.
says, Non vt factorib. iustificatio accedat, sed factores legis iustificatio
praecedat: De spirit. and liter. cap. 26.
not that justification does come to the doers, but that it goes before the
doers of the law.

The Protestants.
WE acknowledge an inherent justice in all faithful men and believers: but it
is imperfect, not able to justify them before God: it is no other then
sanctification, which is a fruit of justification. But that justice, whereby we
are just before God, not falsely accounted, but made truly just by God, is by
the righteousness of Christ only, which we apprehend by faith.

Argum. That justice, whereby we have peace with God, is the only justice,
whereby we are justified before God: for until we are cleared and made just
before God, it is impossible to have peace with him. But this is only the
justice of faith, Romans 5.1. Ergo, by this justice only are we just before God.

August. has a good speech, Si dixerimus, quod nihil iustitiae habemus, De
verbis. apost. ser. 16.
aduersum Dei dona me^timur: si enim iustitiae nihil habemus, nec fidem
habemus: si autem fidem habemus, iam aliquid habemus iustitiae: If we say we
have no justice at all in us, we do belie the good gifts of God: for if we have
no justice, we have no faith: But if we have faith, then have we some justice
in us. Here Augustine acknowledges no inherent justice, but only the justice
of faith:

THE FOVRTH PART, OF Justification only by faith.
The Papists.
Rhemist. Roman. 8. sect. 6. Yea, works are more principal then faith, in the
matter of justification, Iam. 2. sect. 7. Whosoever therefore says, that a man
is justified only by faith, and that nothing else is required to justification,
we pronounce him accursed, Trident. Council. sess. 6. can. 9.

Argum. 1. Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope: Ergo, not only by faith, Rhemist.

Answ. 1. We are said to be saved by hope, not because we are thereby
justified, but because by hope we do expect and wait for our salvation, which
is not yet accomplished: as it follows, verse. 25. If we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience abide for it.

Argum. 2. Galath. 5.6. Faith, that works by charity. Faith then has her
whole actiuitie and operation toward salvation of charity: It does not
therefore justify us alone, but faith and charity together, of the which
charity is the more principal, Rhemist. ibid.

Answ. We grant, that it is a working faith that does justify, as the Apostle
here says: but not as it works, but as it apprehends and believes.
Charity is a principal effect of faith, and follows it: how then can faith
receive actiuitie from charity? the effect does not give life to the cause.
You know Augustine often says, Opera non praecedunt iustificandum, sed
sequuntur iustificatum: Works go not before unto justification, but follow
in him that is already justified. But if charity should beget faith, then
works proceeding of charity, should go before faith by the which we are
justified. The Apostle says, Without faith it is impossible to please God,
Hebr. 11.6. Ergo, neither does charity please God without faith: Faith gives
actiuitie to charity; how then can it receive that which it gives?

Argum. 3. Iam. 2.24. We see how that of deeds a man is justified, and not of
faith only: Ergo, we are not justified by faith only, Rhemist.

Answ. Saint James is not contrary to his fellow Apostle Saint Paul, who
concludes, Romans 3.28. that We are justified by faith without works: that is
as much to say, as by faith only. And he excludes not only works of nature,
or of the law: but even works of grace, which God has ordained, Ephesians. 2.10.
Therefore S. James, in saying we are not justified by faith only, means not
that justification, whereby we are made just before God: for then he should
impugn Saint Paul's principles. But by iustifiyng, or being justified, he
understands nothing else but to be declared just, as well before men as in the
sight of God: which declaration is testified and showed forth by our works
proceeding of faith. Thus the word justified is taken, Romans 3.4. That thou
may be justified in thy words: that is, known or declared to be just.
Augustine also says, Iustificabuntur, id est, iusti habebuntur: They shall be
justified, that is, De spiritu and lite^^ 26
counted just: as we also say, Sanctificetur nomen, id est, sanctum habeatur:
Let thy name be sanctified, that is, reputed and acknowledged to be holy
amongst men.

The Protestants.
WE are not enemies to good works (as our adversaries falsely charge us:) nay
we preach good works, we exhort to good works, we establish good works,
teaching the right use of them out of the word of God: which is not to
concur, or be joined with faith in our justification, but to follow
necessarily and issue out of faith, as lively testimonies thereof, to the
glory of God, the example of others, and our comfort: but faith it is only,
which, as a lively instrument ordained of God, does assure us of our
justification by grace in Christ.

Argum. 1. Salvation is ascribed only to belief, Mark. 16.16. Act. 16.31. But
it is the property of faith only to believe, not of hope or charity: the
effect of hope is by patience to abide, Romans 8.25. The operations also of love
are set forth, 1. Corinthians. 13. Where amongst other, Love is said to believe all
things: that is, mutual love amongst men is not mistrustfull, but takes all
things in good part: but to believe the things of God, it is the property
only of faith: as Augustine upon those words of the Apostle, How shall they
call upon him* on whom they have not believed? In his duobus tria illa intuere:
fides credit, spes and charitas orant: In these two behold those three: faith
believes, Enchirid. cap. 7.
hope and charity pray. Faith therefore only believes, and so consequently
only justifies, Enchirid. cap. 7.

Argum. 2. Our justification and salvation is of the mere grace and mercy of
God, not at al of any merit or desert in us: Ergo, we are justified only
through faith: for it is of grace that we are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
That all is to be ascribed only to the mercy and grace of God, the Apostle
every where shows: Romans 9.12. It is not in him that wills or runs, but
in God that shows mercy. We are justified freely by grace, Romans 3.24. What
have thou that thou have not received? Augustine says, Intelligenda est gratia
Dei per Iesum Christum dominum nostrum, qua sola liberamur a malo: De corrept.
and great. c. 2.
We must understand the grace of God by Jesus Christ, by the which we are only
delivered from evil. Si quid boni est, magni, vel parui, donum tuum est,
nostrum non est nisi malum: si quid boni vnquam habui, a te recepi: If there
be any good in us, much or little, it is thy gift: nothing is ours but the
evil in us: Ergo, all good things are of God, and only of his grace: and
therefore our justification.

Argum. 3. There are many evident places, which do attribute our justification
to faith without works, Romans 3.28.11.8. Ephesians. 2.8.9. In all these places in
plain terms, We are said to be justified by faith without works. As for
those frivolous euasions, that the Apostle speaks of the first justification,
not of the second, or of the works of nature, or of the law, not of grace, we
have answered before, Quaest. 2. part. 3. artic. 3.

If they will oppose that saying of S. James. 2.24. we answer with Augustine:
In Psalm. 31.
Nec Apostoli sunt inter se aduersi: ille dicit, Abrahae opus omnibus notum in
filij immolatione: magnum opus, sed ex fide: laudo fructum boni operis, sed in
fide agnosco radicem: The Apostles are not contrary one to the other: he
says, Abraham's work was known to all in offering up his son: a great
work, but of faith: I praise the fruit, but it was rooted in faith. His
meaning then is this, that Abraham was justified, that is, declared to men to
be just by this work.

HERE FOLLOW SVCH CONTROVERSIES AS do arise between the Protestants and
Papists, about the natures of Christ.
WE have now through Gods gracious assistance entreated of all those questions,
wherein we dissent from our adversaries, both as touching all the offices of
Christ, his prophetical office, kingdom and priesthood: as likewise
concerning the benefits purchased by the death of Christ, the benefits of our
redemption, and salvation. Now, in the last place we are to prosecute such
matters in question between us, as do concern the natures of Christ. And
this treatise contains three controversies. First, of the humane nature of
Christ. Secondly, of his divine nature. Thirdly, of them both considered
together.

THE EIGHTEENTH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, CONCERNING THE HVMANE NATVRE OF CHRIST.
THis Controversy is divided into these questions. First, of the vbiquitie of
the humanity of Christ. Secondly, whether he increased in wisdom. Thirdly,
whether he suffered in soul. Fourthly, whether he descended into Hell. Fifthly,
concerning the place of Hell.

THE FIRST QVESTION, OF THE VBIQVITIE OF the body of Christ, whether his
humanity be every where.
The Papists.
THey do seem in words mightily to impugn this opinion of the Vbiquitaries,
really imparted unto the other: whereupon it follows, that the humanity of
Christ is every where, because it is verily united, and made one person with
the Godhead in Christ. This opinion the Papists would be thought to detest and
abhor: and the Jesuit bestows great pains by sundry arguments to confute
it: as by diverse places of scripture, Math. 28. He is risen, he is not here,
verse. 6. Jesus said, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad, for your sakes, that I was
not there, Ioh. 11.4. Ergo, Christ, as he is man, is not every where. Again,
the opinion of the Vbiquitaries does overthrow the article of Christ's
ascension: for if Christ's body be every where, as they hold, he can neither
ascend nor descend, Bellarm. de Incarnation. verbi. lib. 3. cap. 11.12.

The Protestants.
IT is true Catholic and sound doctrine, that the humane and divine nature
are truly united in Christ, and do make but one person, or hypostasis,
neither by confusion of the natures, nor conversion of one into the other, but
by unity of person: for as the body and soul make one man, so God and man is
one Christ. And the better to understand this mystery, we must set down these
three positions.

1. Though the two natures in Christ be so united, that they make but one
person, yet neither the natures are confounded, nor yet the properties: but as
Christ is both God and man, so there is in him a double power, will, and
understanding, one humane and created, the other divine and uncreated.

2. By reason of this union, all the excellent graces of the spirit in the
highest degree, and above measure, are given and bestowed upon the humanity of
Christ, Ioh. 3.34. but such notwithstanding, as destroy not his humane nature,
but are qualities created, as his humanity also was created.

3. There is also a mutual communication of the proprieties of both natures
each to other, though not really in respect of the natures: So we say in
Concreto, in the concrete, that is, taking the whole person of Christ, that
Christus homo, that is, the man Christ is omnipotent, is every where: and
Christus Deus, that is, Christ being God, died for us, was buried, rose again:
but in the abstract it is great blasphemy to say; that the Godhead of Christ
died, was buried, or rose again, or that the humanity of Christ is
omnipotent, or in every place.

The Vbiquitaries now hold, that there is a real communication of the
proprieties of both natures: and therefore doubt not to say, that the flesh and
body of Christ is every where in all places at once. The Papists in outward
show are enemies to that opinion: but indeed, and in truth, as it shall now
appear, they are not far off from being in the same error.

First, the same arguments which they urge against the Vbiquitaries, do
return upon themselves: for although they will not say, that Christ's body is
every where, yet they hold that it may be in a thousand places at once, yea
and more to, if the Sacrament be at once in so many places celebrated: for
Christ's body is reallie and verily in the Sacrament. But those places
alleged, He is risen, he is not here, and the rest, do prove that Christ
can be but in one place at once. This their opinion also is against the article
of Christ's ascension, and abiding in heaven till the day of judgment: for if
the same body wherein Christ sits in heaven, be in the Sacrament; either
when he is present in earth, he is absent in heaven, contrary to the scripture,
Act. 3.21. which says, The heavens must contain him till that all things be
restored: or else, if he be in both places at once, they must needs make his
body infinite, and so destroy the nature of his humanity, which can be but in
one place. If they say it is another body and flesh, which Christ by his
divine power makes to be present in the Sacrament, that were much more
absurd: for then Christ should have many bodies, and other flesh then that
which was borne of the Virgin Mary. We see then they are not far off from
the opinion of the Vbiquitaries.

Annot. Apocal. 6. sect. 1.
2. The Rhemists do approve that argument, whereby Hierome proves that the
Saints may every where be present at their bodies and monuments: They follow
the Lamb, whither soever he goes: but the Lamb is in every place: therefore
they that be with the Lamb Christ, be present every where. Whereupon it
follows, that the Lamb Christ in humanity must be every where: for how can
he be present else in innumerable places at once, where any relics or
monuments of Saints are? Neither can they excuse this vbiquitarie presence of
the humanity of Christ and the souls of Saints, by their agilitie and
celeritie: because they can quickly pass from one place to another: for if
they must be present at their monuments, whenever they are called upon, they
must of necessity be often in many places at once: for in one and the same
instant, men may resort to their monuments which are in diverse places far
asunder. Thus they are driven not only to grant an vbiquitie or omnipresence
of the humanity of Christ, but even of Saints also: which those whom they call
Vbiquitaries would never grant.

3. The body of Christ is visible and palpable now in heaven, and has a place
according to the quantity of his body: Bellarmine confesses as much, cap.
12. But that body which is in the Sacrament has none of these properties, it
is neither seen, nor felt, neither has a place according to the quantity of
a body, for they close it up in small round cakes. Wherefore destroying these
properties of the humanity of Christ, they may as well, and do in effect, take
away the other, namely, the being of Christ's body in one place: for it is as
proper to the body of Christ to be seen and felt, as to be in one place at
once.

4. Bellarmine grants, being urged with that argument, that Christ's soul was
in Paradise after his passion, and therefore not in hell: he confesses, that
it was not impossible that Christ's soul should be in two places at once, Lib.
4. de Christi anima. cap. 15. Yea he says, that Christ may, if he will, turn
all the world into bread, and the bread so made convert into his flesh; and so
his body may be as well in every place of the world, as now it is in the
Eucharist, Lib. 3. de incarnat cap. 11. What great odds now, I pray you, is
there between the opinion of the Vbiquitaries and of the Papists? but that they
say, that the body of Christ is every where ordinarily by the power of the
Godhead: the other say, his flesh is in many places at once by a miracle. The
one says, Christ's body actually is in every place: the other, that it may be
if Christ will.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER OUR SAVIOVR Christ did verily increase in knowledge
and wisdom as he was man.
The Papists.
CHrist, they say, in the very first creation of his soul, and from his
conception,

1. Christ was anointed from his mothers womb, and then the spirit of God was
upon him: for the Angels that appeared to the shepherds call him Christ, Luke
2.11. And John says, The word was made flesh, full of grace and truth, 1.
verse. 11. Therefore even then he had received all abundance of grace and
knowledge, Bellarm. de Christi anima. lib. 4.2.

Ans. 1. We grant, that our Savior was the Jesus and the Christ even from his
nativity: not that the^ he actually straightwaies entered into those offices,
or received plenarie power of all the graces of the spirit, but because he was
even from his mothers womb consecrated and appointed thereunto: for it no more
follows, because he is called Christ, that he then had his actual anointing,
then, that because he was called Jesus from his nativity, that he had actually
performed our redemption. The full anointing of the spirit was fulfilled in his
baptism, when the holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a Dove: and then
beginning to preach, in his first sermon at Nazareth, he shows the
accomplishment of the prophecy of Esaias, The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
etc. Luke 4.18.

2. Neither do the words of John import so much, as they gather. The word was
made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, full of grace and truth: which is not to be
understood of the very first assuming of the flesh, but of the dwelling of the
word in the flesh amongst us, and so appeared to be full of grace and truth.

Argum. 2. Christ was the Son of God in his very incarnation, and even then
was the humanity perfectly united to the Godhead: therefore immediately upon
this union and conjunction of both natures in one person, must needs follow
the fulness of grace in the humane nature. Again, Adam was created in perfect
wisdom, therefore much more the second Adam, Bellar. cap. 4.

Ans. 1. If presently upon the uniting of the two natures together, it had been
necessary that the humane nature of Christ should have received whatsoever by
the presence of the divine nature was to be conferred upon it: then Christ
straight ways must also both in body and soul have been glorified: for it
can not be denied, but that as the body of Christ after the resurrection
received more glory then before: so also his soul being the other part of his
humanity, was more glorified. By this it is evident, that the humanity
received not at once the fulness of all grace and glory, in the first uniting
of the Godhead.

2. Adam was created perfect in body and soul: and if Christ therefore ought
to have the fulness of the gifts of the soul in his creation as Adam had, why
ought he not also to have had a perfect body, as Adam was created withal?
Wherefore as it was no dishonor to Christ to grow up in stature of body, so
neither was it to increase in the gifts of the mind.

The Protestants.
THat Christ was even from his birth and first conception perfect God, and
perfect man; we do assuredly believe, and that in the very incarnation, the
divine and humane nature were united together. Also we grant, that the Lord
Christ might have created to himself a soul full of all wisdom and
knowledge, as he might have made himself a perfect body: but seeing it
pleased him to be borne of a woman, and first to dwell in the body of an
infant, we doubt not to say, as the scripture teaches us, that he also
Increased in wisdom.

1. He was in all things like to his brethren, only sin excepted, Heb.
2.17.4.15. Ergo, he grew up and increased in knowledge, according to the manner
of men, which may be done without sin.

2. The scripture says plainly, which cannot lie, that Jesus grew up and
increased in wisdom and stature, Luke 2.52. And lest they should answer,
that this increasing was only in the opinion of men: it follows, And in
favor with God and men: he increased in wisdom, stature and favor, not
only in show before men, but in truth before God: and as verily and indeed he
grew up in stature, so also in wisdom.

3. Christ testifies of himself, That neither the Angels nor the Son of
man, as he is man, knows of the day or hour of his coming to judgment, but
the father only, Mark. 13.31. Ergo, Christ as he was man had not at once all
fulness of knowledge. Bellarmine thus expounds this place, Filius dicitur
nescire, quia non sciebat ad dicendum alijs: The Son is said not to know,
because he knew it, not to reveal it to others, but to keep it secret to
himself.

Ans. First, then by the same reason, the Angels do know it also: but that
they are charged not to declare it to men: for the text says, that neither the
Angels, nor the Son of man knows the time. Secondly, in this sense also the
father might be said not to know it: for neither has he revealed it to any.
Lastly, although we do affirm according to the scripture, that the child
Jesus did increase in the gifts of the mind, as he did in the stature of his
body: yet we do put great difference between him, and all other children that
ever came into the world: for as his conception and birth were not after the
common manner; (for he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and brought forth
without travel and labor: as August. says, Nec concipiendo libidine^, nec
pariendo perpessa est dolore^: In conceauing she felt no carnal desire; in
bearing she suffered no pain:) So likewise, De 5. haeres. cap. 5.
the holy and blessed babe, in the constitution both of body and soul
excelled the common condition of all other infants: for as he was void of
original sin, so he was without the effects and fruits thereof, which do
show themselves in children: for neither suffered he the like pangs and
infirmities in body, being in his infancy, as other children do, that are
vexed and tormented in body: neither was he subject to the unreasonable and
brutish motions of the mind, which are in children. Therefore Augustine says,
Hanc ignorantiam and animi infirmitatem, quam videmus in paruulis, nullo modo
fuerim in Christo paruulo suspicatus: This kind of ignorance and infirmity of
mind, which is in children, I cannot think to have been in the babe Christ.
And what ignorance and infirmity he means, afterward he expresses, De
peccat. merit. and remiss. 29.
Cum motibus irrationabilibus perturbantur, nulla ratione, nullo imperio
cohibentur: When their brutish and unreasonable motions come upon them, they
are ruled neither by reason, nor any other government. These infirmities both
in body and soul we deny to have been in Christ: and yet we doubt not to
conclude, that, as Christ grew in stature of body: as Augustine says, Ibid.
Mutationes aetatum perpeti voluit ab ipsa exorsus infantia: He passed through
the ages of man's life, beginning with his infancy: so likewise, as the
scripture says, he increased in wisdom, Luke 2.52.

AN APPENDIX, OF THE MANNER of Christ's birth.
The Papists.
THey say, Christ came out of his mothers womb, the clausure not stirred: as
John. 20.19. and as he passed through the stone, arising out of the Sepulcher,
Rhemist. annot. John. 20. sect. 2. Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 9.

The Protestants.
1. IT can never be proved, that Christ's body came either through the wood of
the doors, or through the stone of the Sepulcher, or clausure of his mothers
womb. And concerning the last, the scripture is evident to the contrary,
where it is said, that our Savior Christ was presented to the Lord, according
as it is written: Every male that first opens the matrix, etc. Luke 2.29.

2. We grant, that both the birth of Christ, his rising out of the grave, his
coming in, the doors being shut, was strange and miraculous, because one
substance gave place to another for a time, and after the passing of his body,
the place remained whole and shut as before: but not in the very instant of
passing. The red sea gave place to the Israelites while they passed, and closed
together again: so did the prison doors open miraculously to the Apostles,
Act. 5.19. An incredulous Jew seeing the ear of Malchus so soon healed,
would not have thought that Peter's sword went between it and his head, as we
are sure it did: So we say concerning the birth of Christ, that the place gave
way while he passed, and closed up afterward again as before. Augustine
brings in Christ, thus speaking, Ego viam meo itineri praeparaui: and a
little after, transitu meo illius non est corrupta virginitas: De 5. haeres.
cap. 5.
I made a way for my self out of the womb: neither by my passage was her
virginity lost. Christ had a way out of his mothers womb: but if the clausure
had not given place, there had been no way made. Epistol 57.
Again he says, Spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt, and quia
nusquam erunt, nec erunt: Take away space of place from bodies, and they shall
be no where, and if they be no where, then are they not at all. But the Papists
in saying that Christ went through the very substance and corpulence of things,
do take away from his body his proper place: for two substances cannot be in
one place, and therefore they destroy the nature of his body.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER CHRIST suffered in soul.
The Papists.
THey utterly deny, that Christ felt any pain or anguish in soul upon the
Rhemist. Math. 27. sect. 3.

1. The scripture does ascribe the work of our redemption and reconciliation
only to the blood of Christ upon the Cross, Coloss. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.7. Ergo,
the death of the body of Christ, without any further anguish in soul, was
sufficient, Bellarm. de Christi anima. lib. 4. cap. 8.

Ans. 1. By the blood of Christ upon the Cross, must needs be understood all
the parts and circumstances of his passion, both his sufferings in body and
soul: for if it should be understood properly, the blood of Christ only were
sufficient, and so his body and flesh should be excluded: and if the shedding
of his blood be taken simply, we shall find, that it was no part of his death:
for his side was pierced, whereout issued water and blood, after he had yielded
up the ghost, and all the torments of death were past: yea after he had uttered
these words upon the Cross, It is finished, that is, he had paid the full
ransom for mankind, John. 19. verse. 30.34. Wherefore by his blood must be
understood, by a Synecdoche, when one part is taken for the whole, all the
other pains and torments which he suffered in his flesh.

Secondly, yea and the pains of the soul to are by that speech fitly
expressed: for the blood of every creature, is the life thereof, Genes. 9.4.
Leuit. 17.14. But the soul is the life of man: Ergo, not improperly by the
shedding of Christ's blood, even the vexation, and at the last the expiration of
his soul, and so his whole passion both in body and soul is signified.
Wherefore as in those places alleged, we read the blood of Christ, or the
blood of the Cross, so otherwhere in more general terms the Apostles call
it, The dying of Christ, 2. Cor. 4.10. And the sufferings of Christ, 1. Pet.
4.13.

Argum. 2. If Christ, when he cried out upon the Cross, O God my God, why have
thou forsaken me? had felt the wrath of God, and despaired of his help, he
should most grievously have sinned: Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. 1. It cannot be, that Christ thus cried out for the pain of bodily
death: for then he had been of greater infirmity then many of his servants,
that in the midst of extreme torments never complained. And therefore it must
needs be the burden of the wrath and curse of God, that he endured for our
sin, that made him so to cry out upon the cross.

2. Neither does it follow that Christ uttered those words in despair, but
only to show the great anguish, trouble, and perturbation of his spirit, being
upon the cross considered now as a mere man, his divine nature and power
repressing and hiding it self for a time: and although in the vexation of his
soul he thus cried out, yet he was not altogether left comfortless in
spirit, in that he said, My God, my God: which words must needs declare an
inward confidence and assured trust in God.

The Protestants.
WE hold, it was necessary for our redemption, that Christ should not only
suffer bodily pains, but also feel the very anguish and horror of soul: that
as by his death we are redeemed both body and soul, so he should pay the
ransom for both in his body and soul.

1. That our Savior suffered great anguish in soul, the scripture testifies:
for before his suffering in his body upon the cross, being in the garden, he
says of himself, My soul is heavy unto death: at the same time being
grievously troubled: he sweat water and blood: and last of all, hanging upon
the cross he cried out. By those effects it is evidently proved, that there
was a greater fear in him, then of the death of the body: for many holy
Martyrs have without any show of such grief endured horrible torments in the
flesh, and therefore consequently it follows, that those things proceeded
from the grief of his soul, as the Apostle shows: Heb. 5.7. He offered up
prayers with strong crying and tears, to him that was able to save him from
death, and was heard in that which he feared. If it had been only fear of
bodily death, what need such strong cries with tears? And the text is plain,
that he was heard, that is, saved from the death which he feared: but he was
not saved from the bodily death: for he died and gave up the ghost: wherefore
it was the great horror of soul that caused him to fear.

Bellarm. answers for all this, that it was the bodily death which he feared:
but not of necessity, because he could not otherwise choose, but willingly, he
would abide this brunt also of the fear and sorrow of death: Voluit poenam
maeroris and timoris subire vt redemptio esset copiosae. And herein he
exceeds all other men that have suffered: for they are rid from fear,
because God gives them greater comfort, and they regard not the present
torment: but Christ willingly and of his own accord drew himself into this
agony of fear.

Ans. 1. That Christ as he was God, had determined and set it down to dye for
the world, it is not to be doubted of: but that as he was man, he had not a
desire to escape death, as being ignorant of Gods determination, it is contrary
to the Scriptures: which make mention of his earnest prayer that he made
thrice, that the cup might pass, Math. 26. Therefore Christ willingly entered
not into that agony of fear in his humane desire, but as submitting himself
and his will in obedience to his fathers will.

2. He is contrary to him self, in saying that Christ's bodily sufferings were
sufficient for our redemption, and yet grants, that Christ, vt redemptio
esset copiosa, That our redemption might be more full, would abide also the
smart of the fear of death: If he feared but the bodily death, as he says,
yet was he troubled in soul, and therefore besides bodily pain, he suffered
anguish in his soul.

Argum. 2. Act. 2.24. Whom God has raised up, says S. Peter, and loosed the
sorrows of death, for it was impossible that he should be holden of it: Ergo,
Christ suffered the sorrows of death, and felt the wrath of God, which caused
those sorrows. The vulgar Latin has the sorrow, of hell (solutis dolorib.
infern^) which pincheth the Papists very sore: for how could Christ be loosed
from the sorrows of hell, if first he had not been held of them?

That which Bellarmine answers, that Christ loosed the sorrows of hell for
others, which were to be delivered, is but a poor shift: for the text is
plain, It was impossible that he, that is, Christ himself, should be still
holden of it: it is spoken of the holding of Christ and not of any other.

Argu. 3. The prophet Esaias says, He was wounded for our sins, and broken for
our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes are we healed, Esaias 53.5. But we could have no peace with God, unless
all the punishment due unto us for our sin, had been undertaken by Christ:
wherefore seeing we by our sin, had deserved to be punished both in body and
soul, it was necessary, that our redeemer should be wounded and broken wholly
for us: for how else by his stripes should we wholly be healed?

Augustine thus reasons against Felicianus the Arrian, and proves that
Christ took not only humane flesh, but an humane soul. Si totus homo peri^^,
etc. If man wholly were lost, says he, he had wholly need of a Savior, and if
he wholly needed a Savior, Christ by his coming wholly redeemed him:
therefore Christ took upon him the whole nature of man, both body and soul:
for if, since the whole man has sinned, Christ only had taken our flesh, the
soul of man should still remain guilty of punishment: haec Augustine cont.
Felician. cap. 13. By the same reason we prove it was necessary that Christ
should suffer both in body and soul: by the which Augustine infers, that
Christ took both body and soul: he did assume them both, to redeem both: But
he redeemed us, not in being borne for us, or walking, or preaching here upon
earth, (although these were preparations to his sacrifice) but by dying and
suffering for us: Ergo, he suffered both in body and soul the punishment due
unto sinners. They grant that Christ suffered anguish in soul, yet not
properly in the soul, but only for the bodily death, which was no part of the
punishment of the soul: which consisted in the very sense and feeling of Gods
wrath, and the torments of hell due unto mankind for their sins. This
punishment of the soul ought also necessarily to have been undertaken by
Christ, being the redeemer both of body and soul.

THE FOVRTH PART, WHETHER CHRIST descended in soul into hell, to deliver the
Patriarchs.
The Papists.
THey do believe that Christ according to his soul went down to hell, to
Rhemist. Act. 2. sect. 12.

Argum. 2. He that ascended, is he that descended first into the lowest parts
of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9. that is, into hell, the which is the lowest place in
the earth, Bellarm. cap. 12.

Ans. 1. The earth it self is in respect of the world, the lowest part, so
that here one part of the earth is not to be compared with another: but the
whole earth in respect of the high heavens has the name of the lower parts:
so is it taken Psalm. 139. ver. 15. Thou have fashioned me beneath or in the
lower parts of the earth: But David (I trust) they will not say, was borne in
hell, because he speaks of the lower parts of the earth, consul. Bez. in
hunc locum. So that by the descending of Christ into the lowest parts of the
earth, is meant nothing else, but the lowest and extremest degree of his
abasing and humiliation, Fulke annot. in hunc locum, as S. Paul says, That he
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
Philip. 2.7.

The Protestants.
THat Christ our Savior by the virtue of his death, did overcome hell and the
devil, we do verily believe, which may be called a descent into hell: that he
also suffered the torments of hell upon the cross, and so descended into hell
for us, to abide that bitter pain which we had deserved to suffer eternally,
we do also hold and teach: for what rather may be called hell, then the
anguish of soul, which he suffered, when he being God, yet complained that he
was forsaken of God Furthermore, if descending into hell, be taken according to
the Hebrew phrase, For entering into the state of the dead: so we also grant,
that Christ descended into hell, Fulk Act. 2. sect. 11. But for the descending
of Christ into hell, after your sense, to deliver the Patriarchs from thence,
when you can prove it out of Scripture, we will yield unto you.

1. The soul of Christ which he committed into his Fathers hands, was in
Paradise, where he promised the thief should be with him, Luke 22.43. How then
could his soul be three days in hell, as you affirm, from the time of his
death to his resurrection? Fulke Luke 11. sect. 4. Bellarm. answers, that it
was not impossible, that the soul of Christ should be in two places at once,
cap. 15. which is an answer not worthy to be answered: for who has taught
them so boldly to build their fantasies upon Gods power, having no warrant
not assurance of his will? May not the Vbiquitaries by the same reason prove the
omnipresence of Christ's humanity, because he is able to make his soul and body
to be in many places at once, as well as in two: and so consequently by his
power, which is infinite as well in all places, as in many?

2. We believe that the Patriarchs and godly Fathers were in heaven or
Paradise, as well before the resurrection of Christ as after: for in as much as
they were justified by faith in his blood, they received the same crown and
reward of righteousness that we do, being justified by the same means. This we
have proved more at large, controu. 9. quest. 1. Wherefore seeing there were
none in hell, which they call Limbus Patrum, to be delivered, there was no such
cause why Christ should descend into hell. Therefore he descended not to
deliver the Patriarchs that remained in darkness.

3. They agree not among themselves about this article of Christ's descension,
to deliver the Patriarchs: Andradius says, it cannot be proved out of
Scripture: but Bellarmine and our Rhemists do bring their best arguments for
it out of Scripture: they allege also diverse causes of his descension: the
Roman Catechism renders two reasons, one, to set the Patriarchs at liberty,
the other, to manifest the power and virtue of his death in hell: but that, S.
Paul says, was sufficiently manifested and made known upon the cross, Colos.
2.15. Thomas Aquinas beside these, adds a third, that as Christ died for us
to free us from death, so it was convenient that he should descend into hell,
to deliver us from the descension into hell: as though Christ by his death did
not fully deliver us from eternal damnation: Some other hold, that Christ
went thither to suffer the torments of hell, that he might fully pay our
ransom by suffering the whole punishment due unto mankind: but this is a
very gross and erroneous opinion: for Christ suffered fully in body and soul
upon the Cross, when he cried, Consummatum est, It is finished: that is, he
had fully appeased the wrath of God by his sufferings.

Augustine says plainly, that he knew not what good Christ wrought for the
just souls that were in the bosom of Abraham, when he descended into hell: a
quib. eum secundum beatifica^ praesentiam diuinitatis, Epistol. 99.
nunquam video recessisse: From whom I find he was never absent or withdrew
himself by the blessed presence of his divine power: Ergo, in his judgment
Christ descended not to deliver the Patriarchs. And concerning the soul of
Christ, he writes flatly: Si mortuo corpore anima latronis ad Paradisum mox
vocatur, quempiam adhuc tam impium credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima
Saluatoris nostri triduo illo corpor^ae mortis apud inferos custodiae
mancipetur? If the soul of the thief straightway being gone from the body,
was called up to heaven: is there any man so wicked, to say that the soul of
our Savior was kept three days in the prison of hell? By his sentence then,
the soul of Christ passed straight to heaven, and descended not to hell.

AN APPENDIX, CONCERNING the place of Hell.
The Papists.
THe place where damned spirits are tormented, they say, is about the center
of the earth, the lowest of all places, and nothing lower then it, Bellarm. de

Their Limbus Patrum, the place of darkness, where the Fathers were before
Christ, is, say they, in the highest part, and as it were the brimme of hell,
Rhemist. Luke 1^.22. Between these two places there is a great gulf or space,
and there is Purgatory, Rhemist. Luke 16. sect. 8. Wherefore they conclude,
veros inferos esse loca subterranea: That the subterrestriall and infernal
places do properly make hell, Bellarm. cap. 8. And so hell should be properly
a place of punishment: because of the far distance from heaven: whereas not
so much the distance of place, as the absence of Gods spirit, and loss of his
favor, makes it a place of horror and misery.

Argum. 1. Math. 12.40. As Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly
of the Whale, so the son of man must be in the heart of the earth: but the
grave is not in the heart, but the brimme of the earth: Ergo, we must needs
understand Hell, which is in the midst of the earth. Bellarm. cap. 12.

Ans. 1. This place cannot otherwise be applied, then to signify the burial of
Christ, and his abode in the grave, and his rising again the third day: of his
soul it cannot properly be meant: for Christ says, he will give them the
sign of Jonas in himself: but a sign is conspicuous, visible and apparent:
how could then the descending of his soul be a sign unto them, which they
knew not, neither could see? But the laying of his body into the grave, and the
remaining there to the third day, they were all eye witnesses of: Also there is
great affinity between the two Greek words (...), a sign, which is there
used, Math. 12.40. and (...), which signifies sepulchrum, a grave, the one
word being fitly derived of the other: what better, (...), then could he give
them, then, (...), his own grave or Sepulcher? Secondly, to be in the heart of
the earth, is nothing else but to be within the earth, according to the Hebrew
phrase, as Exodus 15.8. The heart of the Sea, that is, within the Sea: So Christ's
body was in the earth, it lay hid as it were in the bowels of the earth.

3. This exposition is against themselves: for if Christ went down to the very
heart and midst of the earth, which is the center, then he descended to the
place of the damned: for neither Limbus Patrum, nor Purgatory, are in the
center or lowest part of the earth by their opinion: but they themselves hold
the contrary: for they say, that Christ by descending, delivered souls out of
the two uppermost hels, Limbus, and Purgatory, but not out of the nethermost
hell, which is the place of the damned, Rhemist. Luke 16. sect. 8. Also it
should follow of this their interpretation, that the soul of Christ was as
long in hell, as his body in the grave, which is against the opinion of many
Papists.

Argum. 2. Luke 8.31. The Devils desired Christ, that he would not send them
into the deep: what is that else but the lowest region of the earth, where hell
is, which Saint Paul calls the lowest parts of the earth? Bellarmine.

Ans. We deny not but that God has prepared, and that there is a place of
unspeakable torments ordained for the devil and his angels, and all damned
souls: but that this place should be in the center of the earth, the places
alleged prove not: for the word Abyssus translated, the deep, is sometime
taken figuratively in a metaphore, as Romans 11.33. O the deepenes of the
wisdom of God: the word is (...), not much varying in signification from
abyssus: so the place of their punishment is said to be a great depth, that
is, a place of unsearchable and unspeakable misery and horror. Neither must
this word abyssus, of necessity be referred to the earth, for there are abyssi
maris, the depths of the Sea, Exodus 15.8. as well as of the earth.

The lower places which S. Paul speaks of Ephesians. 4. may be either understood
generally of the whole earth, which is pars mundi infima, the lowest part of
the world, or else of the great abasing of Christ* from heaven to earth, being
God, to become a servant: as also the grave of Christ was that lowest part of
the earth: for the Apostle says in the comparatiue, (...)* not (...), the
lower, not the lowest: and so your vulgar Latin translateth, inferiora, not
infima terrae: but hell is the lowest part, the grave is said to be the lower.

The Protestants.
THat there is a local place of torment prepared for the devil and his
angels, we doubt not, being so taught in the Scripture, Math. 25.41. A place of
darkness, 2. Pet. 2.4. Far distant from the heavenly mansions of the blessed,
Luke 16.26. Neither do we deny but that it may be in the earth, or wheresoever
else it pleases God: but wheresoever hell is, there is but one: that division of
hell into three or four regions, we utterly condemn, as a mere devise of man
without Scripture: and this we say, that the place of hell causes not the
torment, but the wrath and curse of God: for even out of hell God may make a man
to feel the torments of hell, as we doubt not but our Savior Christ did for
us and our redemption upon the cross.

Argum. 1. It is possible to feel the pain of hell in the soul, although not
^n the proper and appointed place of hell: as Job complains, The arrows of
the Almighty are in me, the venime thereof does drink up my spirit, and the
terrors of God fight against me. And therefore he says, his grief was heavier
then the sand of the Sea, Job. 6.4.14. Job felt even the hell of conscience in
himself for the time: yea our Savior bare the burden of his fathers wrath
upon the Cross, as we have showed before: Ergo, it is not the place that
makes hell.

Argu. 2. Hell is nothing else as the Scripture defines it, but to be cast into
utter darkness, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 25.30.22.13.
The darkness causes weeping and horrible gnashing of teeth, the unspeakable
punishment both of body and soul: this darkness is not the absence of the
light of the sun: for neither shall the Saints in heaven have that light,
because they need it not, Apoc. 22.5. And it shall be a place of darkness to the
damned angels, which have no use of the Sun light: they also are reserved in
chains of darkness, Jude 6. as they are no material chains, so neither is it
an outward darkness: but the absence of Gods favor and the light of his
countenance: as the people are said to have sit in darkness, before the light
of the gospel by the preaching of Jesus Christ, did shine unto them, Math.
4.16. But they much more shall be and are kept in darkness, that are condemned to
hell, where they feel nothing but the horror of Gods wrath, his eternal and
endless curse, with unspeakable torments now in soul, and afterward both in
body and soul, without all comfort or hope of refreshing, utterly excluded
from the presence of God: wherefore it is not the place, but the wrath of God,
and absence of his spirit, that causes such endless and unspeakable
punishment.

Argu. 3. As for your distinction of hell, the brim whereof you say is Limbus
patrum, the middle part, Purgatory, the lowest and nethermost hell it self,
the place of the damned, in Augustines time it was not known: for first that
the bosom of Abraham was part of hell, he utterly denies: Apparet non esse
membru^ inferorum, tantae illius foelicitatis ^inum: That bosom of so great
bliss can be no member or part of hell, Epist. 99. Again Purgatory he utterly
refuses, acknowledging but two places: heaven for the faithful, hell for the
damned and unbelievers: Tertium locum penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in
scripturis sanctis inuenimus. A third place we are utterly ignorant of, yea we
find in holy Scriptures that it is not. August, hypognost.

THE NINETEENTH CONTROVERSY, OF MATTERS WHICH ARE IN QVESTION concerning the
divine nature of Christ.
THis controversy contains three Questions. First, whether Christ be (...),
God of him self. Secondly, whether he be mediator as God, or man, or as both.
Thirdly, whether he have by his deserts purchased any thing for himself.

THE FIRST PART, WHETHER CHRIST be (...), God of him self.
The Papists.
Calvin with blasphemy, for saying, that Christ is God of himself as well as
the Father, Rhemist. Ioh. 1. sect. 3.

Argum. The word was with God, to wit, the son is with and of the father, and
not the father of the son: Ergo, the son is God, with and of his father:
Rhemist. ibid.

Ans. This place proves, that the son of God, as he is the son, is of God:
for to be the son of God, the word, the wisdom of God, 1. Cor. 1.30. His
image, Heb. 1.3. do belong unto his person: So then as he is the son, the
wisdom of God, or the word, so he is of God, namely in respect of his person:
but as the son is God, he is of himself, neither takes he his essence but
person only of his Father.

The Protestants.
THat we may fully know the state of this question, we must first set down
certain propositions* First, we do worship one eternal, omnipotent, and only
wise God, one and the same in power, essence, eternity: but three in person,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: there is the same nature, essence,
and deity of them all, though they be distinguished in person: As there is one
nature of the light, the heat thereof and the shining brightness, Lucis,
splendoris, caloris, as Augustine puts the example: which three differ
amongst themselves in property and quality, yet have one and the self same
nature and substance: God the father is as the light, Iam. 1.17. God the Son
is as the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3. God the holy Ghost is as the heat
or fire, Heb. 12.29. Thus these three are one in nature and essence, but three
in person.

2. There is somewhat communicable to them all, as the Godhead and divine power
and nature: Somewhat incommunicable, as the several proprieties of the persons:
for it is proper only to the father to beget, proper to the Son only to be
begotten, proper only to the holy Ghost to proceed from them both. There is
no essential difference in the Trinity: for there is one essence and divine
nature common to them all. But there is both a real and rational difference:
The persons differ one from another really, though not essentially. But the
persons differ only rationally or in respect from the essence of the Godhead:
as the father and the son amongst men differ not essentially, for they are
both men. But they are really, verily, and indeed distinguished; for it is one
thing to be the father, another to be the son: yet from their own essence
their persons only differ in respect and relation, not verily, non re, sed
ratione: for the father is a man, the son also is a man: but in one respect
he is a father, and in an other he is man: so likewise of the son, yet one
and the same, is both father and man; one and the same is both son and man:
so is it in the Trinity. Now to the point of the question, which we have in
hand. The Son therefore in the blessed Trinity is begotten of his fathers
essence, and has the whole essence of his father, not by propagation,
partition, profluence, but only by communication. The son is not (...),
Son of himself, because he is son of the father: But he is (...), that is,
very God of himself: The essence or Godhead of the Son is of himself, not of
the father: for it is one and the selfsame essence, which the father has. He
is indeed, Deus de Deo, lumen de lumine, God of God, light of light: But not
as he is God, is he of God, but as he is the Son. It is one thing for the
person of the Son to be begotten of the essence of the Father, which we
grant: another thing, for the essence of the Son to be begotten, which we
must not yield to. So we conclude, that Christ as he is the Son, is of God
the Father, as he is God, he is of himself.

Argum. 1. The essence of the Father is of himself, not begotten of any: but
the essence and Deity of the Son is the same and all one with his Fathers.
Ergo, it is not begotten of any other. Again, he is not God whose essence is
not of himself: therefore if Christ's essence be not of himself, he should not
be God.

Argum. 2. Our Savior himself says, As the Father has life in himself, so
he has given to the Son also to have life in himself, John 5.26. The Son
then has life in himself: Ergo, he is GOD of himself. Augustine upon these
words writes: Non quasi mutuatur vitam, nec quasi particeps vitae, In Johan.
tract. 19.
sed ipse vitam in se habet, vt ipsa vita sibi sit ipse: He did not as it were
borrow life of his father, neither is made partaker of life, but he has life
in himself, he is life unto himself. But lest any man should thus mistake the
words of the text, that because the Father gave to the Son to have life in
himself, therefore he gave him to be God: (for to have life in himself is to
be God) Augustine thus expounds them: Dedit filio vitam habere in se,
breuiter dixerim, genuit filium: He gave to his Son to have life in himself,
in few words, He begat his Son. As if we should say, the Father which has
life in himself, that is, is God, gave to his Son to have life in himself,
that is, begat God the Son: he begat him not as he was God, but as he was his
Son: yet because of the near uniting and conjunction of the person with the
Godhead and divine power to have life in himself, which really cannot be
distinguished, but only in respect, as we have showed: the Father is said also
to give unto the Son to be God, and to have life in himself, not directly or
properly but obliquely and by a consequent, because his Son whom he begat
from all eternity, must also necessarily be God.

And that it cannot be the proper meaning, that God the Father gave to the
Son power to have life in himself, it appears by the words themselves: for
as the Father has life in himself, even so has he given to the Son: but
the Father has life in himself, without beginning from any other. Ergo, so
has the Son.

There should else be a contrariety and repugnancie in the speech: for if
Christ received life from his father, he could not have it in himself. It must
therefore of necessity be understood of the person in the Trinity, not of the
divine essence. And so we determine that it is true in the concrete, in
concreto, if we say, Deus Pater genuit Deum Filium: God the Father begat God
the Son, but not in abstracto, Deitas Patris genuit Deitatem Filium, that the
Godhead of the Father begat the Godhead of the Son. But in respect of his
person only as he is the Son the second person in Trinity, so is he
begotten and has his beginning of God. But in respect of his divine nature as
he is God, he is begotten of none, but of himself as God the Father is.

THE SECOND PART, WHETHER CHRIST be our mediator, as he is man only, or as
he is both GOD and man.
The Papists.
Rhem. Heb. 5. sect. 4 His obedience, sacrifice, prayer, satisfaction, entering
into the heavens, was all performed by and in his manhood only, Secundum formam
serui, as he was in the form of a servant, not secundum formam Dei, as he was
in the form of God, Bellarm. de Christo, lib. 1. cap. 1.

Argum. 1. If he were priest as he is God, he should be inferior and not equal
to God, and so be Gods priest and not his Son: for he to whom sacrifice is
offered, is greater then he that offers it, Rhemist. ibid.

Answ. It follows not, that because Christ is our priest and mediator as God
and man, that therefore he should perform all the duties of the Priesthood as
he was God: all the parts of his priesthood that required obedience, service,
homage, subjection, as were his sufferings and sacrifice, he exercised as man:
but the authority of reconciling us to God, he wrought both as God and man.

Argum. 2. There is one God, and one Mediator of God and men, the man Jesus
Christ, 1. Timoth. 2.5. Why says the Apostle, The man Jesus Christ, but to
signify, that according to his manhood only he is our Mediator. Bellarm. cap.
3.

Ans. 1. You may as well conclude out of this place, that the Mediator is only
man and not GOD, as that he is mediator only as man and not as GOD: but if
out of these words it may be proved, that the Mediator is both GOD and man,
as it necessarily follows, (for how else can he be a Mediator of God and
men?) it does as well follow that he is Mediator both as God and as man.
Indeed the Apostle says, The man Jesus Christ, not God and man, for the one
he had said before, There is one God; in that speech including our Savior
Christ, who is one God with his Father. Secondly, what Saint Paul's meaning is,
it appears in the next verse, who gave himself a ransom, verse. 6. As Christ
therefore gave himself a ransom, so is he Priest and Mediator: but he gave
himself as he was God; as he was man, he was given: Ergo, as God he is
Mediator.

The Protestants.
IN the office of the Priesthood two things must be considered, a ministry,
and an authority: In respect of the ministerial part Christ performed the
office of his priesthood as man, but in respect of authority of entering into
the holiest place, and reconciling us to God, which was the principal part of
his Priesthood, he did perform it as the Son of God, as the Lord and maker
of the house, and not as a servant. And so we hold that Christ neither
according to his humanity alone, nor his Godhead alone, but that whole Christ
is a Priest, both as God and man.

Argum. 1. Saint Paul says, God was in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself, 2. Corinthians. 5.19. Ergo, Christ, as God, is our reconciler and
mediator. Again, Christ as he is without Father and mother, has no beginning
of his days, nor end of his life, so is he a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech: but Christ as he is God and man has neither father nor mother:
as he is God has no beginning of days, and in his whole person no end of his
life, therefore as God and man he is a Priest of Melchisedechs order.

Argum. 2. Saint Paul says, The law was given by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator, Galath. 3.19. But then Christ was God only: Ergo, he is Mediator
also as God. Bellarmine says, that he is called Mediator, because that person
was appointed afterward to be Mediator: But the text is plain, that he then
actually performed the office of a Mediator, so much as pertayned to his
Godhead: for the Law was given in the hand of a Mediator, which kind of
speech shows a present execution of the Mediatorship.

Augustine says, Non mediator homo praeter diuinitatem, diuina humanitas,
Homil. de. ouib. ca. 12
and humana diuinitas mediatrix: The man Christ is not mediator beside his
divine nature, the divine humanity, and the humane divinity, is the
Mediatrix. Ergo, Christ Mediator both as God and man.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER CHRIST merited for himself.
The Papists.
Rhemist. annot Hebr. 2.1.

Argum. 1. Philip. 2.9. He humbled himself unto the death of the Cross,
wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name above all
names. Ergo, Christ merited his exaltation, Rhemist. in hunc locum.

Ans. 1. This place shows a sequel of the exaltation of Christ after his
humiliation, it makes not one the cause of another, as our Savior himself
says, Luke 24.26. Christ ought to have suffered, and so enter into his glory.
Secondly, the exaltation which the Apostle here speaks of, is the fame, which
God chalengeth to himself, Isai. 45.22. Every knee shall bow unto me, and
every tongue shall swear by me. But it were most gross to affirm, that the
divine power and glory can be merited: Christ has his divinity by nature, and
not by merit.

The Protestants.
IT is not in any wise to be thought, that Christ merited his glory, which is
due to him in respect of his divinity: but that by the glorious work of our
redemption, he has declared himself to be a person worthy of all honor and
glory, Apocal. 5.9. the place is so to be understood.

Argum. 1. If Christ had respect unto himself in his sufferings, to gain or
merit any thing for himself, his love should greatly be obscured and
darkened, which Saint Paul so greatly commends, In that he died for his
enemies, Romans 5.10. For now should not his love be whole and entire toward
us, as though for our cause he only had died: But it is now a divided and
half love: for he died, as they say, partly to merit for himself, partly to
merit for us. But the scripture speaks clean contrary, John 17.9. For their
sakes sanctify I my self: he says not, partly for their sakes, partly for
mine own.

Argum. 2. All glory that Christ has, was from everlasting due to his person,
because he is the eternal Son of God: As he himself says, John 17.5. And
now glorify me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee,
before the world was, and this glory was due unto Christ so soon as he was
incarnate by the right of his Godhead. Hebr. 1. When he brings in his first
begotten Son into the world, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship
him. And the Rhemists themselves confess, in their Annotat. upon these words,
that straight upon Christ's descending from heaven, it was the duty of Angels
to worship him. Ergo, he merited not his glorification by his death, which was
due unto him even at his first incarnation.

Argum. 3. If Christ merited his own glorification, then he also merited the
hypostaticall union, that his manhood should be joined to his Godhead in
unity of person; for his glory, majesty, and power given to his manhood, does
issue and arise from the uniting of his Godhead therewith in one person: but
his humanity deserved not to be united to the Godhead: Nemo tam caecus est,
says Augustine, No man is so blind, that he dare say, De corrept. and great.
cap. 11.
that Christ by his well living merited to be called the Son of God. And he
proves it out of the first of Luke verse. 35. Therefore shall that holy thing
be called the Son of God: not for any works going before, but because the
holy Ghost came upon her. Wherefore the divine glory which Christ has, was
not merited, but his own it was from the beginning, which glory the humane
nature in Christ is made partaker of, not for any merit, but because it is
united to the Godhead in the same person, through the abundant and unspeakable
grace and love of God unto mankind, which of his free grace rather took unto
himself the nature of men, then of Angels. Wherefore Christ by his perfect
obedience and blessed sacrifice, has merited abundantly for us, remission of
sins, and eternal life: but by his merits he has gained nothing for
himself: neither had he any respect to the bettering of his own estate in his
sufferings, but only to pay a ransom for us.

THE TWENTIETH GENERAL CONTROVERSY, CONCERNING THE COMING OF CHRIST TO
judgment: which appertains to his whole person, as he is both God and man.
THis controversy has two parts: First, concerning the signs which must
come to pass before his appearing. Secondly, of the time and manner of his
appearing. The first part contains three questions: Frst whether the Gospel
be already preached to the whole world. Secondly, whether Henoch and Elias
shall come in the flesh, before the day of judgment. Thirdly, of the great
persecutions toward the end of the world.

THE FIRST QVESTION, WHETHER the Gospel be already preached thorough the world.
The Papists.
Bellar. de Roman p^ntif. lib. 3. cap. 4.

Argum. 1. Math. 24.14. Christ says, This Gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached thorough the whole world, for a witness unto all nations, and then
shall the end come. The end of the world shall immediately follow the general
preaching of the Gospel: which if it has been performed, it is most like to
have been done in the Apostles time: then the world should have ended long
ago, Bellarm. ibid.

Ans. This word, Then, does not always in the scripture signify a certain
and definite time presently to follow, as Math. 9.1. Then he entered into a
ship, and so forth. Luke also sets forth the same story, cap. 5.18. Then
brought they a man lying in a bed: But in saying Then, they have not relation
to the same time; for they keep not the same order, in rehearsing the story:
Matthew sets down one thing, that was immediately done by our Savior Christ
before, and Luke another. And so is the word, Then, used in other places, not
to describe a consequence of time, with relation to that which went before,
August. de consensu Euangel. 43.
but absolutely without any such respect to name the time present only, wherein
any thing is done. So, tunc, then, signifies as much as in illo tempore, in
that time, not which shall immediately follow upon the general publishing of
the Gospel, but which God has appointed. We must also consider who it is, that
says, Then, namely, God himself, with whom a thousand years is as one day,
and one day as a thousand years. Christ (Then) may come many hundred years
after, and yet it shall be true, that then shall the end be. But we rather take
the first sense, that (Then) is here taken indefinitely, as it is thorough the
whole chapter, as verse. 21. Then shall be great tribulation, which cannot have
relation to that which he spoke of before; for then it must be understood of
the destruction of Jerusalem: but our Savior means by ( Then) the time
toward the end of the world: as verse. 29. Immediately after the tribulation
of those days, the Sun shall be darkened: Then shall the sign of the Son of
man appear.

Argum. 2. We see the Gospel has been preached in great countries of late,
which never heard the Gospel before, as it is thought, Rhemist. Math. 24. sect.
4.

Ans. 1. They speak doubtfully, they cannot tell: as it is thought, say they.
2. They mean the preaching of their Friars, in those new found countries,
which was not the preaching of the Gospel, but of vile superstition, not to
convert the people to God, but to rob and spoil them, and make a pray of
them, killing and slaying them without al mercy: read Benzo in historia noui
orbis. 3. We deny not but that the Gospel may be revived and renewed in many
countries, where notwithstanding it was planted many years before: As this
country of ours in ancient time called Britanie, was first instructed in the
faith by the preaching of Joseph of Arimathea, as Gildas says: or as
Nicephorus says, by Simo^ Zelotes: yet after that, the foundation of the faith
thus begun, Fox p. 106.
it was confirmed afterward in king Lucius days, by the preaching of Fagane
and Damiane, which at Lucius request were sent into the land from Eleutherius,
B. of Rome: and so may it come to pass in other countries: a second preaching
therefore takes not away the former, but confirms and reuiueth it.

The Protestants.
THat the Gospel was by the Apostles preached to all the known and inhabited
nations of the world, we cannot but affirm, being so taught by the scriptures.

Argum. 1. Our Savior says to his Apostles, Ye shall be my witnesses to the
uttermost parts of the earth, Act. 1.8. which is spoken to the persons of the
Apostles, not in them to all Pastors and preachers* as some expound it: for in
the same verse. there is mention made of the coming of the holy Ghost, and how
first they should begin to witness at Jerusalem: which things were indeed so
accomplished in the Apostles.

Saint Paul also Romans 10.18. expounds that place of the Psalm, Their sound
is gone forth into all the world, of the Apostles.

Again, seeing the Apostolical calling and gift is now ceased, neither are we
to look that men should be immediately called from heaven, and the preaching of
the Gospel to all nations is an Apostolical work, for the which the Apostles
also received the gifts of tongues: seeing now we have neither Apostolic men,
nor Apostolic gifts, we are not to doubt, but that this promise and
prophecy of the universal preaching of the Gospel, is performed already.

Argum. 2. It appears in Ecclesiastical histories, that the Apostles
dispersed themselves into all parts of the world, every where preaching the
Gospel. Thomas preached to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, also to the
Germans: Fox. p. 32.
Simon Zelotes, in Mauritania, Africa, and in Britania: Judas, called
Thaddaeus, in Mesopotamia: Mark, in Egypt: Bartholomaeus to the Indians:
Andrew preached to the Scythians, Sogdians, Aethopians: So that there were few
or no known countries in the world, which heard not of the fame of the
Gospel.

But here two things must be observed: First, that the Gospel was to be
preached in the habitable or known world: the word is (...): Many countries
are inhabited now that were not habitable then, Matt. 24.14
or at the least not inhabited: wherefore it was sufficient, that the people of
the world heard of the Gospel, howsoever afterward they were propagated into
other unknown places. Secondly, as Augustine says, Omnes gentes promissae
sunt, non omnes homines omnium gentium: All nations were promised to hear of
the Gospel, not all the men and inhabitants of every nation. Epistol. 80.
And so we doubt not but the Apostles did lay the foundation of faith through
the whole world, and were first planters of the Churches in every nation. But
their plantings were watered and increased, and continued by others.

Wherefore, seeing the world has once already been generally lightened with
the truth of the Gospel, we are not to look any more for a solemn legacy
and embassage to be sent from the Lord unto all nations: But those countries
rather, which sometime had the truth, and now have lost it, ought now to seek
unto those places that have it, as the Queen of Saba went a long journey to
hear Salomons wisdom: They therefore that yet do expect an universal
preaching, may sooner see Christ coming in the clouds, then have their
expectation satisfied.

THE SECOND QVESTION, OF THE coming of Henoch and Elias before the day of
judgment.
The Papists.
Henoch and Elias do yet live in their bodies in Paradise, and shall come in
person, to oppose themselves against Antichrist, and by their preaching to
convert the Jews, Rhemist. Apocal. 11. sect. 4.

Argum. Malachie 4.5. I will send you Eliah the Prophet, before the great and
fearful day of the Lord. These are also the two witnesses spoken of, Apocal.
11.3. Which shall be slain and rise up again the third day. Ergo, Eliah and
Henoch shall come before the day of the Lord, Bellarm. de Roman. pontif. 3.6.

Ans. First, the prophecy of Malachie was fulfilled in John Baptist, who came
in the spirit of Elias, as it is thrice in the Gospel applied: once by the
Angel, Luke 1.16. twice by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11.14. and 17.13.

Bellarmine says, it is not properly understood of John Baptist, but only in
an allegory. First, the Prophet speaks of the great and fearful day of the
Lord: but the coming of Christ was the acceptable time.

Ans. Here the Jesuit bewrays great ignorance: As though the coming of
Christ in the flesh, as it brought comfort to the Elect, and to as many as were
ordained to salvation, was not also hastening of the judgment of God against
the wicked: and therefore John says, The axe was laid to the root of the
tree, Matthew. 3.10. and that Christ came with his fan in his hand, verse 12.
The Apostle, Heb. 12.26. applies that saying of the Prophet: Once again will I
shake not only the heavens, but the earth, to the preaching of the Gospel:
we see then in what sense the first coming of Christ is called a fearful
and terrible day.

Ans. Secondly, by the two witnesses, is understood the small, yet sufficient
number of the true servants of God, which shall witness the truth even in the
whottest persecution of Antichrist: there is no mention made of Henoch or
Elias. And if you will needs understand that literally, of their rising again,
why not the rest also, how fire shall proceed out of their mouths to consume
the wicked, and they shall turn water into blood? The meaning is nothing else,
but that God will always have faithful witnesses in his Church, which shall
always stand up, in the stead of the Prophets and holy men gone before.

The Protestants.
LIke as the Pharisees deceived the Jews with vain expectation of Elias, and
so hindered their belief in Christ: so the Papists would not have men to
acknowledge the manifestation of Antichrist, under this false pretense, that
Henoch and Elias must first come before Antichrist be revealed, which we do
hold as a Jewish fable and popish dream.

Argum. 1. The Prophecy of Elias coming is properly fulfilled in John
Baptist, and therefore we are not to look for any other accomplishment
thereof: neither now is there any Paradise remaining but Heaven, 2. Corinthians.
12.4. And to affirm that Henoch and Elias went up to Heaven in their bodies,
before the ascension of Christ, out of Scripture it cannot be proved: it is
evident that they were taken up alive into heaven, but not that they continued
alive.

Argum. 2. The variety of opinions concerning the personal appearance of
Henoch and Elias, declare that it is an uncertain thing, and but devised of
men. Hilarye says, they shall be Moses and Elias: Chrysostom grants that
Elias shall come, but not Henoch. Iustine thinks that not only Henoch and
Elias are alive, but all those, whose bodies rose at the resurrection of
Christ: Hippolytus is of opinion, that John the Divine shall come with them and
some say Jeremy also, whose death is not read of, Fulk. Apocal. 11. sect. 4.
And thus it is no marvel, if men run mad as it were in their foolish
conceits, having no warrant for their opinions out of Scriptures.

The nation of the Jews we grant, according to the manifest prophecy of
Saint Paul, Romans 11.
shall in the end be converted: but not in such sort, by the personal
preaching of Moses and Elias: for the Apostle setting down at large the
mystery of their calling, would not have left out so necessary a thing.

Augustine by the two witnesses, understands the two testaments, the Old and
the new. But he denies utterly, that any shall rise before the coming of
Christ: In Apocal. Homil. 8.
as the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 15.23. The first fruits is Christ, Then
they that are Christ's at his coming, but not before. Vnde (says he)
excluditur omnis suspicio quorundam, qui putant hos duos testes duos viros
esse, and ante aduentum Christi coelum in nubibus ascendisse. Their suspicion
therefore, or opinion is utterly excluded, which think these two witnesses to
be two men, which should ascend into heaven before the coming of Christ.
Augustine we see is flat against them.

THE THIRD PART, WHETHER THE most grievous persecutions that ever were, shall
be toward the end of the world.
The Papists.
Bellarmine de Roman. pontifi. lib. 3. cap. 7.

Argum. Matthew. 24.21. There shall be* then such great tribulation in the
world, as was not since the beginning of the world, neither shall be: Ergo*
the greatest persecution toward the end of the world.

Ans. 1. It is plain by the text, that this great tribulation is prophesied to
come upon the Jews: for in the next verse before he says, pray that your
flight be not in the winter: And then it follows, there shall be then, or as
Mark says, In those days, there shall be such tribulation, 13.19. and in the
17. verse Woe shall be to them that give suck in those days. Which must needs
be understood of the destruction of Jerusalem: for at the coming of Christ,
there shall be one and the same case of all, whether of those that give suck,
or of those that give none.

Secondly, it cannot be meant of the last tribulation in the world, because the
words are, that as there was none such since the beginning of the world, so
there shall be none such after. Ergo, there shall be tribulation after, though
none such.

The Protestants.
Our hope and trust is, that the greatest persecution of the Church of God is
ouerpast: because the kingdom or rather tyranny of Antichrist begins to
decay, and we trust, shall more and more be shaken, till it come to utter
ruin.

Argum. 1. The Scripture tells us, that hard upon the end of the world there
shall be great security, men shall say, Peace peace unto themselves, 1.
Thesal. 5.4. They shall eat and drink, marry and be married, as it was in
the days of Noah, Matthew. 24.38. And therefore Luke says, 21.34. Take heed
you be not overcome of surfeiting and drunkenness, least this day come upon you
unawares, For as a snare shall it come, etc. All this proves, that there shall
be rather general security, as in the days of Noah, then general
tribulation. And there is greater danger of surfeiting and wantonness in time of
prosperity and abundance, then in the days of persecution.

Also the text is plain, speaking of wars, troubles and persecutions, but
the end shall not be yet, Mark. 13.7. Wherefore it appears, that the troubles
and persecutions of the Church, shall be well slaked toward the end of the
world.

Argum. 2. Antichrist, though he shall not utterly be extinguished before the
coming of Christ, yet shall be deadly wounded: and he shall begin to be
judged even in this world, Apocal. 16.6. God shall give them blood to drink,
Apocal. 17.16. The ten horns, that is the kings of the earth, shall hate the
whore and eat her flesh. The Church of God shall reward her, as she has
rewarded us, and give her double according to her works, Apocal. 18.6. By
these places it is gathered, that Antichrist shall have a great overthrow before
the coming of Christ, who shall utterly abolish him with the brightness of his
coming, 2. These. 2.8.

Antichrist is already come* and has raged a long time against the Church:
The persecutions of the heathen did neither continue so long, neither were in
exquisite cruelty and bitterness to be compared to the outrageous practices of
the Antichrist of Rome, and his adherents against the Church of God: which
would fill a whole volume by themselves* nay not one, but many and infinite
volumes to be declared at large.

Augustine says, Prima persecutio violen^^ (...) tormentis, In Psalm. 9.
^lterafraudulenta est per haereticos, tertia superest per Antichristum (...)*
qu^ nihil est ^ericulosius, quia and violenta and fraudulenta erit. The first
persecution of the Church was violent with torments: the second was by
fraudulent heretics: the third shall be under Antichrist, the worst of all, it
shall be both violent, and fraudulent. This persecution under the Popes of Rome,
the Church of God endured a great while: who both dealt fraudulently, in
poisoning them with corrupt doctrine, and cruelly also, in punishing with
sword and fire the innocent members of Christ: wherefore seeing it is a plain
case, that Antichrist is, and has been many a day revealed to the world, and
that the Church of God begins to have some respit and liberty from his
thraldom; we doubt not, but that the greatest storms of persecution are
ouerpast, if by our sins we bring not back again the thick and mistie
cloud upon us.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS Controversy, about the manner of Christ's coming to
judgment.
The Papists.
Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 6. verse. 2. They shall sit in thrones with Christ, Matthew.
19. verse. 28. Ergo, judge together with him, Rhemist. ibid.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. TRue it is, that the Saints shall judge the world, 1. Corinthians. 6.2. But
only Christ shall give sentence, Matthew. 25. and is properly and only the
judge of the world: for the father has committed al judgment to the Son,
John 5.22. If all, then there is no part left for any other. The Apostles
therefore and Saints are said to judge, as Christ says of his word, that he
will not judge the unbelievers, but his word shall judge them in the last day,
John 12.48. That is, shall be a witness against them, accuse them, lay in
matter of judgment against them. So the word preached by the Saints upon
earth, and practiced in their lives, shall be the condemnation of the world.
And not only so, but they shall be advanced to greater honor: They shall sit
in thrones and seats: that is, they shall not stand amongst the wicked to
receive sentence, but shall meet Christ in the air, and be caught up in the
clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Yea, they shall in the sight and beholding of the
ungodly enter into the kingdom of God, Luke 13.28. But in any other sense they
cannot be judges of the world: for shall we think, that Christ in that day
shall need under officers and judges, as Moses did? Exodus ^8. Augustine says,
Sancti sedebunt cum domino attendere, In Psalm. 121
qui fecerunt misericordia^^: The Saints shall ^it with the Lord, not to judge,
but to mark and attend, and to witness, who have followed the works of
m^^cie.

The Papists.
2 THey are so bold as to appoint the place, where Christ shall appear, namely
Matthew. 24.27. Bellarm. de cultu sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 3.

The Protestants.
Ans. FIrst, by that similitude Christ only shows the suddennes of his
coming: therefore it must be pressed no further, then to that purpose for the
which it serves. Secondly, our Savior says plainly, that the kingdom of
God comes not with observation, Luke 17.20. either of time, or place: And
therefore, when men say unto us, Behold here, or behold there, we ought not to
believe them, verse. 23. As though they would point out Christ's coming with the
finger, either in the East or West. Whereas Matthew therefore names the East
and West, in the similitude of the lightening, Luke leaves them out, saying,
As the lightening shines from one part of the Heaven to the other, 17.24.
Least we should think any great matter to be in nomination of those parts.

Augustine says notably, Non ab Orient veniet, nec Occidente: quare? quia
Deus iudex est: si in aliquo loco esset, non esset Deus: In Psalm. 74.
quia vero Deus iudex est, non homo, noli illum expectare de locis: He will not
come, either from the East, or from the West: why so? Because God is judge: if
he were tied to any place, he were not God: but because God is judge, and not
a mere man: we must not look for him from any place.

The Papists.
3. THe Son of man shall appear in the day of judgment, with the sign
Matthew. 24.3. that is (say they) the sign of the Cross, Bellarm. de sanct.
lib. 2. cap. 28. Rhemist. in hunc locum.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. THe sign of the Son of man in the Heavens, is nothing else, but his
conspicuous and glorious appearing, who shall come in great glory, as a sign
in the heavens to be seen of all the world. It cannot signify any such
visible sign as they imagine: for Mark. 13.26. Luke 21.27. we read thus:
Then shall they see the Son of man. So then, the sign of the Son of man,
is the Son himself in his glorious appearing. Secondly, it is great
presumption therefore, so boldly to affirm, that it shall be the sign of the
Cross, having no Scripture for it. Other signs we find, that Christ has
appeared with, as the sign of the rayne-bowe, Apocal. 10.1. with a two edged
sword, Apocal. 1.16. with a book in his hand, Apocal. 10.2. We have better
reason, that Christ may appear with those signs, by the which he has
sometime showed himself, then they have for the sign of the Cross.

3 It is more like, that Christ at his coming should show the marks and
prints of the nails and spear in his body, then the sign of the Cross: for
those were felt and seen in his body after his resurrection, so was not the
other. But it is a loose conjecture, and a vain surmise, without any ground of
Scripture, that the wounds are either now in heaven to be seen in the
glorious body of Christ, or that they shall be beheld and looked upon in the
day of judgment. The wicked in deed shall behold him, whom they pierced: but
it follows not thereupon that he should appear as pierced. How is it
possible, that either the body of Christ being perfectly glorified, should
still retain any spots or blemishes, or that they could be espied in so
glorious a body, which with the brightness thereof shall obscure the Sun?

Homil. de temp. 147.
Augustine gives this judgment: Sic voluit resurgere Christus, sic voluit
quibusdam dubitantibus exhibere in illa carne cicatrices vulneris vt sanaret
vulnus incredulitatis. So it pleased Christ to arise, and to show in his flesh
unto some that doubted, the skarres of his wounds, to heal and take away the
wound of their incredulity or unbelief. This then being the only cause, why
Christ would at that time have the printes and marks in his flesh to be
seen, namely to confirm the faith of them which doubted: the cause being now
ceased, for is it to be thought that there are any doubtful persons in
heaven, which may be confirmed by beholding Christ's wounds, or shall
unbelievers find any relief in the day of judgment? The cause being removed,
we have no warrant to think, that there are any such skarres, either now to
be seen in the glorious body of Christ, or which shall appear in the day of
judgment. And seeing there is no ground for this opinion, the showing forth
also of the sign of the cross in that day, is also but a wandering and a
foolish conceit.

The Papists.
Daniel, that waits and comes to the 1335. days, Dan. 12.12. Bellar. de
pontif. Romans lib. 3. cap. 8.

The Protestants.
Ans. 1. THe prophecy of Daniel we have already showed, Controversy 4.
Quaest. 9. to have been fulfilled before the first coming of Christ, in
Antiochus that cruel tyrant and persecutor of the people of God: how he
should cause the daily sacrifice to cease 1290. days, that is, three years
and seven months, 2. Macchab. 11.33. And that 45. days after, Antiochus being
dead, the Church should find ease, 1. Macch. 6.16. Wherefore, seeing this
prophecy has once already had his effect, it is not necessary to look for
any other: as Augustine says of another prophecy of Daniel, Quae prophetia si
tempore primi aduentus impleta est, non cogit intelligi, Epistol. 80.
quod etiam de fine seculi implebitur: Which prophecy if it has been
fulfilled in or before the first coming of Christ, it need not be understood
of the latter.

2 This presumption of theirs is flat opposite and contrary to Scripture,
which says, That the hour and day of Christ's coming is not known to the
Angels, nor to the Son of man, but to the Father only, Mark. 13.33. How then
dare they presume beyond the knowledge of Angels?

Augustine says, Vtiliter latere voluit Deus illum diem, In Psalm. 36. conci. 1.
vt semper sit paratum cor ad expectandum, quod esse venturum scit, and quando
venturum sit, nescit: The Lord to great purpose would have that day kept
secret, that our heart should be in continual expectation of that, which it
is sure, shall come, but knows not when it shall come.

Thus have I through the Lords gracious assistance, now at the length finished
and brought to an end this long and tedious work, which I trust shall not be
so yrkesome to the Christian Reader, as it was wearisome and painful to the
flesh, in the collecting and compiling thereof: and yet not so painful, but
that God has made me able and willing to endure this, and greater pains, and
that with comfort for the good of his Church.

I excuse not, whatsoever has fallen out of my pen in this work, if I have
failed any where in the manner of handling: But as for the matter handled
therein, I trust I have throughout maintained the truth: in the prosecuting
whereof, if sometime I chance to miss, I say with Augustine, Nunquam errari
tutius existimo, quam cum in amore nimio veritatis, Lib. 1. de mendac. cap. 1.
and reiectione nimia falsitatis erratur: I think a man can never more safely
err, then when he erreth in the too much love of the truth, and the rejecting
of falsehoode.

I have labored in this work, to set down not only the chief and
principal, but even the most, and in a manner all the controversies of
religion, between us and the Papists, maintained this day: If any thing be
missing, I say again with Augustine, Tale esse arbitratus sum cui mea
responsio necessaria non fuisset, sieve, quia ad rem de qua agitur, non
pertinet, Defid. and operib. c. 27
sieve quod tam leave esset, vt a quolibet redargui facillime posset: I thought
it to be such, as unto the which mine answer was not needful, either because
it was not pertinent to the matter in hand, or else of so small moment, that
every man might easily answer unto it.

I have no more to say, but this: If thou find thy self any thing profited
or helped (good Christian Reader) by these simple labou^s of mine, give God the
praise, and I will praise him with thee: but one thing, let me pray thee:
Quisquis legis nihil reprehendas, August.
nisi cum totum perlegeris, atque ita forte minus reprehendes: Whosoever
read in this book, reprehend nothing, before thou have read the whole, and
so perhaps thou will be more sparing in rephending. The Lord give us all grace
to love the truth, that they which know it, may live thereafter, and they
which as yet know it not, may seek for it: and we all may embrace the
Counsel of the wise man, to Buy the truth, but in no wise to sell it: that is
by all possible means to labor for it: and having attained thereunto, for no
earthly respect, for fear or favor to depart from it. The Lord God, Jesus
Christ, Jehovah, Emmanuel, our blessed Savior and Redeemer, who is the way,
the truth, and the life, give us of his heavenly grace, that we may walk
obediently in his ways, and constantly profess his truth, that in the end he
may bring us to eternal life. Amen.

Soli Deo immortali patri, Filio cum Spiritu sancto sit omnis honor and gloria.
A PARTICVLAR INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE CONTROVERSIES, WITH THEIR SEVERAL
questions contained in this treatise.
The contents of the first Book.
This Book contains seven Controversies.
The first Controversy of the Scriptures has seven questions.
1. quest. Of the number of the Canonical books of Scripture. page 2. 2. Of
the authentical edition of Scripture. page 12. 3. Of the vulgar translation of
Scripture, and of public prayers in the vulgar tongue. page 16. 4. Of the
authority of Scripture. page 20. 5. Of the perspicuitie and plainnes of
Scripture. page 23. 6. Of the interpretation of Scripture, 3. parts: 1. Of the
diverse senses of Scripture. page 26. 2. Who ought to expound Scripture. page
28. 3. Of the manner of expounding Scripture. page 30.
7. Of the perfection of Scripture, 3. parts: 1. Whether the Scripture be
absolutely necessary. p. 33. 2. Whether they be sufficient. page 35. 3. Of
unwritten traditions beside Scripture. page 38.

The second general Controversy concerning the Church, contains five
questions.
1. quest. Of the definition of the Church, 2. parts: 1. Whether wicked men be
members of the Church. page 43. 2. Whether the Church be invisible. page 46.
2. Whether the Church may err, 2. parts: 1. Whether the Catholic Church may
err at all, or not. page 49. 2. Whether the visible Church upon earth may fall
into Idolatry, or Apostasy. page 52.
3. Of the notes and marks of the Church: 1. Antiquity. page 55 2.
Universality. page 57 3. Succession. page 59 4. Unity. page 60 5. Miracles.
page 63 6. The gift of prophesying. page 66
4. Of the authority of the Church, 2. parts: 1. What authority it has in
matters of faith, and whether we are to believe in the Church. page 73 2. Of
the ceremonies of the Church. page 76
5. Of the Church of Rome, two parts: 1. Whether it be the Catholic Church.
page 78 2. Whether it be a true visible Church. page 79

The third controversy of general Councels contains eight questions.
1. quest. Whether Councels be absolutely necessary. page 81 2. By whom
general Councels ought to be summoned. page 83 3. Of what persons Councels
ought to consist. page 84 4. Who ought to be the president in Councels. page 88
5. Whether Councels may err or not. page 90 6. Of the authority of Councels.
page 93 7. Whether they be above the Pope. page 95 8 Of the conditions
requisite in general Councels. page 98
The fourth controversy of the Bishop of Rome called the Pope, ten questions.
1. Whether the regiment of the Church be Monarchical. page 100 2. Whether
Peter were Prince of the Apostles, and assigned by Christ to be the head of the
Church. page 105 3. Of Peter's being at Rome, two parts: 1. Whether Peter were
at Rome. page 112 2. Whether Peter were Bishop of Rome. page 116
4. Whether the Bishop of Rome be the true successor of Peter. page 118 5 Of
the primacie of the Sea of Rome, six parts: 1. Whether the Bishop of Rome be
above other Bishops. page 120 2. Concerning appeals made to Rome. page 122 3.
Whether the Pope be subject to the judgment of any. page 124 4. Whether the
Pope may be deposed from his Papacy. page 125 5. The original of the primacie
of Rome. p. 128 6. Of the names and titles of the Bishop of Rome. page 131
6. quest. Whether the Pope of Rome, as likewise, whether the Church of Rome
may err. page 134 7. quest. Of the spiritual jurisdiction of the Pope, two
parts: 1. Whether he may make laws to bind the conscience. page 141 2.
Whether all Bishops do receive their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from the Pope.
p. 145
8 Of the temporal jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, two parts: 1 Whether the
Pope be above Kings and Emperors. page 148 2 Whether he be a temporal prince.
page 151
9 Of the Popes prerogative, 3. parts: 1 Of his power dispensatiue page 154 2
Of his power exemptiue Ibid. 3 Of his power transcendent Ibid.
10. Of Antichrist, 9. parts: 1 Whether Antichrist shall be one particular man
page 155 2 Whether Antichrist be yet come, and how long he shall reign page
157 3 Concerning the name and character of Antichrist. p. 162 4 Of the
generation of Antichrist page 168 5 Of the seat and place of Antichrist page
169 6 Of the doctrine of Antichrist page 172 7 The miracles of Antichrist page
176 8 The wars and kingdom of Antichrist page 179 9 Whether the Pope be
Antichrist page 182

The fifth controversy of the Clergy, six questions.
1. quest. Of the name of Clerks or Clergy men. page 190 2 Of the election of
Bishops and Pastors, and of the election of the Pope. page 197 3 Of
Ecclesiastical degrees and orders, 3. parts: 1 Of the seven degrees of popish
priesthood. p. 199 2 Of the difference of Bishops and other Ministers. page 201
3 Of the office of Cardinals. page 205
4 Of the keys of the Church, 4. parts: 1 Wherein the authority of the keys
consists page 206 2 To whom the authority of the keys ^s committed. p. 208
3 Whether the Pastors of the Church have absolute power to remit sins page
210 4 Of the effect of binding and loosing page 212
5 Of the marriage of Ministers three parts: 1 The marriage of Ministers
lawful page 214 2 Men may be admitted to Orders after second marriage page 219
3 Whether perpetual abstinence be required in married Ministers page 221
6 Of the maintenance of Ministers by tithes, two parts: 1 Whether the payment
of tithes be necessary page 228 2 By what right tithes are due page 229

The sixth controversy of Monks and Friars, six questions.
1. quest. Of the original of Monks, and of their diverse sects page 232 2 Of
the difference between Evangelical Counsels and precepts page 236 3 Of vows
in general, three parts: 1 Whether it be lawful for Christians to vow. page
239 2 Wherein lawful vows consist page 241 3 Whether voluntary vows
properly be any part properly of the worship of God page 242
4 Of Monastical vows, 3. parts: 1 Of the vow of voluntary poverty. page
244 2 The vow of Monastical obedience. p. 246 3 Of the vow of chastity page
247
5 Of Monastical persons, four parts: 1 Whether the younger sort ought to
profess Monkerie page 251 2 Whether children may be made Monks without their
parents consent page 253 3 Whether married persons may with mutual consent
become votaries page 254 4 Whether marriage not consummate, may without consent
be broken for the vow of continency. page 256
6 Of the rules and discipline of Monastical life, four parts: 1 Of the
solitary and austere life of Monks. page 257 2 Of the habit and shauing of
Monks. page 259 3 Of their Canonical hours page 261 4 Of the maintenance of
Monks. page 262

The seventh general controversy of the Civil Magistrate, four questions.
1 Of the authority of the Prince in Ecclesiastical matters, four parts: 1
His authority over Ecclesiastical persons page 266 2 Over Ecclesiastical
goods page 267 3 In causes Ecclesiastical page 268 4 Whether the Prince may be
said to be the head of the Church in his kingdom page 271
2 The authority of the Prince in punishing heretics: 1 Whether the judgment
of heresy any way belongs to the Prince page 274 2 How an heretic is to be
tried page 275 3 How heretics are to be examined and punished Ibid.
3 Whether the positive laws of Princes do bind in conscience 4 Whether the
Prince may be excommunicate of the Pope
THE SECOND BOOK CONTAINS SIX CONTROVERSIES.
The first controversy, which is the eight in the whole, is concerning Angels,
three questions.
1. quest. Of the hierarchy of Angels, 2. parts: 1 Of the degrees of Angels.
p. 291 2 Whether Michael be the Prince of the Angels page 292
2 Of the ministry of Angels, three parts: 1 Of their external ministry in
the protection of the Church page 293 2 Of their spiritual office about our
prayers page 295 3 Whether Angels know our hearts page 296
3 Of the worship of Angels, 2 parts: 1 Of their worship in general page 299 2
Of the invocation of Angels page 300

The ninth general controversy concerning Saints departed, two parts.
1. part. Of those that suffer punishment being departed, two questions: 1 Of
Limbus Patrum, and of the apparition of Samuel page 302.305 2 Of Purgatory,
four parts. 1 Whether there be any Purgatory page 307 2 Of the circumstances
of Purgatory page 310 3 Of prayer for the dead. p. 312 4 Of burials and
funerals p. 315

2. part. Of the Saints that are in joy and bliss after their departure. 9.
quest. 1. quest. Of the blessed estate of the Saints, and of Canonizing of
Saints page 320 2 Of the adoration of Saints. 3. parts. 1 Whether they are to
be adored: and of oaths and vows made to Saints. page 325 2 Of the diverse
kinds of worship page 330 3 Of the kissing of holy men's feet page 331

3 Of the invocation of Saints, three parts: 1 Whether prayers are to be made
unto them. page 332 2 Whether they pray for us page 334 3 Whether they
understand our prayers. p. 335
4 Of the relics of Martyrs, four parts: 1 Of the worshipping of Relics.
page 338. 2 Translation of Relics. page 340. 3 Preserving of Relics. page
342. 4 Miracles of Relics. page 343.
5. question, 1. Of Images, four parts: 1 Of the difference of Idols and
Images. p. 347 2 Whether it be lawful to have Images. page 348 3 Whether to
be worshipped. page 350 4 What manner of worship it should be. p. 353
2. Of the sign of the Cross, 4. parts: 1 Of the Cross whereon Christ
suffered. p. 355 2 Of the image of the Cross. page 357 3 Of the sign of the
Cross. page 359 4 Of the power or efficacy of the Cross. p. 360 5 An
appendix concerning the name of Jesus. page 361

6. quest. Of Temples and Churches, five parts: 1 Of the situation and form of
Churches. page 3^2 2 Of the end and use of Churches, three parts. page 365 1
Whether they are built for sacrifice. page 365 2 Whether they be holy places in
themselves. page 367 3 Whether they may be dedicate to saints. page 368
3 Of the adorning of Churches. page 370 4 Of the dedication of Churches. page
372. 5 Of things hallowed for Churches. page 373
7 Of Pilgrimages and Processions, and of the holy land. page 375 8 Of holy and
festival days, five parts: 1 Of holy days in general. 378 2 Of the Lords
day. 379 3 Of the festival days of Christ and the holy Ghost. page 386 4 Of
the festiuities of Saints. 1 The number of them. 2 The manner of keeping them.
page 388 3 Of their vigils. p. 391
5 Of Lent and Imber days. page 392
9 Of the Virgin Mary. 1 Whether she were conceived without sin. page 398 2
Whether she vowed virginity. page 400 3 Of her assumption into heaven. page
401 4 Of the worship due unto her. page 402 5 Of the merits of the virgin,
and of the Aue Maria. page 404

The tenth controversy has but one question concerning the mediation, and
intercession of Christ. page 406.

The eleventh controversy concerning the Sacraments in general, three
questions.
1. quest. Of the definition and nature of a Sacrament. 1 Of the efficient
cause, or institutor of the sacrament. page 408 2 Of the form and manner of
consecration. page 409 3 Of the isntrumental cause, which is the Minister.
page 413 4 Of the use, whether the Sacraments be seals. page 414
2. quest. Of the efficacy and virtue of the Sacraments. 1 Whether the
Sacraments confer grace. p. 416 2 Of the difference of the old and new
sacraments. page 418 3 Of the character imprinted by the Sacraments. page 419 4
Of the necessity of the sacraments. page 420
3 Of the number and order of the Sacraments. 1 Of the number of them, page 42^
2 Of their degrees amongst themselves, page 424.

The twelfth controversy of the sacrament of Baptism, eight questions.
1 Of the name and definition of Baptism. page 426 2 Of the parts, that is,
the matter and form of Baptism. page 427 3 Of the necessity of Baptism, and
whether baptism may by any other way be supplied. page 428 4 Whether women and
lay men ought to baptize. page 432 5 Of the baptism of infants, and whether
they have faith, and of the baptizing of bells. page, 434.436 6. Of the effects
of Baptism. 1 Whether our sins be clean taken away in baptism. page 436 2
Whether baptism be only for sins past. page 438 3 Of the privileges of
Baptism. page 439
7. Of the difference between the baptism of Christ, and the baptism of John
p. 441 8. Of the ceremonies and rites of baptism. page 442
The thirteenth controversy of the Eucharist or Lords Supper, two parts.
1* part. Of the sacrament it self. 10. questions. 1 Of the Real presence.
page 445 2 Of Transubstantiation. page 455 3 Of the reservation of the
Sacrament. page 459 4 Of the elements of bread and wine. page 461 5 Of the
words of consecration. page 463 6 Of the proper effect of the Lords Supper.
page 465 7 Of the manner in receiving the communion, and whether it ought to be
received fasting. page 467 8 Of receiving in one kind. page 468 9 Of the
adoration of the Eucharist. page 472 10 Whether the wicked receive the body of
Christ. page 473.
2. part. Of the sacrifice of the Mass. 8. quest. 1 Of the diverse
representations of the death of Christ. page 475 2 Of the sacrifice. 1 The name
of the Mass. page 476 2 Of the sacrifice it self. page 477 3 Of the name of
priests. page 481
3 Of the virtue and efficacy of the Mass. page 483 4 For whom the Mass is
available. page 484 5 Of private Masses. page 485 6 Of the manner of saying
Mass. page 487 7 Of the idolatrous ceremonies of the Mass. page 488 8 Of the
form, which is the Canon of the Mass. page 490

THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK.
The fourteenth controversy of Penance, nine questions.
1 Of the name of penance. page 501 2 Whether it be a Sacrament. page 502 3
Whether any other sacrament of repentance beside baptism. page 504 4 Of the
material parts of Baptism. 1 Of the matter and form. page 504 2 Of the
three parts. Contrition, page 505. Confession, page 505. Satisfaction. page
505.
3 Whether repentance go before faith. page 506
5 Of Contrition. page 507 6 Of Auricular confession. page 510 7 Of
Satisfaction. 1 Whether the punishment remain after the sin is pardoned.
page 514 2 Whether a man may satisfy the wrath of God by his works. ibid. 3
Whether one man may satisfy for another. page 516
8 Of penal injunctions. 1 Whether penal works be necessary to repentance.
page 517 2 By whom they are to be enjoined. page 518 3 Of pardons and
indulgences. page 519
9 Of the ceremonies and circumstances of Penance. page 522
The fifteenth controversy of Matrimony, seven questions.
1 Whether Matrimony be a sacrament. page, 524 2 Of Diuorcement. 1 Whether
there be any other causes of divorce beside fornication. page 525 2 Whether
marriage be lawful after diuorcement for adultery. page 528
3 Of the degrees prohibited in marriage three parts: 1 Of the supputation of
degrees. page 529 2 Whether any of the degrees prohibited in Moses law, may be
dispensed with. page 531 3 Whether any other degrees by humane law may be
prohibited. page 533
4 Of the impediments of marriage. page 535 5 Of the comparison between
virginity, and the married estate. page 536 6 Of the times of marriage
prohibited. page 537 7 Of the ceremonies of marriage. page 539
The sixteenth controversy, three questions.
1 Of Confirmation. 1 Whether (...) be a sacrament. page 541 2 Of the matter
and form thereof. page 542 3 Of the efficacy and virtue. page 543 4 Of the
rites and ceremonies. page 544
2 Of Orders. 1 Whether it be a Sacrament. page 545 2 Of the efficacy. page
547 3 Of the ceremonies. page 548
3 Of extreme Unction. 1 Whether it be a Sacrament. page 549 2 Of the virtue
and efficacy. page 550 3 Of the minister and the ceremonies. page 551

The seventeenth controversy of the benefits of our redemption, three parts.
1 part* Of Predestination. 1 Of the reprobation of the wicked. page 553 2 Our
election free without respect to our works. page 555 3 Of the certainty of
predestination. page 556
2 part* Of our Vocation. 1 Of sin. 1 Of Original sin. page 558 2 The
difference of sins. page 559 3 Of venial sins. page 560 4 Whether all
sins be remissible. pa. 561 5 God no author of sin. page 562 6 Of the works
of the not regenerate. 563
2 Of the law, 5. parts: 1 Whether it be possible in this life to keep the
Laws. page 564 2 Whether just men do sin. page 566 3 Of the works of
supererogation. p. 567 4 God not to be served for fear. page 568 5 Of the use
of the Law. page 570

3. part. Of justification. 1. Of freewil. 1 Whether it be utterly lost. page
571 2 Of the power of free will in man. Ibid.
2. Of Faith. 1 What faith is. page 576 2 Of the diverse kinds of faith. page
578 3 Charity not the form of iustifiyng faith. page 579 4 How men are
justified by faith. page 581 5 Whether faith be meritorious. Ibid. 6 Whether
faith be in man's power. page 582 7 Whether it may be lost. Ibid. 8 Whether
wicked men have faith. page 583
3. Of good works. 1 Which be the good works of Christians. page 584 2
Whether there be any good works without faith. Ibid.
3 The use of good works. 1 Whether they be applicatorie. page 585 2
Expiatorie. page 586 3 Meritorious. Ibid.
4 Of the distinction of merits. page 589 5 The manner of meriting. page 590
4. Of Justification. 1 Of preparatiue works to justification. page 591 2 Of
two kinds of justification. page 592 3 Of inherent justice. page 593 4 Of
justification only by faith. page 594

The 18. controversy concerning the humanity of Christ, five questions.
1 Of the vbiquitie or omnipresence of the body of Christ page 596 2 Whether
Christ increased in knowledge page 599 3 Of the manner of our Saviors birth
page 601 4 Whether Christ suffered in soul page 602 5 Whether Christ descended
in soul to Hell to deliver the Patriarchs page 605 6 Of the place of Hell page
607
The 19. controversy concerning matters belonging to the divine nature of
Christ, three questions.
1 Whether Christ be (...), God of himself page 610 2 Whether Christ be our
Mediator as man only page 612 3 Whether Christ merited for himself page 614
The 20. controversy of Christ's coming to judgment, three questions.
1 Whether the Gospel be already preached through the world page 616 2
Whether Henoch and Elias shall come before the day of judgment page 618 3 Of
the grievous persecutions toward the end of the world page 620 4 The manner of
Christ's coming to judgment: 1 Whether the Saints shall be judges page 622 2 Of
the place of Christ's appearing page 623 3 The manner, whether with the sign of
the Cross. Ibid. 4 Of the time of his appearing page 624

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the Prefa. p. 5. lin. 18. read nosse. lin. 36. legeritis. In the book. p.
4. which our, p. 7. lin. 42. pru^^ p. 13. l. 12. Simmachus. p. 16. l. 5.
interprete^. p. 21. l. 18. Iddo. p. 23. l. 25. fifth. p. 29. l. 27. so. p. 32.
l. 40. prae^dentis lingu^* p. 35. l. 26. there is. p. 39. l. 3. are judged. p.
46. l. 26. proposition. p. 115. l. 24. euasio^ p. 125. l. ^8. Pighius: the
Jesuit. p 129. l 7 de turre cremata, lin. 40. for heresy, p. 130. l. 37. he
shou^^ p. 146. l. 34. they were. p. 156. l. 18 the beast. p. 171. l. 11 who
should. p. 179 l 29 dele Agrippa. p. 197 l. ^7. dele not. p. 200. l. 20. for
unable, read other p. 201. l. 16* then readers. p. 203. l. 7, 8, 9, 10 dele p.
205. l. 11. their especial. p. 216. l. 19. for, say we, read, says he. p. 220.
l. 23. from having. p. 248. l. 6 he would not. l. 13. not caring. p. 252. l. 3.
for not one to none. p. 253. l. 3. primus. p. 276. l. 41. his posie p. 329. l.
4. for, or alio, read oration, p. 331 l. 9. (...). p. 399. l. 25. absolutely.
p. 442.23. pugnaciter. p. 462. l. 4. good friday. p. 465. l. 5. read, was not,
without the colon. p. 468. l. 31. read, is not of p. 471. l. 24. the counsel.
p. 500. l. 25. permisit p. 517. l. 35 in punishing and chastising. p. 522. l.
6. prescriptions, for presumptions. p. 530. l. 18. read epist. Iud. 14. p. 538.
l. 35. (...). guerebh. p. 592. l. 34. read merc^s fidei coeptae erit fides
aucta.


