A LOYAL SVBIECTS LOOKING-GLASS, Or A good subjects Direction, necessary and
requisite for every good Christian, living within any civil regiment or
politic state, to view, behold, and examine himself in, that he may the
better frame the course of his life, according to the true grounds of the
duties of an honest and obedient subject to his King, and to arm himself
against all future Siren songs, and alluring intisements of subtle, disloyal,
dissembling, and unnatural conspiraters, traitors, and rebels.

Collected for the most part out of both old and later writers, whose names
are in the next page set down.

Whereunto are briefly added six special causes of undutiful subjects
disloyalty.

By WILLIAM WILLYMAT.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Elde for Robert Boulton, and are to be sold at his
shop at Chancerie lane end near Holborne.

The names of the Authors out of which this present Treatise has for the most
part been collected.
Augustine. Ambrose. Theophilacti. Calvin. Musculus. Marlorate. Hyperius.
Hemingius. Piscator.
Iacobus Rex. Bullinger. Bucer. Coruinus. Luther. Vrsinus. M.H. Latimer.
Perkinsus. Turnbull.

To the right virtuous, excellent, and most High and Noble Prince HENRY, by
the grace of God Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewell, Earl of Chester, and
heir apparent to the Realms of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
THE late gracious acceptance, most worthy young Prince (with so prompt and
welwilling hand, so amiable and pleasant a countenance, and so kind and
courteous words,) of those mine hasty and bold attempted labors, in
translating into Latin and English verse the several Precepts and Instructions
of our dread Sovereign your Fathers Majesty's ASILIKON DOPON, for your own
sake, and unto your own self by him so Christianly, fatherly, painfully and
learnedly first penned: that Princes Looking-glass, or Princes direction, (for
that title or inscription I then thought best befitting such an argument) so
benignly accepted of, has animated and encouraged me once again, to publish
under your Graces Patrocinie, an other Looking-glass, to wit, this present
Loyal Subjects Looking-glass, or a good subjects Direction, a treatise I
suppose in these our last days and perilous times, very requisite and
necessary for all Christian subjects, like as was the other for a Christian
Prince. A fault I confess is by me here committed, by this my second so bold
an enterprise, but yet Prius perspecta clementia, and lenitate tua fretus, in
good hope you will bear with my wants and imperfections, and accept and
respect mine heart, and plain simple well meaning will, and rather poyse the
quantity of mine affection and zeal to do good, (according to the gain of
that one poor talent that the Lord God has committed unto me,) then the
quality of mine offense, I have aduentur^d toward the help and instruction
of the rude and ignorant sort of subjects, who want both good books and good
teachers, to publish this my silly Treatise befitting silly subjects, least
through ignorance of their duties in true allegiance, they might the sooner be
seduced, deceived, and withdrawn from giving unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's. Simple and plain indeed is this my work, I must simply confess, but
yet an instrument of mine inward good affection, and a faithful witnessing
messenger before both God and man, of my well-willing and well-meaning heart,
Qui si non potui maxima parua dedi. And if your Grace (according to your former
clemency) shall happily vouchsafe it that good success as to come abroad to
the view of the world under the wings of your benign defense and favorable
protection, then I doubt not but of the better sort it shall be the better
accepted, and also from the nipping cancred Cater-pillers the more freely
escape vntaunted, whose natural inclination is rather to pry at the moates in
other men's eyes, and to carpe and find faults with other men's doings, then to
respect and perceive beams in their own eyes, or endeavor to profit Gods
Church and their country with any their own better labors. The everliving
God for his anointed Christ Jesus his sake, grant you his eternal favor,
grace, and blessing, long and many happy years, with your own hearts desired
felicity, to the advancement of Gods honor and glory, to the joy and
comfort of all good faithful Christian hearts, to the terror of all your, and
our foreign enemies, and home-borne conspirators, and to the happy
conversion or utter confusion of the public and private adversaries of Gods
eternal truth.

Your Graces most loyal and daily humble Orator: WILLIAM WILLYMAT.

To the Christian Reader.
GReat, sundry, and manifold (good Christian Reader) are the enormities,
inconveniences, and mischiefs, which the lack of the right use of Gods most
sacred word, and the diligent care to be governed and ouer-ruled by the same,
do bring, breed, and engender among mortal men. O subtle serpent, o
deceiptfull and too diligent Satan, evermore and every where prying, seeking,
and hunting like an hungry and roaring Lion for thy pray, when irreligious
Macheuillians apt scholars of that Italian helhound, desperate careless
Atheists, obstinate dissembling corner-creeping Papists, temporizing carnal
and verbal Protestants, brainsick, heady, and male-contented Puritanes, and
such other like right borne children of this world, have once cast of the care,
the knowledge, the use and practice of that true lightsome Lantern of Gods
word, which should have served to guide their actions, and given light unto
their feet, whereby they might have trodden in the right paths of all
goodness, how busy, diligent, and ready art thou then with thy legions of
reprobate Angels, to stuff and possess, the blind, ignorant, obstinate,
wilful, rebellious, male-contented hearts, and busy brains of such men, with
ambition, envy, malice, heart burning, coffeehouse of mind, murmurings and
grudgings, dislike and contempt of the most Christian, and best government, as
not fitting nor agreeing with their humors. slandering, evil speaking, and
backbiting, such as are in lawful authority, conspiracy, treason, sedition,
rebellion, and infinite other mischiefs, too many and too tedious here to
recite. How true this is, as at sundry other times heretofore, so also now
has it proved it self by these last discoueries of some of our English
disloyal, unnatural and traitorous plotting practices and conspiracies. The
buildings, and very foundations whereof, the close and cunning conueying
whereof, yea though it were in the very fruit of a tree, the mighty Lord God
our only buckler, shield and sure fortress, according to his former
accustomed goodness and merciful dealings (in our late Queen Elizabeth's
reign) has unto us, reueiled, and detected, yea dissipated, frustrated, and
utterly confounded, he for his holy names sake work in our hearts unfeigned
thankfulness for the same. Now for as much as God has appointed admonitions
and exhortations to encounter temptations, least perhaps the devil that old
experienced and thoroughly practiced enemy of mankind, the chiefest author of
these and all other such wicked and abominable attempts should again suggest
and ingest the like lewd motions into the hearts of any mo, either foreign
malignant supplanters, or homeborne malicious, ambitious, and male-contented
conspirators. I have here endeavored my self to set forth for an admonition or
warning before the eyes of all such as have not consented nor yielded to any
such wicked and diuilish enterprises of treasons and conspiracies, this present
treatise following, A loyal subjects Looking-glass, or a good subjects
direction, wherein every true hearted and good meaning, yea and every wavering
minded, unstable and simple ignorant subject may behold, see, and learn how to
behave himself, and dutifully to live under the government of higher powers,
whether they be supreme Magistrates, Emperors, Kings and Princes, or else
inferior subordinate magistrates and officers, adhibited by the higher powers
to the administration of things for the government of the commonwealth. Herein
I have labored to set before the eyes and hearts of all sorts of subjects,
what duties they owe, and are bounden by the plain and express word of God,
to perform to their superiors, of what degree or place so ever: A treatise I
suppose very requisite and necessary for these our envious, malicious,
ambitious, self-louing, self-wilie proud and rebellious days. Those good and
learned authors both old and of later times, whom I have principally leaned
unto as my chief guids, directors and good masters, in the penning of this
present Looking-glass, ye may see set down by their several names before
the epistle dedicatory. I have herein followed the manner of those Cooks which
coming into Gardens to gather herbs, cast their eyes round about them, and
look upon all, and crop and take but those only which are most convenient and
needful for their use and purpose at that time: Likewise have I chosen and
excerpted out of the forenamed writers, but those things only which I thought
would serve best, and most conveniently befit this present matter and time, and
them for the help of the memory of the readers, and for the ready finding
out, and speedy turning unto any several point or matter herein entreated of,
I have digested into several chapters, according unto the several duties
which are due unto Magistrates set in authority. I am not ashamed to yield and
plainly to confess, that I have collected this present treatise, for the most
part thereof (though not all) out of the drift, sense and meaning, yea and now
and then the very words of other men's writings, for I deem it a sounder, a
surer, and a safer course, to walk in the paths and tread in the steps of
former learned and allowed writers, that so I might always have sufficient
authority for mine opinions and allegations, then to range at randon in
writing, and setting abroach mine own inventions, seeing that, Nihiliam dici
potest quod non sit dictum prius. I weigh not, and I pass not for the virulent
and malicious cauils, of never pleased Momus-like envious back-biters, so that
by my labors I may do any good, or be an instrument to help to avoid any
evil in this Church and commonwealth wherein I live: which happy success
that this my present treatise may have, I pray thee gentle reader help me with
thy zealous prayers to the Almighty, the only giver of all good gifts, to
whom only be all worthy honor, praise and dominion for ever and ever.

The chief and principal matters contained in the first six chapters of this
Book following.
In the first Chapter is contained.
WHat Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. are: by whom they were and are ordained,
and wherefore. page 3. and 4. Of and from whom tyrants and evil Kings and
Princes are: and wherefo^e such are exalted. page 4. Obedience the first thing
due unto Caesar, belongs unto all higher powers, kings and principalities,
yea although tyrannical and evil governors. page 56. A^guments and reasons
to persuade unto obedience to magistrates. Ide^. Magistrates called Gods. idem.
Of the defermities, and ugliness of rebellion, thereby to dissuade from the
same. 6. The horrible finnes and mischiefs that range and reign in rebellion.
Ide^. Commodities of obedience and peace. 7. To what end good examples of
obedience do chiefly serve. 8. What ^e is chiefly to be made by the examples
of evil and rebellious subjects. idem. Examples of two of the best and most
obedient faithful subjects, most worthy to be imitated. 8. 9. 10. Example of
David's behavior toward king Saul, what it does teach 9. A question concerning
obedience resoluen. 11. What it is or a subject to foster and cherish an evil
thought in his heart against his S^ueraigne. 12. What is to be done when a man
is entised or drawn by any kind of means to yield to treason. 14. Treason
and treacherous plottings, and practices are not to be hid nor conceiled for
any man's sake whosoever he be. idem. Delay is dangerous in hiding fire or
treason. 15. Examples of Absolon and of diverse other traito^s, and of their bad
success and confusion. 15. 16. 17. Learn to take warning by other men's
falls. 18. Diverse manners of punishments of traitors and disloyal subjects.
18. 19 Cyp^ian his bridle against going on and continuing in sins. 20 The
last argument or reason to move to obedience, drawn from Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, etc. 21.
In the second Chapter is contained.
HOw necessary and profitable a thing fear is. page 22. To fear the king,
commanded in holy Scriptures. idem. Two kinds of fear. 23. The profies of good
fear. page 23. The nature of the good and child-like fear, explicated by two
apt similitudes. 24. The virtues or effects of the good fear, expressed by
the effects of the fear of a Scholar toward his Scholemaister. Idem. Diverse
and sundry effects of fear of a subject toward his sovereign. i would. How
prinate men are to behave themselves toward such as be in authority, though
they be never so bad and evil disposed. 26 Fear, though it be a very
necessary thing to be yielded unto the higher powers and Magistrates, yet may
it be abused: and of the first abuse of this fear. 28. Of the second kind of
fear. 29. The use and profit of servile fear. 30.
In the third Chapter is contained.
Honor, the third thing belonging to Caesar, what it signifies. 31. The
actions of honoring are manifold, and wherein they do consist. ibidem. The
first kind of honor due to Magistrates. ibidem. The second kind of honor due
to Magistrates. 32. The third honor due to superiors. ibid. The fourth honor
due to superiors. ibid. The beginnings of all conspiracies, etc. arise for the
most part from the heart, that begins to fall away from honoring the higher
powers. 33
In the fourth Chapter is contained.
PRayer the fourth thing belonging to Caesar commanding subjects in holy
seriptures. page 33. What things especially are to be prayed for in the behalf
of kings, Princes, etc. 34. What kind of kings and rulers God commanded to be
prayed for. ibid. What it is not to pray for kings, etc. 35.
In the fifth Chapter is contained.
TRibute, taxes, subsidies, and other such like royal customs, the sift thing
due unto Caesar. 36. The causes for which subsidies, taxes, etc. are grievous
and odious among the common people. ibidem. Tributes, subfidies, taxes, etc.
amongst all nations of old, have been usually paid, and wherefore. 37.
Theophilactus and Bucer their opinions for payment of tribute, taxes, etc. 38.
The only help and lawful remedy for not payment of Subsedies, taxes, etc.
ibidem. Diverse causes wherefore tribute, subsedies, taxes, etc. are to be paid.
39. Diverse great benefits and blessings which subjects receive by their kings,
rulers, etc. 40. How kings may both take and employ tributes, taxes,
subsedies, and such like customs. 41. Lessons necessary for kings, Princes,
etc. to observe, note, and practice concerning the exacting of impositions,
taxes, etc. ibid. Lessons necessary for the common people and subjects to
observe, note, and practice, concerning their behavior and conceits against
kings, Princes, etc. for lifting and demanding of subsedies, taxes, etc. ibid.
A necessary question concerning such subjects as being of wealth and
substance, will seek and practice false and lying shifts and euasions, to
escape, or to diminish their right and due paiments of taxes, subsidies, etc.
partly by defrauding the king, and partly by oppressing and wringing their
poor neighbors: and the answer thereunto. 41.42. Doctor Martin Luther his
opinion concerning the subjects duty, if kings, princes, etc. shall happen to
impose and exact any grievous and ouerchargeable taxes, subsedies, or other
customs and paiments 43. And also S Ambrose his opinion, and likewise king
James his opinion in the same case. 45. Of mutual love and agreement betvveene
Prince and people, and of the good thereof. 46. King James his Majesty's most
loving, Christian and excellent counsel to his son Prince Henry, concerning
lifting of subsedies, etc. ide^
In the sixth Chapter is contained,
Private men may not intermeddle nor take upon them the office of a Magistrate
without some lavvfull calling thereunto. page 47. The people of every kngdo^,
country, or city, divided into 3. sorts. ide^. Two things especially to be
considered in the sixth duty of subjects unto Caesar. 48. The revenge of any
injury to whom it properly belongs. idem. The six causes of
undutifulness of subject; added and briefly entreated of, in the end of this
loyal subjects Looking-glass. 1 Pride. 2 Ambition. 3 Envy. 4 Lack of
vvisdome and knowledge. 5 Coffeehouse of mind. 6 Misliking and inueighing
against the punishment of malefactors.

The aforesaid six causes of subjects undutifulness contained in these vi.
verses following.
The cause why subjects duties fail, who lists to have descride,
Let him give ear, and mark a while, the first cause it is Pride:
The second is Ambition: Envy the third place will have,
The fourth is want of knowledge sure, and want of vvisdome grave,
The fifth cause who desires to know, is minds coffeehouse,
The sixth is the unjust dislike of lewd men's punishment.
(...) contained in the 6. causes of subjects undutifulness, added in the end of
this treatise.
AS Satan of a glorious Angel, through Pride became anvglie devil, forsaking
his loyalty to God, so the same Satan by the same pride, daily tempts man
to fall away from loyalty to higher powers ordained of God for man's good.
page 50. Pride wherein it consists idem. Honorable hours and great men in
the world, through pride have wrought their own utter confusion. 51. The
devils craft and subtlety to ensnare men through pride, and to bring them
thereby to treason, conspiracy and rebellion. ibid. Of Ambition the second
cause of the undutifulness of subjects, and here what ambition is, and who are
said and noted to be ambition. 52. Notable examples of ambitious men's filles
and of the manifold most notorious mischiefs and inconveniences that many have
fallen into through ambition. 54. Of Envy the third cause of subjects
undutifulness: from whence Envy springs, and of the fruits thereof. 55.
Diverse similitudes describing the nature of Envy. ibid. None never so virtuous
escape the virulent and sianderous nippings of the envious crew. 56. Of want of
wisdom and knowledge, the fourth cause of subjects undutifulness. 58. The
great inconveniences that fall out through want of wisdom and knowledge in
indiscreet subjects. idem. Princes purposes, policies and proceedings, not yet
published and known abroad, are not to be condemned and misconstrued. 58. Of
discontentednesse of mind, the fifth cause of subjects undutifulness. 60. Two
sorts of subjects especially troubled with coffeehouse of mind, etc. idem.
The wicked nature and ungodly, vndurifull and disloyal positions, and evil
corrupting words of desperate godless Athrists, prodigal spendals, and
roysting caualliers, bewraying their contempt of God, and undutifulness to
higher powers and magistracy 60 and 61. Counsel and directions for unthrifts
and wast ales to take another course. 62. Misliking of due and deserved
punishment of malefactors, the sixth cause of the undutifulness of subjects,
and of their errortherein. idem. Advise, counsel, and necessary directions
for busy mislikers and indiscreet inueighers, against the punishment of evil
doers, etc. 63.64.
A loyal Subjects Looking-glass.
The Preface.
A Most Christian King, a most sincere professor, J Rex. in his treatise of the
true law of free Monarchies.
and defender of Gods eternal truth, yet at this day living, (and maugre the
heads of the most subtle suggesting serpent, and all his wicked, traitorous,
and rebellious imps, long may he live) has written, that next the knowledge of
God, the right knowledge of subjects allegiance according to the form of
government established among them, is a thing most necessary to be known. The
ignorance hereof, The effects of the ignorance or contempt of the right
knowledge of subjects alledgeance.
or (that which is worsse) the retchlesse and wilful contempt hereof has
bread the heavy calamities, the endless troubles, and the most miserable
wreacke and overthrow of sundry flourishing commonwealths, and also the
worthily deserved fall and confusion of the state, lands, goods, life's and
blood of many disloyal, infatuated, maliciously given, malecontented,
ambitious, traitorous conspiratours, and rebels, in many heretofore flourishing
commonwealths, kingdoms, and monarchies. Examples hereof, and that diverse
within the kingdoms of England and Scotland, are yet greener, fresher, and
more common, both in the hearts and mouths of thousands yet huing, who have
been both eyed and eared witnesses of the same, then that they can casilie be
forgotten. Least therefore any other subjects now living, The special causes
that moved the author to write this present treatise.
or their posterity, or any other generation yet unborn, should be hereafter
trapped in the like snares, and so become subject to the like confusions, (the
natural zeal that I bear to my native country, and the great grief I have
to hear and see my poor countrymen, either so ignorant, or so careless of
true loyal subjects duties, me there unto special moving) I have here done
mine endeavor to set down in this present treatise, the true grounds of the
most special duties, which natural subjects are found to perform to higher
powers, whether they be supreme Maiestrates, Magistrates and governors are of
two sorts.
as Emperors, Kings, and Princes, Gods own lieutenaunts, vicegerents, and
deputies, or whether they be their subordinate magistrates and inferior
officers, which also in their degrees and places are the ordinance of God, for
the good government of men, that under them they might lead a quiet and a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

The grounds of this present treatise, or Loyal subjects looking-glass (for
so not incongruently I have entitled it in the beginning) I purpose through
Gods assistance to draw out of the words of Christ Jesus his own mouth, From
whence the grounds of this present treatise are drawn.
which I have thought not impertinent here to insert. Give unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's. By the which word Caesar, (for so were the Roman
Emperors called, like as the Kings of Egypt were always called Pharaos) is
not only to be understood the person of the Emperor Tiberius Caesar then
reigning and ruling, What is to be understood by the word Caesar. The
Anabaptists then never learned of Christ to disalovve Magistracy.
but also every other Emperor, King, Prince, and civil Magistrate, temporal
ruler, worldly governor, or officer whatsoever. Moreover by these words of our
Savior Christ, it is further to be understood and learned, that he misliked
not, nor condemned, but approved, allowed and confirmed all civil regiment,
politic state, and order with all things that to it appertain.

Now for the things which are Caesar's, that is for all duties which subjects
do owe and ought to perform to all their superior governors and
magistrates, that is the matter which I have here specially to deal with, that
is the mark which I have chiefly to shoot at, and those things by diligent
reading, searching, and observing of learned authors, both divine and profane,
I find to be espedially fix, to wit: 1. Six things especially due unto
Caesar.
Obedience. 2. Fear. 3. Honor. 4. Prayer. 5. Tribute, taxes, subsidies, etc.
6. Not rashly to take in hand (or intermeddle) with any part of Magistrates
office without a lawful calling.


Which said six duties of subjects due unto their Caesar, I have comprehended
in these verses following.

Six things by right are unto Caesar due, 1. Obedience first unto his just
decrees, 2. Next fear insixt in hearts of subjects true, 3. The third is
honor due from all degrees, 4. The fourth for happy state of Prince to pray,
That God with peace may still his life prolong: 5. And fifthy tribute willingly
to pay, Whereby his wealth may daily grow more strong, 6. The six that none
presume for glories sake, Vuc^lde the parts of Magistrates to take.
CHAP. I.
Concerning Obedience, the first duty of a loyal subject.

ALL Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other supreme Powers, and Magistrates, of
what names or titles so ever, according to the fashions and custom of all
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the world, are Gods Vizeroyes,
Vizegerents Lieutenants and Deputies here on earth, and all subordinate and
inferior Maiestrates and Governors, having their commission out of their
principal commissions, though but durante beneplacito, at the will and
pleasure of the higher power, Wherefore magistrates were ordained.
yet for their time they are also ordained and appointed of God: All such both
supreme and inferior civil magistrates are ministers armed both with laws
and sword, to be nursers to Gods Church or people, and Fathers to the
commonwealth, to guide, govern and order the people within their several
circuites and charges, whose hearts are in the Lords hands, and the Lords sword
in their hands, to execute justice and discipline, as well in Ecclesiastical,
as in all other causes, for the benefit and good of the good and the punishment
of the bad. These are exalted and enthroned only by the will and ordinance of
God: By whom the higher powers are ordained. Prou. 8.15. Wis. 6.23.
So God himself protests saying: By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. So does the Wisemen tell and teach: Give ear ye that rule the
multitudes, and glory in the multitude of the people, for the rule is given
you of the Lord, and power by the most high: Wisd. 6.23. So the Prophet Daniel
speaks of God saying: Dan. 2.25.
He takes away Kings, and sets v^ Kings. Yea more clear is it then light
it self, that not only good Emperors Kings, and Princes, are of God: but
also very tyrants and the worst Kings, and Princes, be they never so great an
evil, be they never so great a plague to their own subjects, or to their
neighbor nations.

Good Kings are given of God in his great mercy, Tytants and bad Kings are
also set up and ordained of God, and wherefore.
and evil Kings in his wrath and justice: for the finnes of the people he
gives an evil king in his anger, Hoseas. ^ 3.11. for the sins of the people
he suffers an hypocrite to reign, Job. 34.30. Evil Princes are the
instruments of Gods justice, and the executioners of his vengeance, as their
very titles declare, for so was Ashur called the Rod of Gods wrath, Esa. 10.5.
So was Nabuchodonozar King of Babel called Gods Servant, Ierem. 27.6. So did
Attyla that most valiant Scythian Prince, conqueror of diverse countries,
kingdoms and nations, call himself Flagellum Dei; the Scourge of God. So was
Tamberlaine that cruel tyrant King of Parthia called Ira Dei and Terror orbis;
the wrath of God, and the terror of the world. Unto these and all such like
were they good or bad, among diverse other duties does God himself appoint and
command every Christian subject, Obedience due unto bad kings.
of what rank or degree so ever to yield obedience. This is one of those
things which our Savior Christ spoke of, when he said, Give unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's. Romans 13.1.
Thus says his chosen vessel S. Paul; Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be
ordained of God, Romans Tit. 3.1.
13. Also he writes unto Titus after this manner; Put them in remembrance that
they be subject unto Principalities and powers, and that they be obedient, etc.
Tit. 3.1. Saint Peter also taught by the same spirit, says; Submit your selves
unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as to the superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: for it
is the will of God that by well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
the foolish men. 1. Pet. 2.13.14.15. Diverse and sundry are the reasons and
causes which should move and stir up Christian loyal subjects to this duty
of obedience, Three arguments or reasons to persuade to obedience: out of Romans
13.1, 2, 3. etc.
whereof the Apostle Paul in the before noted place, Romans 13. uses three
several arguments to persuade thereunto. The first drawn from the excellency
or worthiness of the first author or ordeiner of Magistrates, which was God
himself; and therefore whatsoever God himself first instituted, ordained and
founded, that is most worthy to be embraced, received, regarded and obayed. The
second reason he there uses, is taken from the penalty and punishment that
follows such as neglect, reject, and contemn this obedience to the higher
powers, and that is judgment, which is not only the judgment of earthly
judges, but also the vengeance of God for their resistance and rebellion
against Gods ordinance. The third argument is also drawn from the end; for
which Magistrates were ordained and set up by God, which is for the praise and
good of such as do well, but on the otherside to terrify and take vengeance
on such as do evil, for the sword is not put into their hands for naught, or
to do nothing therewith. Two arguments or reasons ^o persuade to obedience:
out of 1 Pet. 2.13, etc.


Two of the very same reasons to induce and persuade to this dutiful obedience
uses the said S. Peter in the before alleged place. 1. Pet. 2.13. Moreover to
move subjects the more readily and willingly to yield obedience unto these
higher powers, God has adorned and beautified the state and persons of
Magistrates, with most honorable titles, recommending unto men the dignity
thereof, in that he vouchsaueth them sometimes his own name and style, as in
Psalm. Magistrates called gods a^ in Psalm. ^2.6. and wherefore.
^26. I have said ye are Gods. Whence we see then, that men placed in
authority are called Gods, because they represent his Majesty in ruling and
governing his people, this is a reason of no small importance to work
obedience to Magistrates in Gods people, if so be that they be of God indeed.
God so honors rulers and governors, that in token thereof he inuesteth them
with his own name, to teach their subjects that they should obey them as they
would do him, to whom that name does of best right belong.

To stir up and draw on good subjects the more readily and willingly to
obedience, let them view and behold, yea though it be but a little and a far
off, Of the deformities and ugliness of rebellion, and whereunto it is likened.
the deformities and ouglinesse of rebellion, and the heinousness of
disloyalty, which may not unaptly be called Monstrum horrendum, inform,
ingens, cui lumen ademptum; An horrible, great, blind, and an ill favored
monster: which not unfitly resembles that confused Chaos spoken of by Hesiodus
the Greek Poet, and described by Ovid to be Congestaeodem non been iunctarum
discordia semina rerum: or most fitly it resembles even hell it self; Aug.
lib. ser. sermon. 26.
as S. Augustine writes of it, to be a place Plenus ardore incomparabili,
plenus saetore intollerabili, plenus dolor innumerabili, vbi tenebrae, vbi
horror aeternus, vbi nullus ordo, vbi omnis miseria. So that Tuchydides the
Greek Historigrapher writes full truly of it, E. N.
that Rebellion is all kind of evil. And as truly says a later writer of it;
that Rebellion is not only a sin, but even the sincke of all sin; for
herein lurketh the puddle of all filthy sins whatsoever, against God and
man, against Gods andointed Vizegerents, Deputies and Lieutenants, against
country and countrymen, against parents, children, kinsfolks, and friends. In
rebellion is open and manifest perjury.
In rebellion is apparent perjury, whereby Gods holy name is contemned and
dishonored, by breaking of oaths, and renouncing alleagiance before sworn to
lawful Kings and Princes, by calling to witness the name and Majesty of God.
In rebellion is swearing and blasphemy.
In rebellion most wicked, detestable, vain swearing and blaspheming of Gods
holy name, and of the parts and members of the blessed body of Christ Jesus,
break out without either fear of God or any controulment of laws. In
rebellion is profaning of the Sabbath.
In rebellion you shall see the Lords day neglected, unhallowed, and the
reverent use thereof profaned, not only by the rebels themselves, but also by
those Christians that would full gladly and withal their hearts keep it holy,
and yet hereby are forced to assemble and meet armed in the field, to save
themselves, their goods, houses, wives and children against the invasion and
fury of rebels. In rebellion are thefts, murders, robbing and spoiling,
whordom, rauishme^ts of widows, wiue, and maids, etc.
Most er^ant thefts, desperate robberies, and most cruel murders, with
spoiling and bloud-shedding violence, not against a few, but whole and
infinite multitudes, do then most range, when rebellion bears the swaye.
Damnable whoredoms, adulteries, fornication, sorcible rapes and rauishments,
violating and deflowring of matrons, widows, men's wines, daughters, virgins
and maids, are most rife in time of rebellion among most horrible and damnable
rebels. And finally among these most impious and atheistical rebels, In
rebellion is the breach and contempt of both Gods laws and man's laws.
are all laws both divine and human, broken, contemned, and trampled under
foot, and all manner of sins possible to be committed against God and man
are set abroache. Who then is so blind but he may even with half an eye, see
and easily discern the wonderful difference between this beastly mother
sin, this terrible monster of rebellion, insurrection, disloyalty and
disobedience to higher powers, and the most excellent, sweet, amiable, and
most precious gift of God, blessed Peace, the daughter of Christian,
faithful, and dutiful obedience. For by the one, namely rebellion, shall men
reap such unsavory, such infected and poisoned fruits, as you here before
have read or heard of: By the other, to wit, Commodities of peace and obedience.
Peaceable obedience shall good loyal subjects dwell without fear, every man
under his Vine, and under his Fig tree, from Dan unto Bersheba: from
Portsmouth in the South parts of England, to Dungisbie in the North parts of
Scotland, and so through out the utmost parts of all good King James his
fortunate kingdoms and dominions. How foolish, how be witched, and how
insatiated are then those subjects, that will not lay hold on, follow and
embrace this so commanded, necessary, profitable, dutiful and loyal
obedience, Ambabus vel vtrisque manibus.
and that obuijs vlnis and (...) ( quod aiunt (...).)

To persuade and allure subjects to dutiful obedience, both holy Scriptures
and diverse learned profane writers have sundry examples, most manifestly
setting before men's eyes, To what end good examples of obedience do chiefly
serve. What use to make of the examples of disobedient and rebellious subjects.
and consideration of their hearts, both how the best sort of subjects have in
this case of obedience behaved themselves, (whose examples in this tempestuous
and blustering world may serve as they were anckers or staves to stay, and as
it were firmly to stablish wavering minded subjects by) and also examples of
the worst sort of subjects, whese ambitious aspiring minds, and envious
rebelling heads have procured both their own and their posterities most
miserable ruin and utter overthrow, that such like affected subjects as they
were, might by their precedent falls, learn in time, and beware, and stop
the beginnings of all disobedient, rebellious and seditious practices.

For the better sort of subjects, Two of the best examples of obedient and
dutiful subjects.
let David his behavior whiles he was yet a subject, out of the old
Testament: and Christ Jesus his behavior, when he yet in his manhood wandered
for a time, and conuersed with us here on earth, out of the new Testament be
set before our eyes to view and consider of, for our learning and instruction,
in the steed and name of all the rest, as most fit and lively paternes for
all good, loyal, and true hearted subjects, to shape, fashion and frame their
duties by: whereof David when God had delivered his bitter persecuting enemy
King Saul into his hands in a Cave where David and his men had hid themselves
from the presence of Saul, 1. Sam. 24.4.5.6.
when and where David wanted neither fit occasions nor exasperating counsel
to have killed his aduersatie the King, being so near him that he had cut off
the lap of his garment, yet he abstained from so undutiful a fact, praying the
Lord to keep him from doing any such thing unto his master the Lords
anointed, and with earnest entreatie overcame his servants that they should
not arise against their King. 1. Sam. 26
The like also fell out an other time not long after, when David and Abishai
entered King Saul's camp, both the King himself and all his host being cast on
a deep sleep, and came so near the kings body, that Abishai carnestly prayed
David to give him leave to smite the king with his own spear, affirming that
he would lay it on so soundly, that one stroke should serve to make him sure
for ever, yet David would not consent unto this, Learn of David not to yield
to bad counsel although it seem never so good and necessary.
but prayed the Lords as before to keep him from laying his hands on the Lords
anointed. Many examples before this had David showed of his prompt and ready
obedience to his Sovereign Lord and master King Saul; yea even to the often
hazerding of his blood and life against the Kings enemies the Philistines, as
the books of Samuel in diverse chapters do testify. And here now in these two
examples of sparing the Kings life, being so straunglie delivered into his
hands, he sets forth a general rule and lesson for all subjects in the
world among all posterities, What David's example does teach.
not in any wise to resist higher powers, nor by their own private authority
to take the sword in hand, nor to consent to the taking of the sword in hand,
to kill or hurt any King or other supreme ruler and governor, no not although
it lie in their power never so easily, without any blood shedding, tumults, or
great broils to effect the same.

This good subject David was so loving and kind, yea even unto a bad King his
undeserved enemy, and every where hunting after, and thirsting for his
innocent blood, that at the very last cast of King Saul, when an Amalekite by
his consent and request had slain him, and brought the first tidings thereof
to David, supposing to have received some great reward at David's hands for his
news, upon the knowledge there of David after he had a while mourned and
lamented the death of Saul, he asked the messenger whether he were not affraide
to lay hands on the Lords anointed to destroy him; and presently commanded
one of his servants to kill him for that act by his own mouth confessed. O
David, David, thou most worthy mirror of obedience and dutifulness to Gods
substitutes here on earth; what if thou were alive in these our days? Thou
that did so readily obey, so reverently use, so patiently forbear, so
sorrowfully mourn and weep for the death, and so willingly revenge the death
of a wicked King, that had been so disobedient to God, and whom God had
therefore utterly cast off, with what reproachful terms and irefull words
would thou not exclaim upon, and revile, yea with what tortures and torments
of most shameful death would thou not destroy, such forlorn devilish
bloody hel-hounds, such desperate treacherous conspiratours, and viperous
rebels, as most naughtilie, unkindly, and unnaturally against Gods Church,
their native country, the Kings Majesty's person and estate, will attempt to
hazard the lives of so many thousands of men, women, and children, by deposing
or murdering so kind, natural, and loving a King, as is now our most noble
Sovereign Lord King JAMES, Concerning King James, and his lurking adversaries.
so gracious a King, so careful and provident for the good and welfare even of
his worst subjects, such a mainteiner of blessed peace and quietness, not only
at home, but also with foreign nations, and neighbor countries round about,
such a favorer of all humanity and learning, such a Mecoenas of the learned,
most bountiful to all goodmen, yea though to his own private loss,
hinderance and charges, and so necessary a head for the whole body and state
of all his realms kingdoms and dominions? Let this one notable example of
David that good and obedient subject serve in this place for all other out of
the old Testament. Out of the new Testament what more excellent and worthy
example can be produced to be considered or meditated upon, The most worthy
example of Christ Jesus, for obedience to magistrates. Mat. 22.21 Mar. 12.17
Luke 20.25 Romans 13.
and carefully to be imitated of all good Christian subjects, then that of
Christ Jesus himself, who all the time that he wandered up and down on earth
in our flesh, though he were very God as well as man, yet he never disdained to
reverence and obey such as were in authority in his time, he never behaved
himself seditioustie, nor rebelliouslie, but rather taught and commanded, to
give unto Caesar the things which unto him belonged; openly he taught the Jews
to pay tribute unto the Roman Emperors, openly for himself and his Apostles
he paid tribute, yea when he wanted money, Mat. 17.27
rather then he would fail in paiments due and accustomed to the higher power,
he miraculouslie caused a Fish to bring him xx. pence to discharge such duties
for himself and his company. And he himself and his Apostles received many
and diverse iniuties at the hands of wicked and faithless magistrates, yet
neither he nor any of them ever moved nor stirred up any sedition or rebellion
against any governors, and such as were in authority, but patiently without
resistance put up, digested, and quietly suffered all vexations, slanders, and
wrongs, knowing that the authority of power was instituted and ordained of
God, and therefore both with their words they taught obedience, and in all their
doings they gave examples of the great reckoning and account that they made of
the same. Among many other examples of the new testament this only may suffice
which our Lord Jesus Christ has given for an eternal example to all manner of
subjects, to teach them to yield this christian and dutiful obedience to all
Sovereign Emperors, Kings, and Princes, yea though strangers, wicked and
wrongful, if God at any time for our sins sake place such over us. But some
man may here ask a question and say, how and in what manner should a subject
obey his sovereign in such sort that he may be assured that his obedience
shall be accepted before God, A question concerning obedience resolved.
and dutifully discharged before man? To whom I answer. A faithful and a true
hearted subject must be careful and heedfull to serve and obaye his sovereign
in thought, in word, or deed. A faithful and a true hearted subject must be
watchful and wary that he offend not, that he break not his allegia^ce
neither in thought neither in word, nor in deed. And first concerning thought:
Note this, Ephe. 6.6.
that if God will have servants obedient to their masters in singleness of
heart, not with eye service as menpleasers but from the heart. Ephesians. 6.6. how
much more fit and meet is it, that subjects should obey and serve their so
ueraigne with the like singleness and simplicity of heart and not with
outward shows only, where their hearts concur not with their outward
appearances. And God is a spirit. Io. 4.24. and will have himself worshipped
in spirit and in truth, so let no subject doubt of it, but that he will
likewise have his own chose^ deputies, his own sword bearers, to have their
due yielded them from the heart, he himself knows the imaginations of the
heart and all the secret thoughts therein, 1. Chro. 28. Pron.
he himself says, Da mih^cor; Give me thy heart. And shall not they whom the
same God has ordained, appointed, and substituted to be his deputies,
vizegerents, and ministers, to supply his room and place among men have and
be served with the very hearts of their subjects? Surely they are very
ungodly men, and as the holy ghost calls them the sons of Belial, 1. Sam.
10.27.
that is vnyoaked persons, which refuse to draw in the yoke of loyal and
dutiful obedience, and that even from the very heart, which is that part of man
that God most chiefly respects. And note this moreover, that God in plain
and express words prohibiteth cursing of the king, yea even in secret thought:
Eccl. 10.20.
thence then we may plainly gather and learn that as God will not have a king
to be cursed, no not so much as in the secret thought of a subject, so no doubt
on the other side the same God will have a king to be served and obayed yea
even in secret thought. Christian, godly, wise, and dutiful subjects ought to
repress and suppress in themselves every insurrection in mind, and all
deprauing and light account of their Soueraigns, and a disloyal thought ought
not to have any place or possession in any corner of their hearts, for the
reverence of the king has God settled and seated immediately upon the conscience
of the subject, so that what subject soever deiecteth the King out of his
conscience deiecteth God himself who requires to sit in his conscience, and
that subject which willingly, wittingly, and seeingly yields to entertain in
his thought an vnreuerent estimation of his Sovereign, What it is for a
subject to foster and cherish an evil thought in his heart against his
soucraigne.
cannot be excused in that very act from despising and despiting of God, for
though the external subjection and obedience be never so great and strict, yet
his contemptuous thought (though the disreuerence be never so secret) cannot
stand without the contempt of God, and that conscience that is guilty of
despightfull and quarrelsome thoughts against the Lords anointed (how closely
so ever it lurketh) is filthy, Epist. Jude. verse 8.
as Saint Jude says.

And therefore as true loyal subjects do tender the quiet and safe keeping of
their own consciences, they must tenderly and carefully keep the obedience
and reverence of their King in the reins of their thoughts, which is the very
original fountain of all true obedience, flowing and issuing out first from
the very internal thoughts of the heart. Pro. 4.23.
Keep thine heart with all diligence, says the wisdom of God by Solomon:
for as the heart is either pure or corrupt, so is the whole course of a man's
life.

A man that would have water sweet, clean, and wholesome, for his meat,
drink, or any other his necessary use, must be careful to keep the very
springhead clean, clear, and free from all poison and corruption: Even so a
good subject must always be mindful to preserve the thoughts of his heart
pure and free from any contemptuous rebellions or disloyal conceits against
his supreme head, and so shall he easily by such custody of the heart,
preserve and keep the purer both his words, and all the actions of his life,
both for duties toward God and toward Caesar. We find it and prove it too
true by our dear bought experience, Ier. 17.9. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.
and the holy ghost does teach us the same in plain terms, that the heart of
man is deceitful and wicked above all things.

O how needful then is the counsel of Solomon before cited, To keep the
heart with all diligence, with inward diligent keeping, and with outward
diligent keeping, with inward diligent keeping, least corruption arising from
the inward thoughts of the heart, burst out from thence to the polluting and
defiling of our words and deeds in duties toward our Sovereign: with outward
diligent keeping, least from without from ouer-familiar conuersing, and
company-keepings with the ambitious, rebellious, and other wicked, disloyal
and male-contented persons, the devils outward means, which he uses to the
seducing of good subjects by them, by their counsels and entising persuasions
to corrupt, infect, and poison the very intrailes of the heart and secret
thoughts.

Full wise, and very necessary is the counsel of the Poet: Obsta principijs
sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas conualuere moras. Quid:

And an other says: Stop the beginnings, so shall thou be sure,
All dangerous diseases to help and to cure.
If any impious, irreligious, fawning, flattering Absolon-like natured subject,
with fair speeches, flattery, and great promises assault thy simple and
plain meaning heart, What is to be done when a man is entised or drawn by any
kind of means to yield to treason.
drawing by any way and means toward disloyalty, mark such well and avoid
them, nay not only that, but moreover, be he never so noble, never so popular,
never so well-beloved, never so mighty, nay if he were the son of thine own
mother, or thine own son or thy daughter, or thy wife that lies in thy
bosom, or thy dearest friend which is to thee as thine own soul, if any of
these, yea if all these should entise thee, allure thee, or go about cunningly
to with-drawe thee from any one jot of true and dutiful allegiance, yet keep
thou diligently thy thoughts, thy words and thy deeds, from yielding unto them,
keep diligently the passages of thy senses so that they make not an entry
into thine heart, resist the enemy rather without the gates, then within the
walls: consent not to any such entisers, hear them not with thine care, pittye
them not with thine eye, keep not their secrets in thine heart, Treason is not
to be hid and co^cealed for any man's sake.
but discover their plotting conspiracies and traiterous patching practisies,
be he or she never so near, never so dear unto thee: yet show rather thine
obedience to God, thy true loyalty to Caesar, and thy christian love to thy
Country, from which let not all thy friends in the world withdraw thee, for
as that good and most famous father of his country Cicero said once very well,
Cicero in Laeliosuo.
Nulla est excusatio peccatisi amici causa peccaueris. It is no excuse for
thine offense, if for thy friends sake thou do amiss. Take example and learn
of Mordacai who with all expedition detected the conspiracy of Bigton and
Teresh against their king Assuerus: Ester. 2.2.
which their treason should have been put in execution the next day at the
kings next going abroad had not faithful Mordacai disclosed the same, and
that as soon as ever he knew it. Delay is dangerous especially in fire and in
treason. 1. Kin. 8, 3
Subjects in whom true allegiance has taken sure root must be most careful
herein, yea even in the very beginning, for in fire and treason. Moratrahit
periculum, lingering delays in this case are perilous. Finally as wise Solomon
prayed unto God to turn the hearts of his people to him: so like a good
subject pray thou to thy God to convert and turn the hearts of all subjects to
their kings, and pray thou likewise to the most high and mighty king of kings
to direct thy heart, thy secret thoughts, and therewithal thy words and
proceedings to the performance of all loyal obedience, and reverent duties to
Caesar, and see that thou break not thine allegiance to him in thoughts, nor
words much less in open actions. So doing among manifold other graces,
favors, and blessings which shall follow thee and overtake thee in earth, Pro.
22.11. What use is to be made by the examples of bad subjects proceedings, and
of their end. Absolon his example of treason, and of his end. 2. Sam. 15.2.3.4.
etc. What outward practices Absolo^ used to bring his wicked rebellion about.
And were four: 1. Slander. 2. Flattery.
this is one promised to him that loves pureness of heart, that the King
shall be thy friend, Pro. 22.11. and in heaven thy felicity shall be to see God,
by the promise of Christ Jesus his own mouth as in Mat. 5.8.

Thus much for the good, and imitable examples of the obedience of the best
subjects, and of the manner of true obedience. And now a while to speak of some
examples of worsse kind of subjects, of their contempt, disobedience,
conspiracies and rebellions, against the higher powers, whose ends, bad
success, and shamfull confusions, may be warnings and caueats for all
posterity to take heed of the like disloyal and traitorous enterprises,
least they bring the like ends with them. And among these, first to begin with
Absolon, the worst son of the best father that ever we read of in these
cases, a double traitor; a traitor to his father, and a traitor to his King,
though all against the only person of David his father, who first by
slandering, secondly by flattery, thirdly by fair promises, and fourthly by
hypocrisy attempted most high treason. First by slandering his fathers
government, as though therein were to justice ministered, nor any body deputed
to hear and determine matters in controversy. Secondly by flattery, in
doing obeisance, putting forth his hand, 3. Fair promises.
taking and kissing such as came near unto him: Thirdly by fair promises,
that if he were made a judge he would do judgment to every one that should have
any matter or controversy: 4. Hypocrisy.
And fourthly by hypocrisy counterfaiting holiness to go to Hebron, to serve
the Lord there by performing of a vow, and offering a peace offering, whereas
in deed he meant no such matter, but only in that place under that color to
draw an head of his fathers subjects to depose his father from his kingly
throne, and himself to usurp the same. O most vile, traitorous, and double
unnatural fact: but mark the end what became of it, The end of all Absolon
his cunning and traitorous practices.
what success had he, how prospered he? Ahitophel his chief counsailer hanged
himself, twenty thousand of his followers poor seduced common people were
slain in the field, by king David his servants, (God favoring a righteous
cause) and Absolon himself though a man of very goodly person, dearly beloved
of his father (who for all his rebellon yet gave commandment to save his
life) and also mightily favored and followed of the common people, so that by
all likelihood, no man would or durst lay but the weight of one finger on him,
to hurt him: But yet notwithstanding all this, God above the king of all kings,
disliking this rebellion and forbidden disobedience against such as he in his
wisdom sets up in authority, to leave an everlasting memorial, and a
terrible example of his vengeance against all such to the end of the world, did
not only confound and overthrow all his conspiracy, treason and rebellion, but
also rather then there should want a gallows or gibbet, or an halter to trusse
up one that had so well deserved such a death; God provided an Oak tree to
serve that turn in steed of a gallows, 2. Sam. 18.9.14.
as he was fleeing by the way, to hang him on by the hair of his own head
instead of an halter, until Ioab hasting to the place, with three darts thrust
him through, and so ended him, 2. Sam. 20.22.
whom he found hanging alive, when he came first to him. And what better speed
had Sheba an other traitorous rebel against the same king David, lost he not
his head? had he not his head cut from his shoulders, and sent for a present by
the citizens of Abel unto Ioah, David's chief captain? And what shall I write
more? It would make this my Looking-glass too large and too heavy if I should
as fully, as of such matter there is store, display herein the vile treacherous
beginnings, the most horrible, envious, malicious, ambitious, and rebellious
proceedings, and the worthily deserved shamfull ends of Korah, Number. 16. 1.
King. 16. 2. King. 15. 2. King. 21.
Dathan and Abiram, of captain Zimbri, of Shallum the son of Iabesh, of
Pelah the son of Remaliah, of the servants of king Ammon that slew their
master the king. And in profane hisstories of Brutus and Cassius that
conspired the death of Caesar after whose death they never had quiet day till
blood was requited with blood. Brutus and Cassius.
Of Engenius that rebelled against the Emperor Thcodosius, Trip. hist. lib. 9.
ca. 4^.
whose rebellious army the Lord consumed and dismaide, whereby Eugenius was in
the end forced to fall down at the feet of Theodosius, where notwithstanding
he was slain and had his rebellious head cut off from his shoulders. Of
Procopius against the Emperor Valens, Trip. hist. lib. 7. ca. 15.
of whom Procopius being taken in open fight in the field, he had for his just
reward his two legs tied to two young trees growing near together and bowed
down by strength, which being suddenly let rise, rent Procopius the rebel
asunder. Lib. eccl. 10 cap. 19.
Of Magnensius the rebellious tyrant against Constans the Emperor who never
enjoyed good day after his rebellion till he was utterly destroyed by
Constantius the Emperors brother. And in our English Chronicles of diverse
Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Knights, and thousands of their followers. And
likewise in the Scottish I need not to bestow neither time, paper, nor ink (it
being lately heretofore done by others) upon the description of the
unnaturalness barbarity, and high traitorous, and viperous attempts of diverse
Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of late time, and of many of the common
inferior treacherous sort, adhering and ready at command of the said Noble men
and their accomplices, Genesis 27.16.17.
all of them differing far from the spirit of Moses that man of God who was
more troubled in his spirit (being forwarned of God of the time of his death)
for a governor for his people then for the loss of his own life, whereas
these on the otherside showed themselves very forward, earnest and busy,
though with danger of the loss of their lives, lands, and goods, to deprive
the people their neighbors, countrifolks, and friends of a most christian
virtuous, wise, and learned governor, and to set all upon seven and a leaven,
for the effecting and bringing to pass of their deuillish, wicked, desperate
and unnatural treacherous enterprises. But seeing that both sacred and
profane histories, both English and Scottish Chronicles may furnish us, as it
were with whole clouds of such examples for caueats and warnings in this case,
let all English, Scottish, Irish, and all other good king JAMES his now living
subjects, Learn to take warning by other men's falls
and their succeding posterity lay to their hearts, consider, take warning,
and learn to be wise by such conspiracies, factions, seditions, commotions,
rebellions, lewd dispotions, inconsiderate and wicked attempts, foolish and
rash actions, recorded Ad perpetuam rei infamiam: Faelix o nimium faelix aliena
pericla
Quem cautum reddunt quemque cauere docent.
O happy are those subjects sure,
whom rebels harms make ware:
Full quietly may they take rest,
when rebels catke and care.


Full truly did thou write o Ignatius, Ignatius epist. 2. ad Magnesianos.
thou good old christian and constant martyr of Jesus Christ in the Primative
church, No man ever remained unpunished which lifted up himself against his
betters, his superiors, his princes: Agreeing herein with the doctrine of the
holy ghost by S. Paul: They that resist shall receive to themselves judgment,
Romans 13.2.
that is not only the punishment of judges here in this life, but also the
eternal vengeance of God in the life to come: Two kind of punishments of
treasons.
For the punishments of disobedience and treason are of these two sorts; either
punishments of and by God, or punishments of or by man. The punishments of men
are mediatly laid upon conspirators, rebels, and traitors, by men whom God does
use as his rods and instruments against them to correct and scourge them by:
The punishments of God, are those which are sent from God immediately, whereof
there wants not many terrible, fearful, and extraordinary examples, as
hereafter anon you shall more at large here of them by diverse their several
sorts and kinds. The punishments that falls upon such treacherous offenders
mediatly by man, are punishments in death, punishments in blood or posterity,
The manner of the death of traitors, and what is signified by that kind of death.
punishments in name, punishments in burial, punishments in body, punishments
in offices, punishments in howses, lands, and goods. The punishment in death is
by a special appointed manner of death, not common after the common sort of
other offenders deaths, but as they offend against no common person, but
against the head of the commonwealth, so is their death for the most part by
the head being taken from the rest of the body, as in their life time they
conspired, practiced, and sought to cut off their supreme Sovereign head, even
so by most just death they suffer Legem talionis, the Law of like for like, for
affecting though very seldom effecting (Interueniente plerumque prounclis suis
protectione diuina) the most wicked, bloody, irreligious and impious
subversion, and utter downfall of kings and princes, whom God has set up to be
rulers, governors, and heads over his people. Punishments of traitors in blood
and posterities.
The punishments in blood and posterity, is when their children, and childrens
children, their blood, and all their posterity through the attendor and
shameful fall of their traitorous parents and auncetors, are so stained and
dishonored, and their ancient houses, lands, and goods so dissipated and
overthrown, that their posterity though they spare with open mouths to
exclaim upon them curse and ban, yet they cannot choose but even volentes
nolentes at one time or other burst out, and to future ages bewail and lament
their ancestors treacherous disloyalty to their Princes and country.
Punishment of traitors by nature, how it is.
Punishment in name, is when the very name of rebels and traitors gives a most
odious scent and smell throughout the whole land, and reaches also unto the
ears of the inhabitants of neighbor nations, leaving every where behind it so
unhappy, so hated, and so infamous, and so reproachful a memory, that the
traitors bird may say of his Sire and lewd progenitor; Genesis 34.30
Thou have made our favor to stink before the inhabitants of the Land.

Punishment in burial or rather through want of burial, Punishment of
traitors in burial.
is when traitors bodies are dismembered by peece-meale, and being fixed upon
the gates and walls of great cities, are exposed to the eyes and reserved for
a fresh remembrance among all men, who seeing their mangled and unburied lims
might learn by such woeful examples to beware of the like offenses.

Punishment in bodies is by the imprisonment, Punishment of traitors in body,
and how.
by torments, tortures, and rackings of those bodies which in the time of their
health, wealth, prosperity and liberty, they yielded to become bond-slaues to
most brutish passions and deuillish affections against God and his anointed.
Finally, punishments in offices, houses, lands and goods, are by forfeitures
and loss of houses, lands and goods, from themselves, from their heirs and
seed for ever.

The second sort of punishments which are imemdiatly from God upon traitors,
Ierem. 27.8 Number. 16. 2. Sa. 18.9.
rebels, and conspiratours, are famine, pestilences, leprosy, fiery serpents,
earth opening to swallow up, confederacy of unreasonable and senseless
creatures, deprivation of a good conscience, tormenting with an evil
conscience: finally casting out of the inheritance and state of the kingdom of
heaven, besides many other worldly crosses and calamities by God himself laid
on the necks and shoulders of this lewd rebellious generation, for si sera
tamen certa vindicta Dei. Though Gods vengeance be slack and long in coming,
yet when it comes, it lights on soundly and surely.

Wherefore as Saint Cyprian wrote, Cyprian his bridle against going an end in
sin.
Si quam turpem cogitationem in mentem tuam venire animaduertis, sulcipe statim
iudicij extremi salutarem commemorationem. If thou once perceauest any filthy
by-thoughts to enter into thy mind, straight way call to remembrance the day
of doom or last judgment of God. Even so would I wish, that when traitorous
thoughts and conceits do once arise and creep into your minds, you would
oftentimes think on and daily speak of those sundry and manifold
judgments and punishments which resisters and rebels have received, suffered,
and been made subject unto, through Gods stroke and just judgment for their
disobedience and disloyal practices.

Besides those things heretofore noted, An other reason or argument to move to
obedience.
to move and stir up men to dutiful obedience, I may also add this, an
other forcible argument to obedience; that if we do but a little look about
us and consider we shall easily spy that very natural instinct has wrought,
framed, and planted this obedience, awe and fear, in reasonlesse beasts,
fowls, and fishes, to one or other superior in their several kind, as among
beasts to the Lion, among the birds to the Eagle, among fishes of the sea to
the Whales, and in pooles to Pikes, yea even among the poor Bees, there is a
king whom all the rest of that company most willingly accompany, wait upon,
follow, and obey. And shall man only degenerate and in this point show
himself inferior and worse then beasts, fowls, fishes, yea even then the
poor little creature the Be. But if I should here stand upon this point of
obedience at large, and set down here all that of this matter may be said or
written, answer all objections, and refute all adversaries, then should this
one chapter concerning obedience unto Caesar grow rather into an huge volume,
or large book, then contain it self within the ordinary bounds of a
chapter: and therefore having herein as it were pointed at the grounds of this
matter, with some few reasons, examples and exhortations to teach the ignorant
and to put all others in remembrance (for that In bonis obliuiosi sumus
plerumque omnes) of this so necessary a duty to be performed by subjects unto
Caesar's, I will here end this first chapter, referring the christian reader
that is desirous to learn more then is here touched and set down, to the
reading of those learned and painful authors in the page before the beginning
of this present chapter set down, where he at large may be satissied out of
such places as they entreat of obedience for any doubts, questions, objections,
or controversies, which for want of time or for any other considerations are
here omitted.

CHAP. II.
Concerning Fear, the second duty of a loyal subject.

SOme men (though not very advisedly nor considerately) do blame and find
great fault with the affection of Fear, as a thing unprofitable, hurtful
also, and not falling for, nor beseeming a wise nor a valiant man; whereas it
is naturally given of God to all flesh, and is not only profitable for the
estate of man, but also expedient and necessary for religion, How necessary a
thing fear is, and how profifable.
and for all civil policy and government among men. Take away the fear of
evil, and the awe of chastisement, correction and punishment, and what way
shall there be left to rule and order unbridled youth, or to restrain the
wickedness and unruliness of ill disposed subjects in any commonwealth?
Oderunt peccare mali formidine paenae.
Is it said for naught, that the evil do fear to offend for dread of pain?
Or does the holy ghost in vain teach by his Apostle: In cave thou do amiss
then fear, for the sword is not carried in vain. To what end both in sacred
and profane writers are the examples of such written, as for their evil and
naughty lives and deeds have fallen into great mischefes and utter
ouer-throwes, if there shall be no use of fear in us, by which we may be
restrained and made the more wary, least we by the like doings fall into the
like inconveniences as they have done before? God himself as appears in
holy-writ, does admonish us and teach us to fear the King, Pro. 24.21. Romans
13.4.
and to fear the higher powers, which he would never have done unless that
fear had been both necessary and profitable for the children of God. How true
this is, it may appear both in Pro. 24.21. My son fear the Lord and the
King. And in Romans 13.3. Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for
evil: will thou then be without fear of the power? do well, so shall thou
have praise of the same. 4. For he is the minister of God for thy wealth, but
if thou do evil, fear, etc. Here hence then it may easily be gathered and
concluded, that fear, and that not without good cause and great reason, may be
reckoned and accounted among the number of those duties which all loyal
subjects are bounden to yield and give unto higher powers, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and other magistrates, and that it is comprehended within that precept
of our Lord Christ; Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. This fear is
out of question one of those things which is Caesar's, and therefore to be given
unto Caesar. But that you may the better understand the circumstances of this
fear, and so become the more thoroughly resolved in the duty of a true subject
herein; you must observe, that the ancient Grecians which for arms and arts
flourished most in those days among other nations, Two kinds of fear.
have distinguished fear into two kinds, the one good and very necessary,
the other naughty and very pernicious: this good fear said they turns men
away from wicked, prohibited, and dishonest things, The profits of good fear.
and makes them stayed and well advised in all their actions Plutarke writing
of this kind of good fear, calls it one of the elements or grounds of
virtue, Plutarke his opinion of the good fear.
affirming it to be most needful and requisite for the^ who carry a mind rather
to fear the practice of evil, the^ to fear the punishment for the same,
because the first which is the practice of evil, is the cause of the later,
that is, of the punishment for evil to so many as wallow in wickedness, which
never escapes without it just reward sooner or late. Therefore a prudent and
well advised loyal subject, ought to have this fear always before his eyes:
Timor filialis.
this fear I may not unaptly call a childly or child-like fear, because it is
inseparable joined with true love and a reverent estimation of the thing
feared. This I take to be the same fear which the wisdom of God by Solomon
required as due both unto God and king. Pro. 24.21.
This is the same fear which the good subjects of wise king Solomon gave unto
him, after that he had given so wise a sentence and judgment between the two
harlots pleading for the living child, where it is thus said. All Israel heard
the judgment which the King had judged, 3. King. 3. verse. 28.
and they feared the King, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to
do justice. In this fear, in this kind of fear, love, and a reverent
regard or account, and fear, do all three concur and meet together, and
that in such a ioynted and inseparable a sort, that you can not sever them one
from an other. The duty of this filial or childlike fear, of this good and
profitable fear, is to cause and stir up good subjects to have an eye unto
the good and safety of higher powers and magistrates, to love them as well as
to fear them, and therewithal to account of them, esteem and regard them in
most reverent manner, always being careful and watchful least through any
disobedience or disloyal action they should offend: The nature of the good or
childlike fear, explicated by two similitudes.
even like as the good and dutiful child is afraid to offend or incur the
displeasure of his good, kind, loving, and natural parents, or as the good and
loving wife is afraid to misbehaue her self either by saying or doing any
thing that her loving and kind husband may justly take offense at. The duties
or effects of the good or childlike fear.
The duty of this good fear, is to make men both apter and readier to
undertake and to execute all good, godly, virtuous and laudable matters,
whenever any good and just occasion shall be ministered, and also more stayed
and better-aduised: not rashly, wilfully, and inconsideratly to take in hand
any wicked, unlawful, unjust, ambitious, malicious, disloyal and rebellious
practices and attempts, that by the sequile thereof may procure damage danger,
wreake, confusion or overthrow of our kings rulers, governors, or of the
common wealth, or perhapps of our selves, our lands, goods, and blood for ever.
If we confer and compare together the workings and effects of the fear of a
towardly scholar to his schoolmaster and of his good fear, What fear in the
scholar works toward his schoolemaister: the like does the fear of the
subject toward his sovereign.
it shall help greatly both to the better and plainer understanding hereof,
and also it shall greatly avail to stir up and induce the hearts of all
circumspect and wise subjects to make more account of it, and the more
willingly to embrace it.

First a reverent fear imprinted in the heart of a scholar toward his
schoolmaster, bridleth and restrains him from the contempt of his master, and
expels from him all carelesnes and negligence. Even so this fear bridleth
and restrayneth a good subject from all contempt, carelessness, and negligence
of his loyal and bounden duty toward his Sovereign Emperor. King, Prince, or
any other subordinate magistrates. The first use of fear in a subject,
Secondly the fear in the scholar to his master causes him to be the more
attentive to hear, and the more diligent to learn whatsoever his master
enioyneth him. Even so this fear in the subject toward his supreme head and
his substitutes which also are the ordinance of God, The second use of fear in
a subject.
causes him to be much more willing, attentive, and diligent, to read, hear,
learn and understand, the proceedings, laws, ordinances, acts and statutes of
his king, that he may the better know what is there allowed or forbidden, and
so live in the more obedient subjection, and not through either ignorance or
w^lfull obstinatenesse to prefer his own will before his lawful magistrates
and higher governors will, What it is to disobay Princes and governors laws.
or rather before Gods will: for when a subject does any thing stubbornly
against the decrees, laws and ordinances, set forth by his natural king and
his most honorable counselors, not repugning but agreeable to Gods laws, then
that subject in so doing prefers his own will, not only before the will of
the king and his counsel, as though he only were wiser then they all, but
even also before Gods will, and so sins very dangerously against both God
and man. Therefore I say that this good and necessary fear, helps greatly to
stir up every faithful subject heart to be contented both to learn and
know, and so consequently to be ruled by good and wholesome political laws,
and so thereby to declare his subjection to Gods appointed deputies and
vicegerents, and therein even to God himself. But here some stubborn and
foolish ignorant subject, in whose garden the seed of this good fear was
never sown, An objection.
may perhaps reply and say unto me: O sir if the king himself commanded me
to do such a thing, or such a thing, then it would never grieve me to do it and
obey, but now such a one calls on and would urge me to it, not so good a man's
child as I am, or a base borne fellow worse then my self, what shall I be
subject to such a one and obey what he will? no, no; I will sooner do, yea mary
will I, I wot what first. To the replication of such an haughty broyling
spirited, An answer to an objection.
and obstinate, stubborn, rebellious minded subject, I reioynd after this
manner: O thou man void or ignorant of all dutiful fear belonging unto
Caesar, learn and observe that worthy, (and in this case) that necessary Canon
of God by S. Peter. 1. Pet. 2.13
Submit thy self not only unto the King as to thy superior, but also unto
governors sent of the king. And learn likewise of an other of Gods chosen
vessels S. Titus. 3.1.
Paul, not to swell against, not to threaten and crack, but rather in steed of
that to pray, not only for kings, but also for all that are set in authority
under them. And learn that not only the king and supreme magistrates, but
also that even likewise subordinate, subalternall and inferior magistrates and
officers are ordained by special institution according to Gods will reueiled:
and that although inferior persons have their authority derived unto them but
by virtue of a commission out of a commission in the respect of the Prince, yet
so long as the prince sends him and allows and confirms his authority, so
long is he called and sent from God, in respect of thy conscience: thou art
bound to obey for thy conscience sake, thou may not resist for receiving to thy
self condemnation or judgment, of what parentage, birth, or degree soever he
be, yea or of carriage or behavior otherwise soever he be, be he never so bad
a fellow as thou take him after in thine own humerous construction, Private
subjects of what note so ever, may not control or resist magistrates or their
officers though they be very bad me^.
for Quid haec adte, ti^i hic non est concessum iudiciunt, si m^^o ^ger^, habot
iudi^^m cui in di^ illo rationem reddit? What have thou to do or meddle to
censure his birth, his preferment, his parentage, or who has appointed thee a
judge for his other bad qualities, or misbehauiour. If he do amiss he shall
be suit to have a judge which one day shall call him to an accounte of his
steward-ship: In the mean time none of these by matters nor hoate protended
excuses can discharge thy duty and obedience: Nisi cogeret te contra dei
praeceptum quippiam agere, hic obedientia reprimenda est and dicendum est
oportet deo plus obedire quam tibi: Always provided if he go about to
enforce thee by virtue or under color of his office, to attempt any thing
against Gods express commandment and will, here in this case only art thou
not bound to obey: but thou may answer with the Apostles Peter and John, I
must obey God rather then you, Acts. 4.19.
here only art thou exempted from obedience, and herein yet thou may not in
any wise draw thy sword against any magistrate, thy self being a private
person; for Christ himself in this case says unto thee that which he once
spoke to Peter: Mat. 26.52
Put thy sword up into his sheath, for all that take the sword shall perish
with the sword.

Thirdly the fear which the scholar has of his master makes him careful
to do those things which are right and good, and to avoid the contrary
according to his masters appointment. The third use of fear in a subject.
Even likewise this aforsaid good and necessary stars, frames and fashioneth
in every faithful and true subjects heart, an carnest desire to obey those
whom God has set over him in all good and godly things, which they command to
be done, and eschewing those evil things which they have by their laws in any
wise prohibited and forbidden, yea although there be no penalty at all set
thereon.

Fourthly like as the fear in a scholar makes him in the end to become
learned and loving to his master of whom ^he has received both learning and
good manners the effects and fruits of learning, although at the first he were
forced thereunto with fear contrary to his own mind, will, and froward
nature. The fourth use of fear in a subject
Even so this good fear in a good subject brings him into an habit of all
dutifullnesse unto his magistrates, makes him to be come cunning and skillful
in the knowledge of a true subjects allegiance a thing (as is aforesaid) most
necessary for every subject to be acquainted with: It is aforesaid in the
first page.
next the knowledge of Gods laws, and moreover it causes and works in every
loyal subject a reciproke love toward his King, Prince, etc. in li^w and
regard of the manifould and great blessings and benefit, which he receives and
daily and howerly enjoys by his superiors good protection and government.

Filtly and lastly like as a scholars fear which he has, always moving and
stirring him up to all dutiful obedience and love of his master, draws a
certain good liking, inclinatton, and kind affection, love, and good
commendation from the master to the scholar, upon the first trial, and
continued proofs of these virtues issuing and proceeding first from his
reverent fear. The fit use and profit of fear in a subject.
Even so experience may every day teach every one that will give his mind to
note and consider hereof, that this loyal subjects dutiful fear, after a time
of trial and due taste thereof, and of the effects and virtues thereof arising,
will win and draw out of the hearts of the king or other supreme heads and
magistrates, a certain reciproke mutual love and good liking of the higher
powers, toward all such dutiful and loving subjects as shall turn to their
great and singular comfort, if not to his preferment, to his exaltation, and
the lifting up of his head amongst his brethren and felow-subiects. Now as for
the most part there is not lightly any thing so good, profitable and necessary
amongst men, but it may be corrupted, depraved and decline to the worse part
through the abusing of the same; Even so likewife this fear having all these
before named most excellent quallities, Fear although it be a necessary thing
to be given to Caesar, yet may it be abused.
fruits, and effects, yet if you look not well unto it, through the devils
suggesting and man's natural corruptions and infirmities, this so good and
necessary a virtue may notwithstanding be diverse ways be abused: as first the
abuse of this fear arises of the vnmeasurablenes thereof, for as the common
saying is, Omne nimium vertitur in vitium, The first abuse of fear.
too much of any thing is faulty, then they incur a manifest abuse of this
fear which go so far forward therein that they stand in greater awe and fear
of the power of men then of Gods power, which are thoroughly touched with a
bodily fear of man, which if they do the worst, can but kill the body, but God
who is able to kill both body and soul, they fear not at all, or at the
leastwise not so much as men. This perverse abuse of fear does Christ himself
correct and reprove, as appears in Mat. 10.28. Fear ye not them which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather sear etc.

The second abuse of this fear is when the penal laws statutes, forfeitures,
The second abuse of fear.
and losses of trifles and things of no moment nor weight in comparison,
devised and set down by men as for the breach of any good orders, or of Gods
^^ait commandment, is more feared, and greater account made of it, then of
Gods severe threatening and curse for the very self same offense, as for
example; Let either magistrate or private person within his own charge, set
down the forseiture but of one penny, yea though it be less, disbutsed and paid
to the pooremans box or any other use, for every vain oath unnecessarily
sworn, and that shall prevail more to fear many from blasphemous and vain
needless swearing, then can the grievous threatenings of God, to cast both
soul and body for ever from the joys of heaven to the torments of hell, and
all for the self same fault and vice. Lo here a marvelous abuse of fear: yea
and as it is in this example so it holds likewise in many more other of the
like nature.

The third abuse of this fear is, The third abuse of fear.
when God either commands any good thing, or forbids any ill, yea and
that with either a gracious promise annexed for the doing of the one, or a
grievous punishment for the other: And man commands or forbids the same,
yet these things are done, or left undone the sooner and with greater care and
fear of the commanding or forbidding by some great men, whom the world is
afraid of or honors and loves, then they were for either the fear or love
of God: before that any such great man in the world undertook to deal in
those things. Examples good store, such as in the last second abuse is set
down, for this third might be produced, but the case is so plain that every
man but of mean capacity may easily see and understand it.

Let this suffice concerning the good, profitable, and necessary kind of fear,
Of the second kind of fear.
spoken of before in my distinguishing of fear into two kinds, and now a while
to the later or second kind, which was the pernicious or naughty fear, and
this the Grecians also express by these two words, to wit, (...), and (...),
the one signifling trouble, the other a band, as if they would have said, that
it held the soul wholly troubled and bound, they describe this fear also to be
as it were a giddines and as it were an alienation of the mind from the right
sense, making the soul idle, dead and void of every good exploit, or effect
whatsoever. And this latter kind of fear works in the wicked a fear of
pain and punishment appointed for offending, whereby they are as it were
curbed and kept back as with a bridle, and restrained from presuming to commit
their wicked hearts, desired villainies, and damnable purposes.

This fear is of some called a servile fear, Of the servile fear.
which works neither by love nor reverence, nor any other virtuous quality,
as does the former filial or child-like fear, but only through an horror of
punnishment which holds back from practicing mischievous purposes. Of this
spoke the Philosopher Py hag^ras, when he said, that he that is let from
doing of evil for no other respect, but only because he would not be punished,
is very wicked: And yet whereas the Apostle Paul in the before cited place
bids to fear Princes, Romans 13.4.
if they do evil, because the magistrates bear not the sword for naught. This
same canon for this kind of fear is very necessary for the preservation of
humane society, for if this were not, all would run on heaps (as they say)
through the licentious, shameless, and naughty disposed natures of the wicked,
The use and profit even of servile fear in some sort.
perverse sort of people, wherewith the whole world now in these last days
swarmeth. And we must think and consider, that it is far better that the
reprobate wicked ones of the world should through this kind of fear be
brideled from the accomplishing of their vile wil^s and desires, then that they
should have full liberty at their pleasures without all fear, to put them in
execution, albeit that yet they cannot be so holden for excused before God, It
is not only to fear evil, and to reframe evil for fear only.
who requires it at all men's hands, that both evil should be avoided, and
good should be done of all inwardly with heart and spirit, as well as outwardly
for any ca^e or consideration so ever. And yet nevertheless we see it often
tunes fall out by common experience in the world, that such kind of fear does
not always so stay them from doing of evil, but that though they forbear and
hold under for a while, yet so much the more they are inwardly inflamed, and
kindled with a desire to satisfy their corrupt wills, which at the length
violently burst out, and evidently then may the world see what mischiefs they
harbored and secretly sostered in their hearts a long time before.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Honor, the third duty to be performed and given by a loyal
subject to the higher powers.

THe third duty due unto Caesar, as is to be gathered and learned both by the
fifth commandment (as generally all that have written thereon, both old and
later writers have noted) and also by the doctrine of the two before named
Apostles Peter and Paul, is Honor the King. This honor due unto Kings,
Prince, Gouernouts, etc. is by their subjects over whom God has placed them
many ways to be given and performed. The word honor, by a figure, Honor what
it signifies.
signifies all that duty, whereby the digni^ie, credit, and estimation of
all, but especially of superiors is or can by any means be preserved and kept
untouched or undefaced. The actions of honor are diverse.
The actions whereof are many, and consist in many points: as first, that
subjects of what rank, sort or degree soever should humbly submit, give over
themselves, yield up and resign all their actions, wills, Of the first kind of
honor due unto magistrates.
and affections unto their superiors, to be willingly without resistance ruled
and guided by their commandments, by their laws, acts, statutes, ordinances,
and decrees: so they be not wicked, impious, and repugnant to Gods express
will and commandments, and of this manner of honor is at large spoken before
in this treatise in the describing of the first duty in the first chapter.

The second action whereby this honor is to be showed, Of the second kind of
honor due to Magistrates.
and wherein it consists, is in talk or speech, either of them or with them;
in talk or speech of them, that is, that the subjects communication and talk
of and concerning magistrates, rulers, and governors, be always honorably and
with reverence toward them, that they take heed and beware that they do not
diminish nor empaire their excellency or dignity, by unseemly, vnreuerent,
and contemptuous words, and herein also is included the abstaining and
forbearing of all manner of evil speaking, mocking, scorning, scoffing,
deriding, reuiling, cursing, or banning of superiors, as things most
vnhonorable, yea worthy of death, Exo. 21.17. Exo. 22.18. Prou. 20.17. How
honor is to be given to magistrates in talking with them.
And as honor is to be given and exhibited to higher powers and states in
talking of them, so is it also in talking to and with them, as in giving them
their honorable right and just titles, thereby in speech to declare a due and
worthy reverence and estimation of them when any talk is had with or before
them 1. Pet. 3.6. Mark. 10.17 1. Sam. 14.15. In letting them speak before us.
Job. 32.6.7.17 in keeping a reverent silence in courts and judgment places in
their presence, until we be bidden speak, and then not to be sawsie or
malapert in words before them. The third kind of honor due unto superiors.
Act. 24.10.

The third thing, way, or means by which superiors are to be honored, may
appear in the subjects behavior and gesture in their presence, as in bowing
the knees to them, Mark. 10.17. Genesis 18.2. In standing by them when they sit
down. Genesis 18.8. Exo. 18.13. In giving them the chief feats 1. King. 2.19.
Luke 14.7.8.9. In reverent rising up before them as they pass by. Leu. 19.32.
In meeting them, as they come toward us. The fourth kind of honor due unto
superiors.
Genesis 18.2. 1. King. 2.19. Fourthly they are to be honored inwardly in the very
secret mind and affection, that is, their subjects are to think honorably,
lovingly, and reverently of them from their very hearts, acknowledging them to
be the deputies and ministers of God, provided and sent of God for their weal,
and the rather to move subjects more willingly and readily to yield them their
due honor, they must learn, know, and consider, that whosoever honors the
deputy, is counted thereby to honor him that appointed the deputy, and
whosoever despises him whom God has sent, despises therein God the sender,
and whosoever persuades himself that external honoring of his Prince is
sufficient, Eccl. 10.20
though inwardly in his heart he foster and harbor a contemptuous, malicious,
and rebellious thought, that man is altogether deceived in such his conceit,
for that subjects conscience that is guilty of dishonorable and quarrelsome
thoughts against his supreme head and governor (though he keep it never so
secret) is wreacked, and such a one is given over unto other vnco^scionable
faults: Epist. Iud. 8
as S. Jude witnesses, That they are filthy persons that despise government.
And therefore as subjects do fear to be delivered up into a reprobate mind, The
beginning of all conspiracies, treasons, etc. arise from the heart that first
fails in honoring the highest powers.
and tender the works of godliness in themselves, let them tenderly keep the
houourable reverence of their Prince in their minds, inward affections, and in
the reins of their consciences: for the neglect and small regard and care
hereof, has bin the very fountain and wellspring of all conspiracies,
treasons, and open rebellions, to the ruin and utter confusion of thousands.
And thus far concerning the third thing due unto Caesar.

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning prayer, the fourth duty of a loyal subject.

AS every faithful and loyal subject is to give unto Caesar obedience, fear,
and honor, as here before in this present treatise you have hard it plainly
laid down and proved, so likewise for a fourth duty, are all true hearted
subjects, bound, taught and commanded by God in his blessed and sacred word to
pray and call upon him for the prosperous estate, good success, and long
continuance of kings, 1. Tim. 2.1.2. Iere. 29.7. Baru^. 1.11
princes, and all such as are set in authority, that the society and company
of mankind may live quietly and peaceably under them, considering how
burdensome crowns and scepters, how hard the welding of them is, and how
difficult a matter it is to discharge them well, whether it be in respect of
themselves, or of their subjects. They must be prayed for, that they may have
Gods favor and his needful protection from all wicked, treacherous and
rebellious assaults, both of foreign enemies and home-borne, desperate
male-contented, dissembling, hypocritish, corner-creeping conspiratours, they
must be prayed for unto the Almighty, that he would direct, guide, and lead
them in such ways as are most acceptable to himself, and that he would
preserve them from all evil: What things especially are to be prayed for in
the behalf of kings, princes, etc.
they must be prayed for that they may have the honor and fear of God before
their eyes, as the only mark to aim at in all their proceedings and purposes,
and that they may be endued from above with the gifts of knowledge, prudence,
Justice, temperance, fortitude, upright severity, discreet clemency, and an
earnest zeal of Gods glory, Gods truth, and of the welfare of their poor
subjects committed to their charge.

They are to be prayed for, that like as God has delivered and put his sword
into their hands, so he would take their hearts into his hands, Things to be
begged by praver in the behalf of kings, princes, etc.
and so temper and guide them, that they may use his sword according to his
own will and pleasure, for the cherishing and praise of their well-doing
subjects, but to take vengeance on them that do evil; and finally that they
may set before their eyes, meditate and consider well of the good and imitable
examples of good, godly and virtuous Kings, Princes, Judges and governors, as
of David, Ezechias, Josias, Moses, and such other like, unto these commended in
holy scriptures, whose paths they may tread, and whose famous, godly, and
zealous acts they may follow.

Thus in old time God commanded the Jews to pray for the life of
Nabuchodonazer, and for the prosperity of Babylon, as in Ierem. 29.7. And in
Baruch. 1.11. Pray (says he) for the life of Nabuchodonazer king of Babylon,
and for the life of Baltazar his son, that their days may be on earth, as
the days of heaven. etc.

Thus many years afterward did S. Paul exhort, 1. Tim. 2.1.2.3.
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men, for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

And who was that King Nabuchodorazer, What a kind of king Nabuchodonazer
was, for vvho^ God commanded prayer to be made.
that the Prophet so exhorted the people to pray so for him and his son
Baltasar? It was even such a one as had with sword and fire overrun their
whole land, burned their country, their towns and cities, yea even Jerusalem
it self, wherein was the holy temple of the Lord, that they trusted so much
unto, such a one as had slain their king, their nobles, their parents,
children, kins folks and friends, and had carried them away captives to
Babylon, he was an Heathen king, a tyrant, a cruel oppressor, and a bloody
murderer of many thousands of their nation.

And who were chief rulers, What kind of rulers they were for whom Paul
exhorted
and had the supreme authority in those days, that the holy spirit of God by
Paul exhorted that prayer and supplications should be made for such. Truly
about that time reigned the Emperors Caligula, Clodius, and Nero, no
Christians but Pagans, and that was worse, most cruel persecutours, martyrs,
and murderers of godly professed Christians. And does God himself command,
charge, and exhort their subjects to pray unto him for such Emperors, Kings
and Rulers, as were strangers, Pagans, Heathen, Infidels, murderers, tyrants,
cruel oppressors of them, ransackers and destroyers of their country and
friends whatsoever: How deeply then are good Christians, and all loyal
subjects bound continually to pray unto God, and to praise God, for the blessed
and most happy government of godly, zealous, and most Christian Kings and
Governors, and for infinite benefits and blessings powered upon them by such
government? What it is not to pray for kings, princes etc.
Surely to fall into such extreme ingratitude, and seeinglie, willingly, and
wittinglie, to incur such retchlesse and profound obliuiousnesse of Gods most
bountiful blessings through want of prayer and thanksgiving in this case, what
is it else then to commit a most heinous and grievous sin against God,
against such gracious governors, and against their own country, against
themselves and the common wealth, and thereby to provoke God to take away such
blessings, and to cause them to feel many things, that willingly they would
not, and to bear burdens of griefs, that otherwise they should not, and that
worthily too: This was an exercise in the time of the primitive church both
highly regarded and fervently followed, their forward and prompt inclination to
pray for Magistrates may appear by due testimony of diverse godly writers in
those days, In the 30. chap of his Apology.
whereof let only Tertullian at this time speak for the rest, who says thus:
We pray always for all Emperors, desiring God to give them long life, a sure
reign, a safe house, valiant armies, faithful counselors, honest subjects, a
quiet world, and what soever else a man or Emperor may desire. The king of
kings for his son Christ his sake, grant true Christian subjects the like
fervent zeal and willing spirits, to be the more diligent, watchful, and
mindful herein, that Caesar may have his due, and God his glory, for ever and
ever.

CHAP. V.
Concerning tribute, taxes, subsidies, etc. being the fifte thing due unto
Caesar.

THe fifth among those things which are due to be yielded unto Caesar, that is,
to every King, The causes for which taxes, subsedies, etc. are grievous and
odious among the common subjects.
Prince, civil Magistrate, and temporal ruler, is tribute, subsedies, taxes,
and other such like customs, a thing I know very grievous to the ears, and no
less odious to the hearts of a sort of simple ignorant people, and that partly
because that at such paiments the poorer sort of the comminaltie are oftentimes
forced by the richer and more able sort (as it is Vox populi, and would to God
it were not too true) to beat the heat and burden of the day, and to
sustain the greatest charge and paiments, whereas they that are ten times the
more able, are nothing the like, for their substance ratablie ceased, but can
easily invent, devise, and use diverse cunning subterfugies and starting shifts
to draw their necks out of the heauiest part of the yoke, verifying the old
saying; The weaker must be thrust to the wall. And partly also because that
lightly in all ages there have ever started up (if not in deeds, at leastwise
in contumelious, slanderous, undutiful, Acts. 5.
and disloyal speeches) some such Theudasses and Iudasses as doctor Gamaliel
spoke of in Act. 5. mutinous reformers, grudging and male-contented reuolters,
viperous conspirators, and routing, rioting, rebels, which under pretense of
the common good of all men, and bearing the people in hand that they sought
for, and coueted only a reformation of disorders and a redress of
commonwealth matters, have spoken against the payment of tributes, subsidies,
and such like taxes, which appertain to kings and princes, affirming them to
be oppression and extreme poulling of the poor comminalty, and so have drawn
the silly ignorant unconstant sort of people at leastwise to murmur, grudge,
and exclaim against them, if not to take arms upon them: Yet notwithstanding
what soever can be devised to be said to the contrary upon the heads or by the
means of any such lewd, wicked, malecontented and insurrectious authors, who
both they themselves and their seduced silly followers through out all ages
have come ever to a bad end. This have I read, and this I wish all true loyal
subjects to consider of, which for my own part I dare not nor I cannot but
with all mine heart allow of, to wit, Hyperius in Romans 13.6.
that Ius pendendi vectig alia apud omnes gentes fuit semper receptissimum: The
law of tribute paying amongst all nations evermore has bin a thing most usual
and accustomed: and unto this in the same writer this reason is added, Recte
perpendunt omnes ac fatentur, quantum and quam vtile sit humanae societati
magistratuum officium, du^ ij pro salute hominu^ sine intermissione invigilant,
atque hoc nomine vectigalia haud grauatim omnes illis pendunt. All men do right
well consider, and confess, how great and how profitable the office of rulers
and magistrates is for the maintayning of the society or fellowship of men,
whiles that they watch and take pains for the safety of men, and for this
cause they pay their tributs most cheerfully and not grudgingly: The same
Hyperius upon the Romans 13.
And again he says, Hoc scripturae approbant, hoc leges ciuiles communi
gentium omnium consensu recipient: This do the scriptures allow of, (writing
there of tributes paying.) This do the civil laws with the common consent of
all nations accept of. And a none after he concludes this matter of tribute
paying with these words, Vectigalia iuxta receptissimum omnibus gentibus ius
sunt danda, idque pro quadam contestatione obedienciae magistratibus debitae,
ob beneficia quae per cosdem in communi vita obueniunt. Tributs according to
the law admitted among all nations are to be paid, and that for a certain
witnessing of obedient magistrates, for the benefits which in common life befall
by them. Theophilactus and Bucer their opinions concerning tributes, taxes, etc.
And Theophilactus an ancient, a learned, and approved author co^menting upon
the Epistle to the Romans chap. 13. upon the words of the Apostle Reddite
tributum says thus, verbo reddendi significat debitum quod inexcusabile
subditis impositum est. And Bucer a latter writer yet of great reckoning,
reading, and learning, agreeing with the same Theophilact says: Non damus sed
reddimus quicquid ex officio cuiqua^ damus, etc. As who would say, subsidies
and taxes are not gifts but debts, a gift is a thing in the free choice and
liberty of a man whether he will give it and depart with it to an other yea or
no, and if he will not give it, yet no man has any remedy or course by law,
to constrain him to give: but debt is a thing which no man can choose whether
he will pay it yea or no, it must of necessity be paid, the laws will force a
man to pay it, will he, nill he, and of this nature are subsidies, taxes and
such like unto Kings, The only lawful remedy against subsedies, taxes, etc.
Princes, and supreme governors, debts, not gifts, due and paiable by the
laws both of God and of all nations: no with-standing, no pleading to the
contrary, no denial, no excuses will serve. There is no remedy for to free
subjects from them, but only the compassion, pity, and bountifulness of the
king, prince, etc. in pardoning and remitting the same, Diverse causes
wherefore tributes, subsedies, etc are to be paid.
Tributes, subsidies, and such like customs, according to the accustomed
orders of that country and common wealth wherein any subjects do dwell, are to
be paid for diverse causes, as first for the maintaining and upholding of that
royal estate which God has given to Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc.

Secondly, tributes and customs are to be paid by subjects for the defense
and maintenance of the common wealths, in quietness, peace, and security, and
to the intent that they may be preserved the better, especially in time of
wars, (...). lib. 2. How necessary money is in the wars
necessary provision must be then had, and as our most noble king James has
very truly written, especially money is to be had in a readiness, for that it is
Neruus belli, without which wars cannot be borne out, and through want of it,
kings and princes shall either be forced to yield unto most dishonorable and
disaduantageous peace, or lie open, both them selves and their subjects to the
open rapine and outrageous violence and spoil of foreign inuaders and
bloodthirsty enemies; so that their goods, wives, daughters and lives shall be
made common and commanded by others, Customs, subsedies, taxes, etc. are
sinews of the commonwealth says Vlpia^.
and as the same noble and learned King calls money Neruus belli, so before
him Vlpian that most famous writer of law cases has called tributes and
customs Nerui reipublicae, the very sinews and strength of the commonwealth,
without which it can neither consist nor be well governed, for according to the
old said saying; A great bird has need of a great neast, what or who is able
to reackon up or truly to number how many ways and upon how many occasions
the kings money must still be running: little wottes, and full little considers
the common private people, what affairs their governors have to use money in,
and to exhaust not only their purses but their coffers, and that Pro aris et
focis, for the good, safety, and safe keeping even of them and theirs, that
most murmr, mutter and grudge at the payments of such customs, by which such
things cannot otherwise be effected.

Thirdly tributes are to be paid by loyal and faithful subjects, The third
cause of paying of Tribute, Taxes, etc.
thereby to contestate and acknowledge their subjection to their Sovereign,
who for his good and royal preservation has power to command them, their
goods, their lands, their lives and whatsoever they have, their souls only
excepted, for that is to be resigned only to God animam deo, corpus regi.

Fourthly and lastly, these tributs and taxes are to be paid by good subjects,
yea and that with good and reverent affections to their Princes, in regard of
thankfulness for benefits by them and by their means received. As David in
his lamentation for the death of king Saul, 2. Sam. 1.24
calling to remembrance the benefits which his subjects had reaped by him in
his life time, said to the daughters of Israel, Weep for Saul which clothed
you in skarlet with pleasures, and hanged ornaments of Gould upon your
apparel. Lam. 4.20. The benefits that come by a King, etc.
And again as the prophet Ierem. said of king Josiah, that he was the breath
of their nostrils, and that under his shadow they had been preserved alive
among the Heathen. Even so may I say and write unto all wise and discreet
loyal subjects, were it not for the care, vigilancie, pains, and circumspect
government of your kings, princes, etc. what would become of your brave and
fine attire, of your costly and gorgious garments, of your most exquisit fine
linnin, of your silks, of your veluets, your skatlets, of your exceeding
sumptuous clothings, your ornaments of gould, your surpassing apparel, The
benefits that subjects receive by their king and governor.
and of all your pleasures that your selves, your sons, and your daughters do
take therein. Nay more then this, what would become of the breath of your
nosestrills, that is of your very lives, then which what can be more precious
unto you, and how were it possible for you to be preserved alive among your
enemies so greedily on every side hunting for your lands, your goods, and all
those treasurers whereof you make most account, were it not that you are
shadowed under the wings of the lords anointed of king, princes etc. unto whom
for these and exceeding many more benefits received, and discommodities and
mischiefs avoided, too many for me hear to repeat by name, (next under God
the primary author of all goodness) you are altogether beholding for these so
great blessings, which none knows nor considers how great they are but such as
have taffed and smarted for the want of them. Let subjects therefore be think
themselves in their consciences how much they are bound to their sovereigns,
and study to be thankful again to them, as in all other duties and
obediences, so also in this point of cheerful and willing paiments of
tributes, taxes, etc.

Tributes and taxes are the lawful revenues of Princes, Calvin in his
institut. lib. 4 ca. 20. sect. 13.
which they may chiefly employ to sustain the common charges of their office:
which yet they may likewise use to their private royalty which is after a
certain manner conjoined with the honor of the princely state that they bear.
But yet always so provided that Kings and Princes should on the otherside have
this for their parts-still in remembrance, that their exchequers, and
treasure-chambers, are not so much their own private coafers, as the
treasuries of the whole land. Let not this doctrine that Tributes are so
necessarily and strictly to be paid, be an occasion to encourage Princes to
wastfull and unnecessary expenses, A lesson necessary for Kings and Princes to
observe and practice.
to ryote and excessive abuse of the treasuties, or rather the sweat of the
brows, and the very blood of their people, which not to spare is cruel and
tyrannical unnaturalness, and let them no otherwise think but that those
impositions, taxes, tributs and charges of money or provision which they
receive from their subjects, are especially to be supports, shields, and
bucklers for public necessity, wherewith continually without intermission to
burden and weary out the poor comminalty, especially without some great cause
is tyranicall extorsion. A lesson for subjects to note and observe.
Neither on the otherside let this doctrine concerning Princes be an occasion
for common people and private men, little acquainted with princes affairs,
rashly and stubornly to entermeddle with judging of condemning or censuring of
Princes expenses, although in their silly simple judgment they exceed and
offend in lavish excess in many things, and many times Ne suitor vltra
crepidas. In deed subjects must help and aid their civil Magistrates,
especially the higher powers, whenever occasion and necessity shall so
require, yea though it were with the bestowing of their bodies, lives and
blood, much more with the tribute of some small portions of their goods.

The Saints did gather their goods in common to help the Magistrate, Bullinger
in his second Decade upon the 5. and 6. comma^deme^ts.
so often as public safegarde did so require. The Isiaelites of all ages did
always fight for their Judges, for their Kings and other Magistrates, and
likewise did all other people upon good advise taken: and on the other-side, so
did the Princes for the people, such has been the force of the reciprock and
mutual love and duty, such has been the zealous and godly naturalnesse in
cities, kingdoms, and commonwealths, between Kings, Princes, Judges and
governors, and their natural and good loving subjects. Taxes and tributes and
other paiments of the like nature, as learned writers, and reverend authors do
teach, ate due to Magistrates as the hire of their labors, and as it were (as
before was noted out of Vlpian) the sinews of public tranquillity and
commonwealth, for who goes to warfarre on his own proper costs, every man
lives by that labor wherein he is occupied. The Prince takes pains in
governing the commonweal and preserving it in peace, he neglects his own
private and household business whereby he should live and provide for himself
and his family, by looking and attending on his country affairs. It were
against reason therefore but that he should be maintained upon the public
treasure and cost of his country. It is most requisite also that kingdoms and
commonwealths should be sufficiently provided and furnished with money and
substance to help in distresses, as in wars especially, in famine, dearth,
and other such like common calamities besides mainteining of Ministers of laws
and justice for the just government and deciding of controversies amongst
subjects, as Judges, Sergeants, and such like: and at one word, to be brief,
there is such great wants of so many things in the well ordering of a
commonwealth, that unless money be still at hand in a readiness, there can
no kingdom nor commonweal stand long in any good order. They therefore that
murmr, giudge, and deny and withdraw other to deny the paiments of tribute,
go the next way to work to subvert and overthrow the commonweal, and to
bring all to naught. A question necessary to be considered on and looked unto
in these our days.
But what shall we here say of such a kind of subjects, as in the sight of the
world in their corn, cattle, sheep and other goods, are deemed worth two or
three hundred pounds, yea that will not stick if he can here of a good purchase
of land to give two or three hundred pounds for a piece of land, and as much to
the marriage of his daughter, and will crack that he has an hundred pound to
bestow on his enemy at law, if he crosses his mind and will not suffer him
to have his will in every thing that he desires, and yet so soon as the Kings
commission comes forth for subsidies and taxes, this man forsooth stoopeth
very low then, and will be worth no more at the valuation to the king then ten
pound, and sore against his heart it is that he is tendtered so far: and
besides this he must have bearing money (as they call it in some countries)
that is, he must have of his poor neighbors each one somewhat to help him to
bear out this great charge and burden of subsedies, and if they refuse he
will crack them to make them subsedie men, to put them into the subsedie book
with him, and therefore they were better to bear him out, then to be brought
in themselves to a far greater charges then he requites at their hands. What
shall we say to this kind of men, does this man rightly Give to Caesar that is
Caesar's. Master H. Latimer, sometime Bishop of Worcester.
Let a godly learned Doctor of Divinity, sometimes a zealous preaching Bishop
in England, and afterward a martyr (so zealous of maintaining Gods truth, that
he most willingly and cheerfully gave his body to be burned at a stake, and
his hearts blood in miraculous manner, even to the quenching of the fire
burning the lower parts of his body to be shed,) come forth and answer this
sort of subjects, and he will in plain terms tell them that they are very
thieves, that thus they rob their king of his due debt that he ought to have,
and that they might with as good a conscience take another man's garments off
his back, as so unjustly take and withold from the king that which the
Parliament, the highest court in the land has given to the King, and that it
is due debt, and that upon the peril of their souls they are bound to pay it.
And this man of God will further tell them, that if the king should require an
unjust request, yet they are bound to pay it, and not to resist nor rebel
against the King, and that the King shall be in peril of his soul for asking
of an unjust request, and God will in his due time reckon with him for it: but
in the mean while the subject must obey the King, and not take upon him to
judge him: God is the Kings Judge, and doubtless will grievously punish him if
he do any thing unrighteously. But the subject must pray for his King and pay
him his duty, and disobey him not. And know this, that whenever there is any
unjust exaction laid upon him, it is a plague and a punishment for his sins,
as are hunger, dearth, pestilence, and such other punishments of God. And unto
this sound doctrine in this case subscribeth also Doctor Martin Luther in these
words: D. Martin Luther upon Math. 22.21.
Whether Kings, rulers, magistrates and officers, use and exercise their rule
and authority well or ill, we must have regard only to their power and
office, for their power and authority is good, in as much as it is ordained
and instituted of God. Neither is there any cause why thou should find
fault with power, if at any time thou be oppressed with tyrants: for whereas
they abuse the power given them of God, they shall surely be compelled to give
an account thereof, the abuse of a thing does not make that thing evil which
is in it self good. A chain of Gold is good, neither is it therefore made
worse, for that an harlot wears it about her neck, or if one should put out
thine eye with it, is the fault therefore in the chain? In like manner, the
power of the Prince must be borne, for if he abuse his office, he is not to be
counted as no Prince, neither belongs it to the subject to revenge or to
punish it in him. The subject must obey him for Gods cause only, for he
represents the place of God: how grievous things so ever therefore
Magistrates shall exact, the subject for Gods cause must bear them all, and
obey them, so far forth as they be not contrary to Gods commandments. If
they do justly or unjustly in due time it shall appear. Wherefore if thy
substance, body or life, and whatsoever thou have should be taken from thee by
the Magistrate, thou may say thus: I willingly yield them unto you, and
acknowledge you for ruler over me, I will obey you, but whether you use your
power and authority well or ill, see you to that. Such as this was the
doctrine of S. Ambrose cited by B. Jewel in his defense of the Apology of the
Church of England. If the Prince (says he) happen to be wicked, or cruel,
Defense of the Apolcgie. page 18
or burthenous, we teach with S. Ambrose, Arma nostra sunt preces and
Lacbrymae: Tears and prayers be our weapons. This doctrine does our now most
gracious Sovereign King JAMES at large set down in that his treatise of The
true law of free Monarchies.

Behold and see here now O you murmurers, grudgers, deniers, or cunning
patching peece-payers of Tributes and other royal customs, in this parcel of
this present Looking glass you may behold and see your right and true duties:
And yet more over and besides all this, hear and consider of both the example
and doctrine of the Doctor of all truth in whose mouth was never found any
guile or falsehood, Christ Jesus himself, who when he lived here on earth, both
taught as before you have heard, Give unto Caesar, etc. And also for this point
confirmed it by his own act and deed, by his own example, that it must be
paid, when as with his own hand he paid tribute and custom for himself and
his company, Math. 17.
with that piece of money which Peter found in the fishes mouth. To kick
against this therefore is to kick against God himself, against both the
instructions and example of Christ Jesus, and of his blessed Apostles. And
finally if you will proceed herein so far as they did, in the end you are
like to have the like success and end as had Theudas and Judas of Galilie in
the days of the tribute, of whose shameful fall and overthrow, and of them
that were seduced by them writes Josephus, both in lib. 18. and in lib. 20. of
his antiquities: Acts. 5.
In this world you shall make your selves the ruin of your selves and of your
own blood, houses and families, by your deserved immature death, or else become
subject to great flauerie and thraull to forreiners and strangers, according to
Gods threatening by his Prophet Jeremy. Ierem. 28.
Thou have broken (says he) yoakes of wood, but in the steed thereof thou
shall have yoakes of Iron. And in the world to come you shall procure upon your
selves the heavy wrath of God, and so eternal damnation for ever.

But now here by the way, Bullinger 2. Decade 6. precept. An other notable
Iesson for Kings, Princes, etc.
all Magistrates and Princes must be admonished to love the people subject to
their charge and government, to bear with them bountifully, and not to nip
them with immoderate exactions: which is easily done if they themselves will be
thriftie, and keep themselves moderately from ryotous gluttony and
ouer-sumptuous pride. Let a good Prince consider what a sin it is to have his
own palace abound in riotousnesse and surfeiting, while his poor subjects are
tormented with famine and hunger. Let Magistrates consider that Tributes and
subsedies are not the private goods of them in authority, but the public
substance of the whole commonweal, God hates pillars and robbers, God
abhors immoderate exactions, God curses polling tyrants, but blesses
profitable and moderate magistrates. Both in peace and wars, agreement and
concord are much more available then money unjustly gotten: and stronger is
that kingdom, Of mutual love and agreement between Prince and people.
and firmer that commonweal which is vpheld by the love and agreement of the
Prince and communaltie, although the common treasure there be very small, then
that country or city which has innumerable riches heaped up together and
wrunge out of poor subjects entrails, when as continual grudge and ill will
makes the Prince and people at continual variance. And what counsel in all
the world may more aptly, fitly and effectually be applied and used in this
case then that which our most renowned Sovereign King JAMES commended to his
dearest son Henry our Prince, In his instructions to Prince Henry his son,
l^. 2.
that is, that his liberality should not decline to prodigality, and that above
all he should not enrich himself with exactions upon his subjects, but think
that the riches of his people were the best treasure: and in case the necessity
of wars or any other extraordinaries should compel him to lift subsidies, yet
to do it very seldom, employing it only to that it was ordained for, and to use
himself in that case a fidus depositorius to his people. Thus much hitherto
plainly as I could, have I laid down before all loyal subjects eyes, what is
to be yielded and given to Caesar, for this fifth point concerning tribute,
subsedies, taxes, and such like royal customs and duties.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the absteining from taking in hand or intermedling with any part of
the Magistrates office.

HEmingius in his Euchiridion theologicum reckoning up all those duties which
subjects ought to perform and observe toward higher powers and lawful
Magistrates, makes this one among the rest, Non irrumpers in parts officii
magistratus, Private men may not intermeddle nor take upon them the office of
the magistrates without a lawful calling.
sed magistratui cognitionem defer, si quid ad reipublicae salutem pertinere
videatur: that is to say, It is not falling nor fit for a subject to thrust
himself into any part of a magistrates office, but to tell it to the
magistrate and to make him acquainted with it if any thing seem to be for the
safety of the commonweal. For the better understanding of this duty, subjects
must learn and note that all the people in a commonwealth in any kingdom,
country, or city may be sorted into three several kinds of people, and there
is none but they appertain and belong to one of those three, and those are
first Emperors, The people of every kingdom, country or city, may be divided
into three sort.
Kings and Princes within their several empires, kingdoms, and jurisdictions:
secondly subordinate or subalternall magistrates who have and hold their
commissions and authorities from the first: and thirdly private subjects which
are to be ruled and governed by the first and second sorts of men, having no
public charge nor office to attend upon but only each of them his own private
business according as his own place, function, and calling requires. So then
here you see the difference between the prince, the magistrate, and the
private man: Now this sixth duty which here is to be entreated of, concerns
neither the first nor the second kind of men, but only the third, which is the
priuare man or common subject without any lawful calling to any authority or
office: this last kind of men may not intrude themselves without any lawful
calling into any manner of action or office that of right belongs unto the
lawful magistrate for that is not to Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's,
but rather to take and usurp that which is Caesar's unto his owneselfe. Two
things to be considered under this sixth duty of subjects to Caesar.
Under this duty are contained especially two things, whereof the first is,
that moderation which all private persons ought to observe in public
affairs, namely that they may not of their own motion without any calling
busy themselves in public affairs, nor intermeddle in the government nor
reformation of them, nor take upon them rashly any part of the Magistrates
office, nor attempt any public thing. If they epsy any fault in the common
policy that needs amendment, they must not stir at all therein, nor take to
themselves authority to redress it, or once uncalled to put to their helping
hand, having their hands in that respect as it were bound behind them: but
they are to show it to the superior, who only has his hands lose to dispose
and order public matters; and if the superior do then command them and give
them liberty and authority to deal therein, they may put it in execution, as
being furnished with public authority. The second thing contained in this
sixth duty, is the casting off, or laying away all vindictiue resolutions, The
revenge for injuries to whom it belongs properly.
all taking up of revenge for a man's own proper injury is here forbidden, for
the revenge for injuries received, or any wrong committed against any private
person belongs properly to God, who says, Vengeance is mine, I will repay:
and to the Magistrates Gods deputies, to whom God has committed the sword,
not for naught, but to be Gods minister, to take vengeance on them that do
evil, that offend by doing wrongs and injuries to others; in this case then,
when any private person takes upon him to revenge and requite an open injury
done to himself, he gives not unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, but by
revenging with his own hand, he forgets a loyal subjects duty, and
commits a manifest wrong against the King and his Magistrates, by usurping
their office unto whom only the sword belongs for revenging of all iniuties
committed against any of his people. So that to conclude in few words, this
sixth duty of a loyal subject, it is, that private men may not attempt any
public Magistrates office without a lawful commission or calling, neither to
reform any thing amiss, nor to do any good in the commonweal, nor yet to
revenge himself against his adversary for any received wrong, for vengeance
is to be committed only to God and to the higher powers, to whom only it does
by right appertain.

TO THE CHRISTIAN reading Subject.
IT is not to be doubted, nay there is nothing more sure (good Christian
subject) then that Satan as he has been used to do ever of old, so he will
still hold on, and busy himself to withdraw thee from the regard of some, or
of every of these my before handled loyal subjects duties, and to trumpe in
thy way by casting before thee many stumbling blocks, and causes of
undutifulness, thereby to cause thee to forget, or else to neglect, and omit
these before noted six duties. Of the which causes of undutifulness by that
our mortal and deadly foe, very much and oftentimes suggested and urged, I
have thought it good for thy learning and warning, to give thee here a taste
of six of the^ in this little Pamphlet following, whereby thou may take a
scantling of the residue, and so be thereby the better awaked and more excited,
to beware of them all in time.

W.W.

CHAP. I.
Concerning Pride, being the first cause of the undutifulness of subjects.

THe most writers do agree and consent, and the greatest and most reasons may
be alleged, The cause of the fall of Angels.
that the first and chiefest cause of the fall and unrecoverable overthrow of
some of Gods most glorious angels, whereby they lost their glorious state and so
became terrible and most ougly devils, was pride, whereby they being but
creatures began to rebel and to exalt themselves against God their creator.
Now the subtle, crafty, cozening, envious devil, being become a mortal
enemy to man's welfore and blessed state, having experience in himself that
pride was a chief cause of his own fall, he cease not to use the same as an
engine or weapon for the overthrowing of mortal men in this world, even to
blow them up with pride, as it were with Gun-power, for as we see it come to
pass, when the enemies lay siege to win or beat down castles, walls, and
the strongest holds, amongst their batteries, forces of shot, and other
stratagems and feats of war, they use this also as their surest remedy and
policy, to undermine them and blow them up with trains of Gunpowder: Even
so likewise is it the devise and policy of Satan, among his other trains, to
attempt, assault, and blow up men with pride as it were with Gunpowder. Pride
wherein it consists.
Now this pride consists in the great love and liking of our own selves, of
our own excellency and worthiness, and a disdainful contempt, and despising
of others in comparison of our selves. A fit instrument is this then for
Satan to work with in this case: for as the wisdom of God does teach by
Solomon; Prou. 13.10.
Only by pride does man make contention: which comes to pass when as every
man contendeth to have the pre-eminence and will not give place unto an other.
So that that man which has his heart once insected and poisoned through pride,
he can in no wise brook it to be at command, and to submit himself willingly
(according to Gods ordinance and appointment) to the obedience of magistrates,
rulers, and governors, be they never so well worthy of the place. Pride and
hautinesse of stomach in great me^ what work they make.
Herehence it oftentimes comes to pass that Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights
and such like being once possessed with this pride, upon never so light
occasions, nay rather taking offenses, then tarying until offenses be justly
given, will contenine, disdain, and irreverently and dishonorablie use, yea
and oftentimes also conspire against, take up arms, and seek the life and
blood, or at leastwise the deposing of the Lords anointed, their supreme
heads, ordained and placed in such rooms by God himself: and herehence
likewise it falls out, that many private persons among the common people will
not stick to vilipend, disdain and contemptuously to abuse the inferior
subordinate magistrates, thinking themselves in the pride of their own hearts,
The deuilles craft and subtilty to ensnare men through pride and to bring them
thereby to conspiracy and rebellion, described by a similitude of a fisher:
blinding and deceiving the poor^ fishes.
far better men and more worthy to command and rule, then to be by others
(whom they think to be worse men then themselves) commanded and ruled. It is
the manner of fishers who use to take fish with standing nets in running
waters, that look where they choose a fit place to plant their net in, there
round about their net, will they first blunder and muddle the waters, so that
thereby their net cannot easily be seen by the fish, then will they go
somewhat higher into the river and with their long poulleringe staves will they
beat and dash in the stream and drive down the fish toward their net, into
the which the silly deceived fish soon shoots it self, and so at unawares is
ensnared, by reason that the net could not be seen, the water about it being
before thickened and blundered by raising up of the mudde.

Even this is the case of many subjects in the world, The cunning crafty
devil is the fisher, he sets the net of disobedience to magistrates within the
circuit and walk of such as he means to catch therein, then he blindes their
hearts with pride, so that they therewith having their senses and reason
darkened, rush forward headlong, the d^uill forcing them on a pace in their
mad mood, into the nett, which they silye souls never perceive nor consider
of till they be surely snared past all help of retyring back again and so are
they cast away ere they be aware. A caveat.
O subjects, subjects, of what estate soever you be, noble or ignoble, high or
low, rich or poor, look to it in time, beware of this net, take heed of this
pride the devils own engine: To handle every particular point of pride would
make a larger discourse then here now I purpose, let this suffice therefore for
so much concerning pride being the first cause of undutifulness, as it does or
may prejudice loyal subjects duties to higher powers.

CHAP. II.
Concerning Ambition, the second cause of undutifulness of subjects.

AN ancient Latin christian divine has written, Hugo Victorinus li. 1 de
anima.
that Pride riding in a coach, has her coach drawn with four horses, the
forehorse is Ambition, the second Vaineglory, the third Contempt, and the
fourth Disobedience. Ambition therefore an attending servant on dame Pride may
I not unaptly here set down in degree next unto Pride for the second cause of
subjects undutifulness: And this ambition may well be defined to be a most
vehement, What ambition is.
strong, disordered and an unreasonable desire of glory, an insatiable and
anvnbrideled greedines to rule: It is a vice of excess fighting full, but
against modesty which is a part of temperance, for a modest man (as Aristotle
says) desires honor as he ought, and as becomes him, Who is ambitious.
but he that desires otherwise then he ought by unlawful means is ambitious
and car^ed away with a perturbation of intemperance. Of such as these there are
many examples (which may serve to instruct and warn loyal subjects) both in
sacred and profane histories, amongst whom comes here to my remembrance the
notable story of Korah that seditious headed and ambitious minded Isralite,
whose rebellion Moses at large sets down, Number. 16.1.2.3. etc.
with his bad success, and strange punishment: In which ambitious man, (like
as it commonly falls out with all such as are infected with that vice) there
was first a male contentment of mind, who not contented with that honor,
calling, and office wherein he was placed, raised up disquietnesse, disturbance
and tumults among the people: Psalm. 106.16.17.
Secondly there was in him an envious affection, whereby he disdeined that
Moses and Aron should have any power over him. Thirdly like unto our vile
Anabaptists, he went about to suppress government and magistracy and would
have all the people to be of equal authority, power and condition, which is
the confusion of all states of people. Fourthly he raised up open sedition and
rebellion among the people against governors appointed of God. Fifthly he went
about to have brought the high priesthood from Aron unto himself although he
found fault with others for the same. Full of the like ambitious humors was
also Absol^n son of king David, of whom I surcease to speak here, because
I have described him somewhat at large before in the first chapter concerning
Obedience, whither I refer the reader, and unto the second book of Samuel
where he may have his history at the full. Let all loyal true meaning subjects
in time beware that they do not in any wise yield unto this pestiferous humor
of ambition then the which there cannot lightly be a greater enemy to all
bounde^ duties of good subjects. Look into and consider but a while either
ancient or later Chronicles and histories and see where there ever was any
great plagues, any subuersions and overthrows, of either flourishing
monarchies, common wealths, or cities, but they were wrought by ambitious men,
refusing dutiful submission to higher powers, and desirous to command and to
be preferred before others. Who but ambitious men are wont to kindle and stir
up the fire of domestical divisions, civil wars, and dissentions, making no
reckoning and taking no thought what will be the issue of such damnable
enterprices, so they might make away to effect their own devised platformes.
What did procure the ruin of Graecia flourishing in arms and sciences?
Ambition. What wrought the decay and confusion of the common wealths of the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians the one being masters of the Sea and the other of
the Land? The great falls and overthrows that ambition has brought upon many.
Ambition. What stirred up Caesar and Pompey, Marius and Sylla, Octauius,
Antonius and Lepidius by force of arms to put their country to sword and
fire, and so most unnaturally to empaire the large and great scope of the Roman
Empire? Ambition. What has drawn some men to such desperate minds, so far
to abandon both God and all goodness as to give over themselves to Necromancie
and to contract and enter into covenants with the devil that they might come
to sovereign power and authority? Ambition. What caused Henry the fifth the
Emperor, by force to deprive his father from the Empire, and to keep him in
prison till he died there? Ambition. Maufroy the prince of Tarentum, what moved
him to strangle his own father Frederick the emperor, and to poison Conradus
his own brother? what forced Antonius son to the Emperor Seuerus to stabbe
his brother Geta with a Dagger? What caused Solomon king of the Turks to
strangle his own son Sultan Mustapha? What moves many to put innocents to
death that stand in states expectant of kingdoms, that themselves may take
surer footing as they think to grow up and continue in royal places? What is
and has been the cause of these and many other such satanicall and most
impious and horrible actions? Ambition. Ambition, I say Ambition. And what
should I further weary my self and weary the reader, spend my time, paper, and
Ink to repeat the examples, effects, fruits, and sequels of this vile
monster Ambition? Let me therefore conclude this second cause of subjects
undutifulness, with my before noted request, namely, that all loyal true
meaning subjects in time beware that they do not in any wise yield unto this
pestiferous humor of Ambition, then the which there cannot lightly be a
greater enemy to all duties of good subjects.

CHAP. III.
Concerning Envy, the third cause of undutifulness of subjects.

THe third cause whereby Satan undermines and maineth the good and reverent
conceit of the Sovereign in the heart of the subject, is Envy; Whence Envy
first springs.
the root whereof is fetched out of the devils own garden, for from him came
and sprung forth the original and beginning thereof, who in the beginning so
envied the welfare and prosperous estate of man, that he sought not only to
separate him from that pleasant abode in Eden, the pleasauntest place on the
earth, but also to alienate him from Gods savor, and by that means to expel
him from all happiness, and to plunge both him and all his offspring into
eternal misery.

Through this envy it is that one man grieueth at an other man's well doing
and prosperity, The fruit^ of Envy.
whosoever is once attached herewith, straight-waye he murmureth and grudgeth,
he chafeth, fretteth and fumeth that any man should be advanced to any honor,
dignity, office or high authority besides himself, inuenting, imagining, and
devising which way and how to disgrace, hurt, disquiet, cross, and remove
him that so is preferred.

The envious man la^guisheth and pineth to see his neighbor promoted and
prosper, as says the Poet Horace: Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.
The man that envy does possess, does pine and fall away,
At others wealth and good success, increasing every day.


Such a waster and consumer is this envy, that for the correspondencie thereof
with these things, ancient writers both Latin and Greek have compared and
lykened it to the Worm that consumes old soft timber, What things envy is
very aptly compared unto.

Moaths that eat and wast woollen cloth:
Rust that corrupts and cankereth away iron.


Vipers young ones that eat out their dammes bellies before they be brought
forth into the light. These viperous generations of envious creatures are
likewise resembled to the swelling toad which (as some report) cannot abide the
smell of Iarmaunder, even so will these swell and disdain at virtuous and good
governors placed by God in the midst of Gods garden, Other co^parison^ very
well befiting the envious man.
to expel and chase away such venomous toads. They are moreover likened unto
the blind Howlet, which as it is said, in the day time is very dim and slow
of sight, but in the night is most quick of eyesight: Even so whereas the
virtues, graces, and good qualities of magistrates, rulers, and governors
appear and show themselves manifestly to all the world in open light, as it
were at the no one day, yet these envious people see nothing nor will take any
knowledge of any of those good gifts, but if through the infirmi^y of the flesh
any of them slip, and be tainted with any fault be it never so little, this
can they soon epsy, herein they have Lyncaeus his eyes, then a little moate
shall be made a great mountain, Ex humili tumulo magnum producunt olympum: If
they see any thing well done, they grudge at it and find fault with it, like
Simon the Leper who blamed Marie Magdalein for doing of a good deed. If they
see that God accept of, bless and prosper any man's doings more then theirs,
straight way they malign him and envy him, yea and maliciously seek his
blood, like as Cain did his brother Habels. If any man for the good service
done for or in his country, be applauded unto and have his due honor given
him, they seek to disgrace him, and to hold back his due from him, and to
supplant him or keep him under, 1. Sam. 18.7.
like king Saul who could n^^ abide the speech nor remembrance of little David's
te^ thousand. If the kings highness for some good service, or for some good
liking, or for some other secret purpose better known unto himself then to
these men, do honorably bestow any gift or preferment upon any courtiers or
other his good subject, noble or otherwise, o how these envious murmurers will
mutter, grudg, and speak against that, like unto those whining and
malecontented laborers which could not abide any equal reward to be given
unto their fellow laborers: and like unto that envious, Mat. 20.
unkind and unnatural brother that was angry with his father and would not
come into the house although fair entreated, Luke 15.
and that because he maligned and envied that his father should give his younger
brother a kind and a natural fatherlike entertainment, after his return from
going astrey: Even so this envious brood and ill willie kind of men, will
change the copy of their countenaunces, murmr, grudge, give out hard
speeches even against their supreme Sovereign, if he take to heart, give
sauourable and gracious entertainment to any other then themselves or other of
their own crew and faction whom it shall please them to allow and think well
of. There is neither king nor keisar, the highest magistrate nor the inferior
subordinate magistrate, who either by birth, right, succession, or by their
virtuous and good desert, have been advanced and exalted to any manner of
honor and dignity in the commonwealth, but envy possessing the virulent heart
and bitter tongues of this insatuated crew, they will not stick to break out
into slanderous and malicious misreports, and to bark at the beards of those
to whom in all humble, reverent, and dutiful manner they ought to submit
themselves. Let all loyal subjects therefore take heed, avoid, and shun from
Enure this third cause of subjects undutifulness, and according to S. Paul his
exhortation. Do all things without murmurings and reasonings that they may be
blamles and pure, Phil. 2.
and the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked
nation.

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning the lack of subjects wisdom and knowledge, the fourth cause of
their undutifulness.

THe fourth way by which satan seeks to abuse subjects and to inueigle and
entise them to abuse and make less account and reckoning of higher powers and
magistracy then they should, and to grow more untowardly and contemptuous in
their bounden duties then becomes dutiful subjects for to be, The great in
conueniences of want of wisdom, and knowledge.
is lack of wisdom and knowledge, for through the one, that is through lack of
wisdom, subjects become altogether unable to judge and discern of princes
pretenses and policies, and so both: ashly and foolishly take upon them like
Sus Mincruam to censure, controull and condemn the actions and proceedings of
their princes, through the other, that is lack of knowledge, they be come
undutiful and disobodient to the laws, ordinances, injunctions, acts, and
statutes of the king and his magistrates and officers under whom they live.
Kings, Princes and governors do use oftentimes for diverse causes to disguise
their purposes with pretenses and colors of other matters, Princes
proceedings, policies and purposes not to be condemned, nor misconstered.
so that the end of their drifts and secret purposes are not right seen into
nor understood at the first, this to be lawful the word of God does not deny.

To make construction of intents, and as yet unknown meanings of princes in
any ill part falls not for subjects, but rather to interpret them in the best
manner, and take them in the best part. Every creature is not acquainted with
the mind of his creator, nor every subject of his governor: so the Lord says
Job, gives not account of all his matters, and so in some respect it may
likewise be said of princes, that they give not accounts of their matters to
all their subjects. 1. King 3.
King Solomon pretended to divide the quick child between the two harlots and
did not, what if any foolish busy subject or servant had stepped in to have
taken exception against Salomons commandment of dividing the infant, surely
it had argued a foolish want of discresion and a sawsie vndutifullnesse to have
interrupted the kings attempt, wherein did lurk almost manifest reuellation of
king Salomons exceeding gift of wisdom. 2. King. 10.
Iehu pretended that he would serve Baal, much more then ever did Ahab, but he
did it not, but by this subtilty destroyed all the servants of Baal. Eusebius.
lib. 1 chap. 11. de vita constant.
Constantius the Emperor pretended that as many as would offer sacrifice unto
Idols should have access to his royal person, dwell in his court and have
offices and great honor in the common wealth, but they that would not should
both be banished the court and deprived presently of such honors as now they
did enjoy. But yet he did not so, but by that policy tried the true christians
from Idolaters, and so took to them, and cast out the Idolaters, had it not
been great lack of wisdom to have interrupted these Christian princes
pretenses and commandments tending as afterward it proved to so good an end,
had it not been busy, folly and rash vndutifullnesse for any subjects, to have
meddled, taken exceptions against, exclamed upon, and condemned these christian
pretenses and pollices. Here-hence then let Christian subjects learn to beware
that they fall not into vndutifullnesse through this lack of wisdom, in not
discerning the lawfullnesse, drift and end of princes affairs. And likewise
let them here learn and strive to be acquainted with and to know their Princes
laws, for otherwise they must needs incur the crime of vndutifullnesse
through lack of knowledge, for how can they obey laws which they never saw,
heard, not read of, and yet can they not be excused through ignorance.

CHAP. V.
Concerning Coffeehouse of mind, the fifth cause of subiests undutifulness.

THe fifth cause of undutifulness of subjects which hinders many from
performing and yielding of those bounden duties which magistrates may justly
expect at their hands, is coffeehouse of mind, Two sorts of subjects,
troubled with coffeehouse of mind.
abounding especially in two sorts of subjects, first in the proud ambitious
sort of great men in the world, secondly in the wicked and wilful needy sort
of inferior subjects: of the first has bin spoken in the first and second
chapters; for the second when they have rashly, inconsideratly, prodigally and
lewdly wasted and consumed their patrimony, their lands, and goods, when all
is gone and nothing left, then in their discontented moods, with blasphemous
and horrible oaths they will utter and maintain diverse unseemly, uncouth,
ungodly, undutiful and disloyal positions; as that this world is unevenly
dealt, that it is no sin to take it from these fat backs, and greasy bags
that have it and will do no good with it, but will suffer a good fellow to
starve in the streets, or h^ng himself, before they will depart from one penny;
that they hope to see a day shortly when a sword and a dagger will do them as
much good as the best farm, or the best plowe in the parish, that if all they
have will buie them a sword and a dagger they hope to live as well as the
richest Curmuchin of them all, and that they be good fellows, and have had it,
and must have it, and will have it, for why? as some of them say Domini est
terra and plenitudo eius, the earth is the Lords and all that therein is. These
prodigal) professors of irregulatity, in their malecontented fitts, when they
see that their company will serve them, stick not to despise all rules of
magistracy, then Ex abundantia cordis es loquitur, their tongues run
voluntary, wilfully, and wittingly, scornefully, and contemptuously will they
cast out words of high indignation and disdein against the reverence and honor
of higher powers: and so these wild-headed, and staring eyed creatures, these
impudent and audatious spirited madcappes, must be counted forsooth men of
valor, of ingenious spirits, of manly courage and martial natures, they look
as big as if their faces were made of harness, and their hearts grown with
hair like Leonides that most valiant and courageous Lacedimonian. These
furious roysters and desperate cauallieres, crook in their nails to keep
them sharp for a day, and with their Absolons long locks prognosticate either
a vindictiue resolution of mind, or foolish vain heads, or Absolon fatal end,
they want nothing but only a ringleader, a captain of their own conditions,
whom they may follow, or else bands and legions, of lewdlings like themselves
which would follow them, and then they would (Si diis placet) cut it out, for
the common good of the poor comminalty, they would reform disorders, they
would redress common wealth matters, they would bridle and cut short the
malice of magistrates, the pride and oppression of the nobility, and cutthroat
landlords, the pilling and coosinage of lewd conscience les lawyers, and
stop the mouths of busy controuling preaching prelates, they would divide
every man his share, share and share like. But o insatuated, bewitched and
foolishly ensnared poor peasants, you discontented and malicious mates, you
that are so desperate, malapart, rude and rash in all your actions, you most
lavish inconsiderate and fond unthrifts, you prodigal wasters, of your lands,
goods and patrimony, that have plunged your selves so far into other men's
goods, or else into robberies, thefts, and murders that you can not, or dare
not show your faces to live neighbourly in any good and well governed common
wealth, that are always ready to murmur, grudge, and mutiny against
government, to belie, backbite, and slander lawful magistrates, to control
and censure the state, to be factious, seditious and ready upon (...) light
occasion rather taken then given either to begin or to follow and conioyne with
every conspiracy, insurrection, commotion and open rebellion: will any wise and
dutiful loyal subjects think you meet men to perform that you bost and
brag of, or that which you outwardly pretend, that you can or will reform
disorders, and bring with you a common wealth to others, that have showed such
bad presedents before in most foolish, needles, and wastfull spoiling and
overthrowing of your own wealth? Are you like men to amend other men's
disordered actions, whereas your selves super abound and flow over with so many
vile vices, and abominable conditions. Counsel and directions for unthrifts
and wastalls.
Cease in time from these your undutiful conceits, begin the world again,
return to better minds and meanings, take better hold, and if you have not
other callings lawful and good for your selves and the commonwealth be not
ashamed of that ordinance and command of our God in the beginning of the world
In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo, eat your bread in the sweat of your
faces, for a while until you return to the earth, this course may perhaps
seem painful and far contrary to your former courses, but it shall prove
joyful afterward for ever and ever, whereas your former deceauable course
will fit and please your humors for a while, but yet will prove painful
afterward for ever and ever.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the misliking of due and deserved punishment of malefactors, the
sixth cause of the undutifulness of subjects

THere remains now to be spoken of the sixth and last cause of the decay of
reverent affection and dutifulnes toward princes, governors and other lawful
magistrates, for which I have chosen out among many other this one, whereof many
ill disposed subjects are worthy both to be admonished, and reproved for it,
to wit, the misliking of due and deserved punishment of malefactors, whiles
that inconsiderate and evil disposed persons cry out against Judges,
magistrates, and zealous iusticers, whose proceeding and purposes are bent by
due severity, where clemency will take no place, to amend the obstinate
wicked, thinking it better upon well advised consideration, to cut of one
putrified and rotten member in time, then to suffer the whole body to be lost
by long languishing and careless, negligent loosnes of their duties. Against
such, do these incorrigible fellows, these beliers, and virulent exclamers on
such as are in authority, open their foul mouths, and that in such sort that
they can do nothing by them though never so well advisedly and christianly, but
these busy bawling barkers will seek either to deprave their sufficiency, or
to hinder their proceedings, or to carpe at their actions, or to murmur and
mutiny at their doings, or to malign their prosperity, or to envy their
stats. But o ye wrangling crew that are so lavish in this behalf, know you
that it is the duty of Gods deputies which are the magistrates into whose hands
God has committed the sword, to punish extraordinary wickedness with
extraordinary severity, for they are taught by Solomon, that Blewnes of the
wound serves to purge the evil: and the stripes within the bowels of the
belly: For as Saint Augustine says, sicuti est aliquando miserecordia puniens,
ita and est crudelitas parcens: As there is a punishing mercy or mercy in
punishing, so there is a sparing cruelty or cruelty in sparing, too much pity
destroys the whole city. Evil is to be taken out of Israel. Seeing it is
even thus, ye slanderous and judging spirits, then cease you at the length
your exclamations on magistrates chastising offenses, leave of your prying into
magistrates matters, malign not their dealings, slander not (especially
before you thoroughly understand it) politic conueance, occupy not your tongue
so peruersly in matters of state impertine^t unto you, seek not your own
revenge on them that bear the sword, by dispersing lewd lies and contumelious
reproaches and reports on them. And let not drive, behind their backs (in the
broyling heat of your poysonfull stomakes) at those honorable personages to
whom in their presence you would bow your knees. Be not so forward being but
private persons to judge others, Mat. 7.1.3.
lest (as Christ Jesus said) you your selves be judged. Be not so curious, or
malicious, to try out, yea often before trial to condemn the faults of others,
for it is the manner of wicked me^ and hipocrits, to hide their own faults, and
not to amend them, but rather to be curious to condemn and reprove other
men's, to see moates in their brethrens eyes, and not to perceive beams in
their own; be not so iniquisitiue after great matters that be hid from you,
for David a man far wiser and better disposed then you, for he had the holy
ghost, he would not do so as him plainly protested. Psalm. 131.
Psalm. 131.

Be not so meddling with that you have nothing to do with, for then if you still
on proceed the wisdom of God by Solomon will pronounce you for no better but
fools. Be not evil doers, Pro. 20.3 1. Pet. 4.15.
nor busy bodies in other men's matters, for does not God himself forbid you
by S. Peter. 1. Pet. 4.15. Yea and finally God himself by the Apostle gives
you this sound and fatherly counsel, 1. Pet. 3.10.11. Psalm. 34.12.13.
Refrain your tongues from evil, and your lips that they speak no guile,
eschew evil and do good, seek peace, and follow after it. In deed there is
one only cause for which private subjects may be tolerated to learn and seek
after intelligence of state matters, if they may certainly attain unto the
knowledge of them, and that is only with a mind and an intent to direct their
prayers the more certainly to God for them, but otherwise let not a private man
make an occupation of intell^gencing and seeking after news to occupy his
tongue therein, for they have other callings which concerns them more nearly
to talk of and look unto then that.

1. Tim. 1.17. Unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wife be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

